THOUSAND OAKS, CALIFORNIA
MUNICIPAL CODE
2025 S-76 Supplement contains:
Current city legislation passed through September 30, 2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This Thousand Oaks Municipal Code was recodified by American Legal
Publishing in January 2006.
   The code arrangement is by subject matter. The ordinances are divided into
Titles, chapters and sections. In parentheses following each section is a
legislative history.
   The code is organized under a numbering system which is designed to allow
future supplementation.
   This codification brings the code up to date through Ord. No. 1739-NS, eff.
10-10-25.
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, OH 45202
800-445-5588
TITLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 1. ADOPTION OF CODE
      
1-1.01–Title: Reference to Code
      
1-1.02–Authority
      
1-1.03–Effective Date
      
1-1.04–Effect of Code on past Actions and Obligations
      
1-1.05–Reference to Specific Ordinances
      
1-1.06–Validity of Code
      
1-1.07–Repeal of Ordinances
      
1-1.08–Maintenance of Code
      
1-1.09–Exclusions from Code
CHAPTER 2. PENALTY AND COST RECOVERY PROVISIONS
Article 1: Generally
      
1-2.01–Violations
      
1-2.02–Prohibited Acts
      
1-2.03–Imposition of Penalty
      
1-2.04–Determination of Punishment
      
1-2.05–Place of Confinement
      
1-2.06–Fees, Charges, and Taxes Made a Civil Debt
      
1-2.07–Unreasonable Refusal to Pay or Comply: Attorneys’ Fee
      
1-2.08–Recovery of Inspection and Code Enforcement Costs: Certificate of
Compliance
Article 2: Civil Penalty Procedure
      
1-2.201–Application
      
1-2.202–Definitions
      
1-2.203–Citation
      
1-2.204–Service of Citation
      
1-2.205–Amount of Civil Penalty
      
1-2.206–Payment of Civil Penalty
      
1-2.207–Preliminary Review
      
1-2.208–Request for Administrative Hearing
      
1-2.209–Waiver of Penalty Deposit
      
1-2.210–Notice of Hearing
      
1-2.211–Hearing Procedures
      
1-2.212–Administrative Hearing Decision
      
1-2.213–Right to Judicial Review
CHAPTER 3. RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
      
1-3.01–Scope of Chapter
      
1-3.02–Provisions Construed as Restatements and Continuations
      
1-3.03–Tenure of Officers Preserved
      
1-3.04–Effect of Headings
      
1-3.05–Meaning of Section and Subsection
      
1-3.06–References to Acts or Omissions Within the City
      
1-3.07–Acts by Deputies
      
1-3.08–Writing
      
1-3.09–References to Ordinances: Application to Amendments
      
1-3.10–Service of Notices
      
1-3.11–Service of Notices: Proof
      
1-3.12–Statute of Limitations
      
1-3.13–Definitions
CHAPTER 4. APPEALS AND GROUNDS TO DENY APPLICATIONS
Article 1. Appeals
      
1-4.01–Right to Appeal
      
1-4.02–Time Limit for Filing
      
1-4.03–Hearing: Notices
      
1-4.04–Hearings
      
1-4.05–Time Limitations for Judicial Reviews of City Decisions
Article 2. Grounds for Denial/Revocation of Application
      
1-4.201–Material Misrepresentation
      
1-4.202–Crimes of Moral Turpitude
      
1-4.203–Notice of Denial or Revocation
CHAPTER 5. CITATION PROCEDURE
      
1-5.01–Scope
      
1-5.02–Notices to Appear: Form
      
1-5.03–Notices to Appear: Time
      
1-5.04–Notices to Appear: Place
      
1-5.05–Notices to Appear: Promise and Release
      
1-5.06–Warrants for Arrest
      
1-5.07–Violations of Promises to Appear
      
1-5.08–Enforcement
      
1-5.09–Enforcement Officers: Duties, Interference
CHAPTER 6. PUBLIC NUISANCES
      
1-6.01–Declaration of What Constitutes a Public Nuisance
      
1-6.02–Enforcement
      
1-6.03–Collection of Treble Damages for Subsequent Nuisance Offence
      
1-6.04–Recovery of Attorney Fees by Prevailing Party
CHAPTER 7. PROCEDURE FOR ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES
      
1-7.01–Maintenance of Property: Abatement of Nuisances by Repair,
Rehabilitation, Demolition, Or Removal
      
1-7.02–Notices of Hearings for Summary Abatement of Nuisances
      
1-7.03–Department Head Hearings to Abate Nuisances
      
1-7.04–Appeal to City Council
      
1-7.05–Action by Council to Abate Nuisances When No Appeal
      
1-7.06–City Expenses: Records of Costs
      
1-7.07–Nuisance Abatement Lien and Special Assessment Procedures
      
1-7.08–Maintenance of Property: Alternative Proceedings
CHAPTER 8. CITY COUNCIL
Article 1. Council Meetings and Procedures
      
1-8.101–Regular meetings
      
1-8.102–Adjourned meetings
      
1-8.103–Study sessions
      
1-8.104–Special meetings
      
1-8.105–Meetings to be public: Exception for closed sessions
      
1-8.106–Agenda: Public input
      
1-8.107–Mayor
      
1-8.108–Council correspondence
      
1-8.109–Quorum
      
1-8.110–Minutes
      
1-8.111–Presiding officer
      
1-8.112–Powers and duties of the presiding officer
      
1-8.113–Rules of debate
      
1-8.114–Addressing the Council
      
1-8.115–Rules of decorum
      
1-8.116–Enforcement of decorum
      
1-8.117–Motions: Seconds not required
      
1-8.118–Voting procedures
      
1-8.119–Disqualification for conflicts of interest
      
1-8.120–Failure to vote
      
1-8.121–Lost motions and tie votes
      
1-8.122–Changing the vote
      
1-8.123–Reconsideration and recision
      
1-8.124–Ordinance, resolutions and contracts
      
1-8.125–Hearings
      
1-8.126–Consent calendars
      
1-8.127–Conceptual approval
      
1-8.128–Rules of order
      
1-8.129–Failure to observe rules of order
Article 2. Council Salaries
      
1-8.201–Council salaries
      
1-8.202–Population and salaries
      
1-8.203–Council compensation
      
1-8.204–Increases
      
1-8.205–Deemed separate from reimbursement for expenses
CHAPTER 9. COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS
Article 1. Planning Commission
      
1-9.101–Created
      
1-9.102–Membership
      
1-9.103–Membership: Appointment
      
1-9.104–Membership: Terms
      
1-9.105–Membership: Vacancies
      
1-9.106–Membership: Removal
      
1-9.107–Duties and functions
Article 2. Thousand Oaks Cultural Heritage Board and Regulations
      
1-9.201–Purpose
      
1-9.202–Thousand Oaks Cultural Heritage Board
      
1-9.203–Definitions
      
1-9.204–Thousand Oaks City Council Functions
      
1-9.205–Ventura County Cultural Heritage Board Functions
      
1-9.206–Prohibition of alteration: Certificate of appropriateness/removal of
designation
CHAPTER 10. CODE OF ETHICS FOR OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
      
1-10.01–Declaration of policy
      
1-10.02–Responsibilities of public office
      
1-10.03–Dedicated service
      
1-10.04–Fair and equal treatment
      
1-10.05–Conflicts of financial interest
      
1-10.06–Political activities
      
1-10.07–Applicability of chapter provisions
      
1-10.08–Ex parte communications
      
1-10.09–Avoidance of impressions of corruptibility
      
1-10.10–Discrimination in appointments
      
1-10.11–Investments creating a conflict of interest
      
1-10.12–City allegiance and proper conduct
      
1-10.13–Future employment
      
1-10.14–Giving testimony
      
1-10.15–Sanctions
CHAPTER 11. CITY SEAL
      
1-11.101–Form of seal
      
1-11.102–Unauthorized use
      
1-11.103–Custodian
CHAPTER 12. CITY BADGES
      
1-12.101–Issuance of badges
      
1-12.102–Presentation of badge upon termination
      
1-12.103–Unlawful use of city badges
CHAPTER 13. CITY ELECTION CAMPAIGNS: CONTRIBUTION LIMITS AND DISCLOSURE
REQUIREMENTS
      
1-13.01–Purpose
      
1-13.02–Definitions
      
1-13.03–Contribution limitations
      
1-13.04–Filing requirements
      
1-13.05–Printed disclosure on advertisements of major contributors
      
1-13.06–Recordkeeping
      
1-13.07–Remedies
CHAPTER 14. TERM LIMITS
      
1-14.01–Purpose
      
1-14.02–Limits
      
1-14.03–Appointed terms
      
1-14.04–Applicability
CHAPTER 15. ELECTIONS TO FILL COUNCIL VACANCIES
      
1-15.01–Purpose
      
1-15.02–Election to fill Council vacancy
      
1-15.03–Date of election to fill Council vacancy
      
1-15.04–Interim appointment
CHAPTER 16. DISTRICT-BASED ELECTIONS
      
1-16.01–Purpose
      
1-16.02–District-based electoral system
      
1-16.03–Establishment of City Council Electoral Districts
      
1-16.04–Election schedule
CHAPTER 1. ADOPTION OF CODE
Sec. 1-1.01.   Title: Reference to Code.
   This Code shall be known as the “Thousand Oaks Municipal Code.” It shall be
sufficient to refer to this Code as the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code in any
prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof. It shall also be
sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, or repealing this
Code, or portions thereof, as an addition or amendment to, or a repeal of, the
Thousand Oaks Municipal Code, or a portion thereof.
Sec. 1-1.02. Authority.
   Except as otherwise herein or hereinafter provided, this Code consists of
all the regulatory, penal, and administrative laws of general application of
the City of Thousand Oaks, codified pursuant to the authority contained in
Article 2 of Chapter 1 of Part 1 of Division 1 of Title 5 of the Government
Code of the State of California.
Sec. 1-1.03. Effective date.
   This Code shall take effect upon the effective date of the ordinance
adopting this Code by reference.
Sec. 1-1.04. Effect of Code on past actions and obligations.
   Neither the adoption of this Code nor the repeal hereby of any ordinance of
the City shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of
ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date of this
Code, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or penalty at said effective
date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of
the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such
license or penalty or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof,
nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required
to be posted, filed, or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all vested
rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and
effect.
Sec. 1-1.05. Reference to specific ordinances.
   The provisions of this Code shall not in any manner affect the deposits or
other matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with,
ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and
which are included within this Code, but such reference shall be construed to
apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this Code.
Sec. 1-1.06. Validity of Code.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Code is for
any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this Code. The Council hereby declares
that it would have passed this Code and each section, subsection, sentence,
clause, and phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more
sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared
unconstitutional.
Sec. 1-1.07. Repeal of ordinances.
   All ordinances or portions of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of
this Code are hereby repealed.
Sec. 1-1.08. Maintenance of Code.
   Not less than three (3) copies of this Code shall be filed for use and
examination by the public in the office of the City Clerk. At least three (3)
additional copies, duly certified by the City Clerk, shall be maintained on
file in this office as the official copies of the Code. Additional copies of
the Code shall be distributed to the departments and divisions of the City as
shall be prescribed by the City Manager.
   Upon the adoption of any amendment or addition to this Code, or upon the
repeal of any of its provisions, the City Clerk shall certify thereto and shall
make an appropriate notation in the official volumes of this Code of the taking
of such action, noting thereon the number and date of the ordinance pursuant to
which such action is taken.
   Duly certified copies of each ordinance making changes in the Code shall be
filed in the office of the City Clerk in books for such purpose, duly indexed
for ready reference.
   At least semi-annually, the City Clerk shall cause the loose leaf pages of
this Code in which changes have been made to be reproduced, including the
notation as to the ordinance number and date pursuant to which such change is
adopted, and distributed in order that the loose leaf copies of the Code,
prepared for the use and convenience of the officers and employees of the City
and the general public, may be brought up-to-date. (Amended by § 1, Ord. 1274-
NS, eff. January 8, 1997)
Sec. 1-1.09. Exclusions from Code.
   Ordinances relating to matters of special or temporary nature only are
excluded from this Code and are unaffected by the provisions of this Code.
CHAPTER 2. PENALTY AND COST RECOVERY PROVISIONS
Article 1: Generally
Sec. 1-2.01. Violations.
   (a)   Except for parking violations of Article 4 of Chapter 3 of Title 4 of
this Code, the violation of any other provision of this Code or other ordinance
of the City, may be prosecuted as an infraction punishable by fine, or as a
misdemeanor and punishable by fine or imprisonment, or both, in accordance with
Government Code Section 36900, et seq. All violations shall be a misdemeanor
unless made an infraction by: (1) the City Attorney filing a complaint in the
Municipal Court specifying that the offense is an infraction; or, (2) the
issuing of a citation specifying that the violation is an infraction; or, (3)
the City Attorney making a motion in court to reduce a misdemeanor to an
infraction if such motion is made prior to the trial on the matter.
   (b)   Each day a violation of this Code or other ordinance of the City
continues shall constitute a separate offense. The continuing violation of any
provision of this Code shall constitute a public nuisance which may be
redressed by civil or criminal action, abated by mandatory or prohibitory
process of a court of competent jurisdiction or pursuant to Chapter 7 of this
title.
(§ 1, Ord. 770-NS, eff. February 26, 1981, as amended by § 1, Ord. 907-NS, eff.
February 11, 1986 and §1, Ord. 1183-NS, eff. June 1, 1993)
Sec. 1-2.02. Prohibited acts.
   Whenever in this Code any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall
including causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the
fact of such act or omission.
Sec. 1-2.03. Imposition of penalty.
   (a) Penalty for infraction. Every violation charged as or determined to be
an infraction is punishable by (1) a fine not exceeding One Hundred and no/
100ths ($100.00) Dollars for the first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding Two
Hundred and no/100ths ($200.00) Dollars for a second violation of the same
ordinance within one year; (3) a fine not exceeding Five Hundred and no/100ths
($500.00) Dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance within
one year.
   (b)   Penalty for misdemeanor. Every violation charged as or determined to
be a misdemeanor is punishable by penalty of fine or imprisonment, or both. A
fine shall not exceed One Thousand and no/100ths ($1,000.00) Dollars and
imprisonment shall not exceed six (6) months.
(§ 2, Ord. 907-NS, eff. February 11, 1986)
Statutory reference:
   Infraction penalties, see California Government Code § 36900
   Misdemeanor penalties, see California Government Code § 36901 and California
Penal Code § 19
Sec. 1-2.04. Determination of punishment.
   Whenever in this Code the punishment for a crime is left undetermined
between certain limits, the punishment to be inflicted in a particular case
shall be determined by the court authorized to pass sentence, within such
limits as may be prescribed by this Code.
Sec. 1-2.05. Place of confinement.
   Every person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this Code
and sentenced to imprisonment shall be imprisoned in the County Jail.
Sec. 1-2.06. Fees, charges, and taxes made a civil debt.
   The amount of any fee, service charge, utility charge, license, or tax of
any nature whatsoever imposed by any provision of this Code shall be deemed a
civil debt owing to the City. An action may be commenced in the name of the
City in any court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of the amount of
any such delinquent or unpaid fee, service charge, utility charge, license, or
tax, together with any penalties applicable thereto as prescribed by this Code.
The remedy prescribed by this section shall be accumulative, and the use of an
action to collect such an amount as a debt by civil action shall not bar the
use of any other remedy provided by this Code or by law for the purpose of
enforcing the provisions thereof.
Sec. 1-2.07. Unreasonable refusal to pay or comply: Attorneys’ fees.
   In any civil action against a person to collect any fee, service charge,
utility charge, license, tax, or any other charge or obligation imposed by any
provision of this Code, or to enforce any other duty or obligation imposed by
any provision of this Code, if the person has failed for thirty (30) days after
demand prior to the commencement of the action to make payment or otherwise
perform in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Code, and it
appears to the court that such refusal was without reasonable cause, the court
may allow to the plaintiff a reasonable attorneys’ fee and include such fee in
any judgment that may be rendered in such action. The failure of a person to
defend any such action shall be deemed prima facie evidence that failure to
make payment or otherwise comply was without reasonable cause.
(§ 1, Ord. 491-NS, eff. September 12, 1974)
Sec. 1-2.08. Recovery of inspection and code enforcement costs: Certificate of
compliance.
   (a)   When the maintenance, condition, construction, or use of any real
property is such that it violates any section of the Thousand Oaks Municipal
Code, and such a situation violating that Code continues past the date for City
code compliance, as set forth in a written notice to the owner or party in
possession informing them of that violation, the City may do all or any part of
the following:
   (1)   Record with the Ventura County Recorder a Notice of Violation of the
Thousand Oaks Municipal Code setting forth all violations related to the real
property.
   (2)   Require the owner to obtain from the City a Certificate of Compliance
indicating the correction of the Code violations, and pay a certificate
processing fee which will be equal to all the costs incurred by the City in
connection with its inspection and code enforcement efforts from the initial
discovery of the situation until such violations have been corrected and such
certificate can be issued. The certificate shall be issued when the property is
in full compliance with the City Codes.
   (3)   Require the owner, as part of the application fee for any needed
permit which the property owner failed to obtain before the activity or use was
initiated, to pay a code enforcement cost surcharge in an amount equal to the
City’s cost for its code enforcement efforts.
   (4)   Request, as a condition of probation or sentencing on any criminal
conviction of such City code violation, that the defendant provide full
restitution to the City for such inspection and code enforcement costs.
   (b)   The written Notice of Violation described in Subsection (a) shall be
mailed to, or personally served on, the owner of record of the real property on
which the code violation exists, and, if deemed appropriate by the City, to the
party in possession of that property. The notice shall contain a warning that
the owner may be obligated to pay all of the City’s code enforcement and
inspection costs incurred in obtaining compliance with the Code should the
property owner not correct the violation within the time specified in the
written notice.
(§ 1, Ord. 1140-NS, eff. March 17, 1992)
Article 2: Civil Penalty Procedure
Sec. 1-2.201. Application.
   (a)   Any violation of the provisions of this code is subject to a civil
penalty.
   (b)   This chapter establishes the administrative procedures for the
imposition, enforcement, collection and administrative review of civil
penalties pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4.
   (c)   The issuance of an civil penalty citation under this chapter is solely
at the City's discretion and is one option the City has to address violations
of this code. By adopting this chapter, the City does not intend to limit its
discretion to utilize any other remedy, civil or criminal, for any violation of
the Municipal Code.
(Ord.1430-NS, eff. Dec. 16, 2004)
Sec. 1-2.202. Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter certain words and phrases are defined as
follows:
   (a)   “Administrative Hearing.” A civil proceeding to contest a civil
penalty citation.
   (b)   “Citation.” A civil penalty citation charging the citee with a code
violation issued pursuant to this chapter.
   (c)   “Citee.” Person served with a civil penalty citation charging them as
a responsible person for a code violation.
   (d)   “Code Violation.” A violation of the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code.
   (e)   “Enforcement officer.” Any City employee or agent of the City with the
authority and responsibility to enforce provisions of this code as designated
by the director of the applicable City department.
   (f)   “Hearing Officer.” A person appointed by the City Attorney to conduct,
consider and decide administrative hearings. Prior to being appointed, a
hearing officer must first be certified by the City Attorney as qualified to
provide a fair and impartial hearing based on appropriate education, training
and experience.
   (g)   “Issuance date.” The date when a citation is served on the citee.
   (h)   “Person.” A natural person or any other legal entity, including its
owners, majority stockholders, corporate officers, trustees, and general
partners.
   (i)   “Responsible person.” A person who creates, causes, maintains or
allows a code violation to exist or occur by their action or failure to act.
(Ord.1430-NS, eff. Dec. 16, 2004)
Sec. 1-2.203. Citation.
   (a)   Upon determining that a provision of this code has been violated, an
enforcement officer has the authority to issue a civil penalty citation to any
responsible person. However, prior to issuance of a civil penalty citation for
a continuing violation of a building, plumbing, electrical or other similar
structural or zoning issue that does not create an immediate danger to health
or safety, a responsible person shall be provided with notice of the violation
and a reasonable period of time to correct the violation, but in no case less
than 20 days.
   (b)   A responsible person upon whom a citation is served is liable for and
shall pay to the City the penalties described in the citation.
   (c)   Each day a code violation exists shall constitute a separate violation
and be subject to a separate penalty.
   (d)   A citation may charge a violation for one or more days on which a
violation exists, and for violation of one or more code sections.
   (e)   Civil penalty citations shall contain the following information:
   (1)   Name of the responsible person;
   (2)   Address or other description of the location where the code violation
occurred;
   (3)   Date(s) on which the code violation(s) occurred or existed;
   (4)   Issuing department;
   (5)   The code section(s) violated;
   (6)   Brief description of the violation;
   (7)   Amount of the penalty;
   (8)   Procedure to pay the penalty;
   (9)   Description of the procedure for requesting a Preliminary Review, a
Waiver of Penalty Deposit and an Administrative Hearing to contest a citation;
   (10)   A notice that the code violation may constitute a nuisance and that
collection of unpaid penalty and nuisance abatement costs may be enforced as an
assessment or lien against property;
   (11)   Printed name and signature of the issuing enforcement officer;
   (12)   Date the citation is served;
   (13)   A distinct citation number.
(Ord.1430-NS, eff. Dec. 16, 2004)
Sec. 1-2.204. Service of Citation.
   A citation may be served as follows:
   (a)   An enforcement officer may personally deliver the citation to the
citee.
   (b)   An enforcement officer may mail the citation by first class mail to
the citee's last known address. An address shown on the county's last equalized
property tax assessment rolls for a property related violation is deemed to be
a valid address for service.
   (c)   In the case of a property related code violation, an enforcement
officer may post the property in a conspicuous location with a copy of the
citation. A copy of the citation shall also be mailed to the citee at the
property and at their last known address, if different.
   (d)   Service is deemed accomplished on the date the citation is delivered,
mailed or posted in accordance with this section.
(Ord.1430-NS, eff. Dec. 16, 2004)
Sec. 1-2.205. Amount of Civil Penalty.
   (a)   The amount of the penalties for violating provisions of this code
shall be set by resolution of the City Council.
   (b)   Penalties are due on the day the citation is issued, except that when
a penalty deposit has been waived and the hearing officer upholds the citation,
the penalty shall be due on the date the decision is issued.
(Ord.1430-NS, eff. Dec. 16, 2004)
Sec. 1-2.206. Payment of Civil Penalties.
   (a)   Penalties shall be paid to the City Treasurer within 35 days of the
due date.
   (b)   Penalties not paid in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
are obligations of the responsible party and may be collected by the City
through any legal means.
   (c)   Payment of a penalty shall not excuse the citee from correcting the
code violation. The issuance of a citation or payment of a penalty does not bar
the City from taking any further enforcement action regarding a code violation
that continues to exist, including but not limited to issuing additional civil
penalty citations or filing a criminal complaint.
(Ord.1430-NS, eff. Dec. 16, 2004)
Sec. 1-2.207. Preliminary Review.
   (a)   A citee may request a preliminary review of an citation within 14 days
of the date the citation is issued. The citee must present a preliminary review
request form, a copy of the citation and any additional information
demonstrating the reasons why there was no violation or why the citee is not a
responsible person for the violation to the City Treasurer. The purpose of the
review is to identify any improper citations due to errors that are readily
verifiable and not to resolve factual disputes concerning the citation.
   (b)   The preliminary review shall be conducted by the director of the
issuing department or their designee. The reviewer shall not be the enforcement
officer who issued the citation.
   (c)   If the determination of the preliminary review is that the citation is
improper, the citation shall be dismissed. The citee shall be notified of the
results of the review in writing within 10 working days of receipt of the
request.
   (d)   A request for preliminary review does not extend any time periods for
compliance, the penalty due date or the time to request an administrative
hearing.
(Ord.1430-NS, eff. Dec. 16, 2004)
Sec. 1-2.208. Request for Administrative Hearing.
   (a)   Any citee may contest a civil penalty citation by filing a signed
written request for an administrative hearing stating the grounds for
contesting the citation.
   (b)   The request must be received by the City Treasurer's Office within 35
days of the date the citation was served and be accompanied by a deposit of the
full amount of the penalty.
(Ord.1430-NS, eff. Dec. 16, 2004)
Sec. 1-2.209. Waiver of Penalty Deposit.
   (a)   A citee who files a request for an administrative hearing may also at
the same time file a request for a hardship waiver of the penalty deposit. The
request for a hardship wavier of the penalty deposit shall include a statement
of the grounds for the request.
   (b)   The citee requesting the waiver bears the burden of establishing by
substantial evidence that they do not have the financial ability to deposit the
penalty.
   (c)   The request will be decided within ten (10) days of filing by the
director of the issuing department or their designee. A written decision that
the penalty deposit is or is not waived shall be issued.
   (d)   If the waiver is denied, the citee shall deliver the penalty deposit
so that it is received by the City Treasurer within fourteen (14) calendar days
of the decision. Failure to make the deposit by the time required shall be
deemed an abandonment of the request for administrative hearing.
   (e)   The filing of a request for hardship waiver of the penalty deposit
does not extend any time periods set forth in this chapter. The decision of the
director of the issuing department or their designee regarding the request for
a hardship waiver of the penalty deposit is final and not subject to review.
(Ord.1430-NS, eff. Dec. 16, 2004)
Sec. 1-2.210.   Notice of Hearing.
   (a)   Within ten (10) days following the receipt of a request for
administrative hearing and either a deposit of the penalty amount or a decision
waiving the penalty deposit, the City Attorneys Office shall schedule an
administrative hearing. The date of the hearing shall be no more than 90 days
later than the date the request for hearing is filed. The City Attorneys Office
shall notify the citee of the date of the hearing.
   (b)   The City Attorney's Office or the hearing officer may grant a one time
continuance of a hearing for no more than 45 days if a request is made showing
good cause by the citee or a representative of the City. All continuance
requests shall either be made in person at the hearing by the citee or his or
her representative if the citee is physically unable to attend, or be made by a
written request received by the City Attorney's Office at least 72 hours before
the hearing date. If the request for continuance is denied, the hearing shall
proceed as noticed.
   (c)   A citee who requests a continuance waives their opportunity for a
hearing within 90 days of the date the citation is issued.
(Ord.1430-NS, eff. Dec. 16, 2004)
Sec. 1-2.211. Administrative Hearing Procedures.
   (a)   The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer on the date set by
the City Attorneys Office.
   (b)   The citee shall have the opportunity to appear, testify and to present
evidence relevant to the code violation alleged in the citation.
   (c)   The citee may file a written declaration with the City Attorney's
Office at least 48 hours prior to the hearing in lieu of personally attending
the hearing.
   (d)   The citation shall be accepted by the hearing officer as prima facie
evidence of the code violation and the facts stated in the citation.
   (e)   Neither the enforcement officer nor any other representative of the
City shall be compelled to attend the hearing. However, any such appearance or
submission may be made at the discretion of the enforcement officer.
   (f)   The hearing shall be conducted informally and formal rules of evidence
need not be imposed. The hearing officer does not have the authority to issue a
subpoena.
   (g)   The failure of the citee to appear at the hearing or to file written
testimony prior to hearing shall constitute an abandonment of the request for
administrative hearing and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies
concerning the violation set forth in the citation. Any penalty deposit shall
be forfeited to the City.
(Ord.1430-NS, eff. Dec. 16, 2004)
Sec. 1-2.212. Administrative Hearing Decision.
   (a)   After considering all evidence and testimony submitted at the
administrative hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision to
uphold or dismiss the citation within 15 working days.
   (b)   The hearing officer has no discretion or authority to reduce or modify
the amount of any fine.
   (c)   The decision shall state the reasons and evidence considered for the
decision.
   (d)   If the decision is to uphold the citation, the deposited penalty shall
be forfeited to the City. If the decision is to dismiss the citation, the City
shall refund the penalty deposit within 30 days of the decision. If the
citation is upheld and the penalty deposit has been waived, the penalty shall
be due on the date the decision is issued.
   (e)   The hearing officer's continued employment, performance evaluation,
compensation, and benefits shall not directly or indirectly be linked to the
number of citations upheld or canceled by the officer.
(Ord.1430-NS, eff. Dec. 16, 2004)
Sec. 1-2.213. Judicial Review.
   (a)   Notwithstanding any other provision of the Municipal Code, the
administrative hearing decision is final and not subject to appeal or further
review by any City body or person. The citee may seek judicial review of the
administrative hearing decision by filing an appeal to the Ventura County
Superior Court in accordance with the provisions of state law.
   (b)   No appeal is permitted from a decision on a request for preliminary
review, or a request for waiver of the penalty deposit, or where the citee is
deemed to have abandoned the contest of the citation by failing to appear at
the hearing or failure to deposit the penalty.
(Ord.1430-NS, eff. Dec. 16, 2004)
CHAPTER 3. RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
Sec. 1-3.01. Scope of chapter.
   Unless the provisions of this Code otherwise specifically provide, or the
context of this Code indicates to the contrary, the general provisions, rules
of construction, and definitions set forth in this Chapter shall govern the
construction of this Code. The provisions of this Code and all proceedings
under it are to be construed with a view to effect its objects and to promote
justice.
Sec. 1-3.02. Provisions construed as restatements and continuations.
   The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as
existing ordinances relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as
restatements and continuations and not as new enactments.
Sec. 1-3.03. Tenure of officers preserved.
   All persons who, at the time this Code takes effect, hold office under any
of the ordinances repealed by this Code, which offices are continued by this
Code, shall continue to hold them according to their former tenure.
Sec. 1-3.04. Effect of headings.
   Title, chapter, article, and section headings contained in this Code shall
not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope,
meaning, or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter, article, or section
of this Code.
Sec. 1-3.05. Meaning of section and subsection.
   “Section” shall mean a section of this Code, unless some other source is
specifically mentioned. “Subsection” shall mean a subsection of the section in
which the term occurs, unless some other section is expressly mentioned.
Sec. 1-3.06. References to acts or omissions within the city.
   This Code shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within the
territorial limits of the City and to that territory outside the City over
which the City has jurisdiction or control by virtue of the Constitution of the
State of California or any law, or by reason of ownership or control of
property.
Sec. 1-3.07. Acts by deputies.
   Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon, a public officer
or employee, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a
deputy of such officer or employee or by a person otherwise duly authorized
pursuant to law or ordinance, unless this Code expressly provides otherwise.
Sec. 1-3.08. Writing.
   Writing includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by
ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement, or record is
required or authorized by this Code, it shall be made in writing in the English
language unless it is expressly provided otherwise.
Sec. 1-3.09. References to ordinances: Application to amendments.
   Whenever any reference is made to an ordinance, the reference shall apply to
such ordinance of the City unless otherwise specifically provided. Whenever any
reference is made to any portion of this Code, or to any ordinance of the City,
the reference shall apply to all amendments and additions now or hereafter
made.
Sec. 1-3.10. Service of notices.
   Whenever a notice is required to be given under this Code, unless different
provisions are otherwise specifically made in the Code, such notice may be
given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by
deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid,
addressed to such person to be notified at his last known business or residence
address as the same appears in the public records of the City or other records
pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail
shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the post
office.
Sec. 1-3.11. Service of notices: Proof.
   Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or
employee of the City or by affidavit of any person over the age of eighteen
(18) years, which affidavit shows service in conformity with this Code or other
provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned.
Sec. 1-3.12. Statute of limitations.
   When a limitation or period of time prescribed in any existing ordinance or
statute for acquiring a right or barring a remedy, or for any other purpose,
has begun to run before this Code goes into effect, the time which has already
run shall be deemed a part of the time prescribed as such limitation.
Sec. 1-3.13. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this Code, unless otherwise apparent from the context,
certain words and phrases used in this Code are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Calendar year” shall mean from January 1 through December 31 of any
given year.
   (b)   “City” shall mean the City of Thousand Oaks.
   (c)   “Council” shall mean the City Council of the City of Thousand Oaks.
   (d)   “County” shall mean the County of Ventura.
   (e)   “Fiscal year” shall mean from July 1 of any given year through June 30
of the following year.
   (f)   “Gender.” The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter
genders.
   (g)   “May” shall be permissive.
   (h)   “Month” shall mean a calendar month unless otherwise expressed.
   (i)   “Number.” The singular number shall include the plural, and the plural
number shall include the singular.
   (j)   “Oath” shall include affirmation.
   (k)   “Office.” The use of the title of any officer, employee, office, or
ordinance shall mean such officer, employee, office, or ordinance of this City,
unless otherwise specified.
   (l)   “Official time standard.” Wherever certain hours are named in this
Code, they shall mean
standard time or daylight savings time as may be in current use in the City.
   (m)   “Owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner,
joint owner, tenant, tenant in common, or joint tenant of the whole or a part
of such building or land.
   (n)   “Person” shall include any person, firm, company, corporation,
partnership, association, any public corporation, political subdivision, city
(excepting the City of Thousand Oaks), the County of Ventura, district in the
County of Ventura, the State of California, or the United States of America, or
any department or agency of any thereof, unless this Code expressly provides
otherwise.
   (o)   “Personal property” shall include money, goods, chattels, things in
action, and evidences of debt.
   (p)   “Property” shall include both real and personal property.
   (q)   “Quarterly,” where used to designate a period of time, shall mean the
first three (3) calendar months of any given year or any succeeding period of
three (3) calendar months.
   (r)   “Real property” shall include lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
   (s)   “Shall” shall be mandatory.
   (t)   “State” shall mean the State of California.
   (u)   “Street” shall include all streets, highways, avenues, boulevards,
alleys, courts, places, squares, or other public ways in the City which have
been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public
property so designated in any law of this State.
   (v)   “Tenant or occupant,” applied to a building or land, shall include any
person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone
or with others.
   (w)   “Tenses.” The present tense shall include the past and future tenses,
and the future tense shall include the present tense.
   (x)   “T.O.M.C.” shall mean Thousand Oaks Municipal Code, as amended from
time to time.
   (y)   “T.O.O.C.” shall mean Ordinance Code of the City as amended and in
effect on October 7, 1964, adopted by Ordinance No. 7 of the City, effective
January 14, 1965.
(§ 3, Ord. 907-NS, eff. February 11, 1986)
CHAPTER 4. APPEALS AND GROUNDS TO DENY APPLICATIONS
Article 1. Appeals.
Sec. 1-4.01. Right to appeal.
   Except where an appeals procedure is otherwise specifically provided in this
Code, any person excepting to the denial, suspension, or revocation of a
license or permit applied for or held by him pursuant to any of the provisions
of this Code, or to any administrative decision made by any official of the
City, if the denial, suspension, or revocation of such permit or the
determination of such administrative decision involves the exercise of
administrative discretion or personal judgment exercised pursuant to any of the
provisions of this Code, may appeal in writing to the City Manager by filing
with the City Clerk a written notice of such appeal, setting forth the specific
grounds thereof.
   No right of appeal to the City Manager from any administrative decision made
by an official of the City pursuant to any of the provisions of this Code shall
exist when such decision is ministerial and thus does not involve the exercise
of administrative discretion or personal judgement exercised pursuant to any of
the provisions of this Code.
(§ 2, Ord. 1491-NS, eff. 11-22-07)
Sec. 1-4.02. Time limit for filing.
   The appellant shall file a Notice of Appeal setting out reasons for the
appeal with the City Clerk within fourteen (14) days after receipt of the
notice of the administrative decision that is the subject of the appeal. Any
administrative decision to suspend or revoke any license or permit shall be
stayed, if a timely appeal is filed until a decision is issued by the City
Manager or designee.
(§ 3, Ord. 1491-NS, eff. 11-22-07)
Sec. 1-4.03. Hearing: Notices.
   After the City Clerk’s receipt of the Notice of Appeal, the City Manager or
designee shall set a hearing date within a reasonable time, but no more than 60
days after filing Notice of Appeal and provide the appellant with at least ten
(10) days notice prior to the hearing.
(§ 1, Ord. 921-NS, eff. May 20, 1986; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1491-NS, eff. 11-
22-07)
Sec. 1-4.04. Hearings.
   The City Manager or designee shall hold the hearing and issue a written
decision within thirty (30) days of the completion of the hearing. At such
hearing the appellant shall have the right to be present at the hearing, review
evidence against them, cross-examine witnesses and present evidence on his/her
behalf. The decision of the City Manager or designee shall be final.
(§ 4, Ord. 1491-NS, eff. 11-22-07)
Sec. 1-4.05. Time limitations for judicial reviews of City decisions.
   Any court action or legal proceedings to attack, review, set aside, void,
annul, or seek damages for any final City decision on a permit, license, City
entitlement, or any City decision or action taken pursuant to Title 9 of this
code, or referred to in Section 1-4.01 of this chapter, shall be commenced and
the service of summons effected within ninety (90) days after the date of such
final decision or action taken, or if a shorter period of time is prescribed in
state law or elsewhere in this code, such shorter period shall prevail.
   The time provision of Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6 is also made
applicable by this section. This section shall not expand the scope of judicial
review. Except where a shorter time period is set forth, this Code of Civil
Procedure section shall prevail over any conflicting provision, law or code
section.
   The posted meeting agenda shall contain a notice or, if no agenda, the
chairperson of the meeting shall announce to the parties in attendance, that
the time within which judicial review must be sought is governed by Code of
Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. Thereafter, all persons are barred from filing,
commencing or prosecuting any such legal action, or from asserting any defense
of invalidity or unreasonableness of such decision, proceeding, determination,
or action taken by the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 705-NS, eff. March 29, 1979, as amended by § 4, Ord. 907-NS, eff.
February 11, 1986, and Ord. 1165-NS, eff. December 15, 1992)
Article 2. Grounds for Denial/Revocation of Application.
Sec. 1-4.201. Material Misrepresentation.
   The City may deny any application submitted pursuant to any of the
provisions of this Code or refuse to renew, suspend, or revoke any license,
permit or privilege granted pursuant to such application, if the application
contains a material misrepresentation or omission of a material fact.
(§ 6(part), Ord. 1491-NS, eff. 11-22-07)
Sec. 1-4.202. Crimes of Moral Turpitude.
   Except for applications made pursuant to Title 9, Planning and Zoning, or
Title 10, Utilities, the City may deny any application submitted pursuant to
any other provisions of this Code or refuse to renew, suspend, or revoke any
license, permit or privilege granted pursuant to such application, if the
applicant has been convicted (including pleading nolo contendere) of an offense
involving moral turpitude.
(§ 6(part), Ord. 1491-NS, eff. 11-22-07)
Sec. 1-4.203. Notice of Denial or Revocation.
   Notice of any decision by the City to deny any application or refuse to
renew, suspend, or revoke any license, permit or privilege granted pursuant to
such application based on Section 1-4.201 or 1-4.202, above, shall be in
writing to the applicant and shall be effective upon delivery or upon mailing
to their address of record.
(§ 6(part), Ord. 1491-NS, eff. 11-22-07)
CHAPTER 5. CITATION PROCEDURE
Sec. 1-5.01. Scope.
   All violations of any provisions of the laws of the City and of this Code
shall be subject to the citation procedures set forth in this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 104, as amended by § II, Ord. 770-NS, eff. February 26, 1981)
Sec. 1-5.02. Notices to appear: Form.
   If any person is arrested for the violation of any provision of the laws of
the City or of this Code, and such person is not immediately taken before a
magistrate, the arresting officer shall prepare, in duplicate, a written notice
to appear in court. Such notice shall contain the name and address of such
person, the offense charged, and the time when and place where such person
shall appear in court.
(§ 2, Ord. 104)
Sec. 1-5.03. Notices to appear: Time.
   The time specified in the notice to appear shall be at least ten (10) days
after such arrest.
(§ 3, Ord. 104, as amended by § 5, Ord. 907-NS, eff. February 11, 1986)
Sec. 1-5.04. Notice to appear: Place.
   The place specified in the notice to appear shall be:
   (a)   The court of the magistrate before whom the person would be taken if
the requirement of arresting and taking the person before a magistrate were
complied with; or
   (b)   Before an officer authorized by such court to receive a deposit or
bail.
(§ 4, Ord. 104)
Sec. 1-5.05. Notices to appear: Promise and release.
   The enforcement officer shall deliver one copy of the Notice to Appear to
the detained or arrested person. The arrested person, in order to secure
release, shall give his written promise to so appear in court by signing a
duplicate notice which shall be retained by the officer. The officer may book
the arrestee or release the person from custody. Any person refusing to sign
the Notice to Appear may be taken into custody.
(§ 5, Ord. 104, as amended by § 6, Ord. 907-NS, eff. February 11, 1986)
Sec. 1-5.06. Warrants for arrest.
   When a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and place
specified in the written promise to appear and has not posted bail as provided
in the Penal Code of this State, the magistrate shall issue and have delivered
for execution a warrant for such person's arrest within twenty (20) days after
his failure to appear as promised, or if such person promises to appear before
an officer authorized to accept bail other than a magistrate, and falls to do
so on or before the date which such person promised to appear, within twenty
(20) days after the delivery of such written promise to appear by the officer
to a magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense.
(§ 7, Ord. 104, as amended by § 7, Ord. 907-NS, eff. February 11, 1986)
Sec. 1-5.07. Violations of promises to appear.
   Any person wilfully violating his written promise to appear in court shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon
which he was originally arrested.
(§ 8, Ord. 104)
Sec. 1-5.08. Enforcement.
   For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this code, the following are
designated as “enforcement officers”:
   (a)   The Community Development Director;
   (b)   The Zoning/Code Enforcement Officers;
   (c)   The Building Official;
   (d)   The City Engineer;
   (e)   The Business License Inspector;
   (f)   The Public Works Director;
   (g)   The Chief of Police;
   (h)   The Health Officer;
   (i)   Conejo Open Space Conservation Agency (COSCA) Rangers; and
   (j)   The Conejo Open Space Conservation Agency (COSCA) Manager.
(§ 6, Ord. 104, as amended by § Ord. 183, § 1, Ord. 106-NS, eff. September 5,
1969, § 8, Ord. 907-NS, eff. February 11, 1986, §§ 1, 2, Ord. 962-NS, eff. May
19, 1987, § 2, Ord. 1351-NS, eff. January 4, 2000, and § 1, Ord. 1532-NS, eff.
March 11, 2010)
Sec. 1-5.09. Enforcement officers: Duties, interference.
   It shall be the duty of the enforcement officers to enforce the provisions
of this Code and they shall have the power to issue citations. Any person who
resists, delays, obstructs, threatens or attempts to intimidate the officer in
the discharge of, or attempted discharge of, his duty shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(§ 9, Ord. 907-NS, eff. February 11, 1986, and § 1, Ord. 1250-NS, eff. January
9, 1996)
CHAPTER 6. PUBLIC NUISANCES
Sec. 1-6.01. Declaration of what constitutes a public nuisance.
   In addition to any other provisions of this Code, it is declared to be a
public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge,
possession, or control of any premises or property in the City to cause,
permit, maintain, tolerate or allow any of the following conditions or acts to
exist thereon.
   (a)   Hazardous obstructions. An obstacle, landscaping, or thing installed
or maintained in the corner setback area reaching a height higher than two and
one-half (2-1/2) feet above the adjoining top of the curb at the applicable
corner of the street intersection, or two and one-half (2-1/2) feet above the
nearest pavement surface where there is no curb or pavement. “Hazardous
obstructions” shall not mean existing or future permanent buildings, otherwise
constructed or maintained in accordance with applicable zoning and building
regulations, public utility poles, or trees trimmed at the trunk at least eight
(8) feet above the level of the ground surface provided such trees are spaced
so that trunks do not obstruct vision of the motorists;
   (b)   Polluted water. A swimming pool, pond, runoff water from excessive
irrigation, or other body of water which is abandoned, unattended, unfiltered,
or not otherwise maintained, resulting in the water becoming polluted or
odorous or infested with mosquitoes. “Polluted” shall mean water contained in a
swimming pool, pond, runoff water from excessive irrigation, or other body of
water which includes, but is not limited to, bacterial growth, including algae,
remains of insects, remains of deceased animals, reptiles, rubbish, refuse,
debris, papers, or any other foreign matter or material which, because of its
nature or location, constitutes an unhealthy, unsafe, or unsightly condition;
   (c)   Solid waste. Solid waste in any yard area visible to the general
public from a public sidewalk, right-of-way, or service easement located in the
front yard area of any flag lot, which, by reason of its location and
character, is unsightly and interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of
property by neighbors, including but not limited to the accumulation of solid
waste by any person in a manner other than as specified in Chapter 2 of Title 6
of this Code. “Solid waste” shall include, but not be limited to, unused or
discarded matter or material having no substantial market value and may consist
of such matter and material as debris, rubble, asphalt, concrete, plaster,
tile, rocks, bricks, soil, building materials, crates, cartons, containers,
boxes, packing boxes, machinery or parts thereof, scrap metals and other pieces
of metal, ferrous or nonferrous, furniture, inoperative vehicles and parts
thereof, trimmings from plants, trees, cans, bottles and barrels;
   (d) Animal nuisance. A public nuisance due to animal noise is defined in
Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code incorporated by Section
6-1.100 and as amended by Section
6-1.105 of this Code; and
   (e)   Maintenance of property. The existence of any of the following
conditions:
   (1)   Unpainted or unfinished buildings or portions of buildings where no
major exterior repair or construction activity is under way.
   (2)   The exterior of any building which has a substantial portion of
peeling or deteriorating paint or finishing materials.
   (3)   The painting of any building in a color, shade, or pattern that is
substantially out of character with the color, shade, or pattern of the
original color scheme or conditions of approval required by the City in that
structure's development approval or by any other City issued entitlement.
   (4)   Dead, overgrown, or neglected lawns, ground cover, trees or shrubs on
any improved property, or within one hundred and fifty feet (150) of a public
right of way for unimproved property that is not open space as defined by
Section 9-4.629 of this code, which is visible to the general public from a
public sidewalk, right-of-way, or service easement located in the front yard
area of any flag lot:
   (i)   Constituting unsightly appearance; or
   (ii)   Dangerous to the public safety and welfare.
   (5)   Neglected or inoperative machinery, equipment or other personal
property including but not limited to, household appliances, refrigerators,
washers, dryers, or furniture left and kept in any yard area.
   (6)   Vehicles, as defined in Section 5-10.02 of this Code, campers,
trailers and other mobile equipment, parking in any inoperative condition or
obvious state of disrepair in the front yard area, in a driveway, or visible
while standing at ground level from a point within five (5) feet of any
dwelling located on adjoining property in a residential zone.
   (7)   Camper shells, boats off any trailer, or non-mobile equipment/building
materials (not used in connection with any ongoing work at the property) in the
front yard area, or driveway of a property in a residential zone.
   (8)   Any repairs, dismantling or body work being made to any vehicle, as
defined in Section 5-10.02 of this Code, boat, camper, camper shell, trailer or
any other mobile equipment, on a driveway or in any yard areas on any
residentially zoned property which activity: (i) is visible to the general
public from a public sidewalk, right-of-way, or service easement; and (ii)
occurs within the front yard areas of any flag lot. This subsection shall not
prohibit routine maintenance of the personal property listed above, provided
such routine maintenance is performed between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m. and is completed within four (4) hours.
   (9)   Any tent, canopy, or other temporary structure that is stretched and
sustained by poles or capable of being collapsed, in any yard area visible to
the general public from a public sidewalk, right-of-way, or service easement
located in the front yard area of any flag lot, for a period of more than ten
(10) consecutive days, or ten (10) nonconsecutive days in any thirty (30) day
period, after written notice from a code enforcement officer.
   (10)   Yard areas exposed to the general public, or areas within the front
yard of any flag lot, which yard areas do not have landscape treatment fully
installed within the following time frames:
   (i)   For single-family detached dwellings that have not been previously
occupied, within two hundred seventy (270) days of the initial occupancy of the
dwelling;
   (ii)   For single-family detached dwellings that have been previously
occupied, within ninety (90) days of the receipt of a written notice delivered
to the property owner by the City Attorney, a health officer, or code
enforcement officer.
   (11)   Clothes lines in the front yard visible to the general public from a
public sidewalk, right-of-way, or service easement located in the front yard
area of any flag lot.
   (12)   Buildings, structures, or appurtenances that are abandoned, partially
destroyed, partially constructed, or incomplete, for more than ninety (90) days
unless a valid un-expired permit exists for the work.
   (13)   Solid waste, green waste or recyclable materials containers stored in
front or side yards which are exposed to the general public view.
   (14)   The accumulation of animal feces left un-removed after a twenty-four
(24) hour notice from the City and which accumulation can be seen from the
property line or which results in producing odors, or insects identifiable at
the property line.
   (15)   Construction equipment, machinery, or other industrial or commercial
equipment or machinery parked, stored, or kept in any front or side yard area
of any property or premises in a residential zone, visible to the general
public from a public sidewalk, right-of-way, or service easement located in the
front yard area of any flag lot, except when used in conjunction with a project
on the property with a valid un expired permit, or in conjunction with work
that does not require a permit provided progress on such work has not ceased
for more than ninety (90) days.
   (16)   Real property or structures including, but not limited to, yard
areas, fences, hardscape features of any landscape, or building exteriors,
which are left in a broken, defective or unsightly condition or in a condition
of deterioration or disrepair for more than thirty (30) days after written
notice from the City for those properties in any commercial or industrial zone,
or, for more than ninety (90) days after written notice from the City for all
other properties. This nuisance condition includes, but is not limited to:
   (i)   The keeping, scattering, or disposing of junk, trash, or debris over
the property;
   (ii)   Stagnant water, dirt piles or open excavations;
   (iii)   The neglected maintenance of or improper repair works to the
exterior of any structure, fence, yard, or premises out of harmony or
conformity with the maintenance standards of adjacent properties;
   (iv)   The storage, depositing, keeping, or accumulation of dirt, stone,
gravel, sand, concrete, brick, lumber or other construction or building
materials, except when used in conjunction with a project on the property with
a valid unexpired permit, or in conjunction with work that does not require a
permit provided progress on such work has not ceased for more than ninety (90)
days. This subsection shall not apply to commercial properties with an
entitlement or approved use for the sale of such materials.
(§1, Ord. 351-NS, eff. March 8, 1973, as amended by § 10, Ord. 907-NS, eff.
February 11, 1986, §1, Ord. 1085-NS, eff. October 2, 1990, by § 3, Ord. 1200-
NS, eff. March 15, 1994, §1, Ord. 1310-NS, eff. February 5, 1998, and §1, Ord.
1411-NS, eff. July 17, 2003)
Sec. 1-6.02. Enforcement.
   It is unlawful for any person to maintain, permit or allow a public nuisance
to continue to exist upon property owned, controlled, maintained or occupied by
them after receipt of a fifteen (15) day written notice to abate, correct, or
remove same has been served upon such person, from the City Attorney, a health
officer, or code enforcement officer. Each day the nuisance continues after
service of such notice shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
Enforcement and abatement of a nuisance violation by way of criminal
prosecution is an alternate and additional remedy to other abatement and
enforcement procedures available to the City.
(§ 11, Ord. 907-NS, eff. February 11, 1986)
Sec. 1-6.03. Collection of treble damages for subsequent nuisance offense.
   Pursuant to the provisions of the Government Code, City may recover treble
damages against the owner of property for abatement of a nuisance when a second
or subsequent civil or criminal judgment occurs within two (2) years.
Sec. 1-6.04 Recovery of attorney fees by prevailing party.
   (a)   Recovery authorized. The prevailing party in any judicial action,
administrative proceeding, or special proceeding to abate a nuisance may
recover its reasonable attorneys' fees, provided that the City elected, at the
initiation of such individual action or proceeding, to recover its own
attorneys' fees. In no judicial action or administrative proceeding shall an
award of attorneys' fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable
attorneys' fees incurred by the City in the judicial action, administrative
proceeding, or special proceeding to abate a nuisance. In addition to any other
basis, the City shall also be determined the prevailing party when a person
complies voluntarily or involuntarily after a deadline in a notice issued by
the City expires, and also when the City's enforcement action was a cause or
catalyst for compliance.
   (b)   A judicial action includes, but is not limited to, any civil action,
inspection or abatement warrant, administrative proceeding, or appeal from an
administrative proceeding. “Abatement” shall include any action taken by the
City to cause or otherwise obtain compliance with this municipal code, uniform
or adopted codes by the City, or any provision of state or federal law that may
be enforced by the City, even if the violation is ultimately corrected by the
violator. Any recovery of attorneys' fees for abatement of a nuisance shall be
in accordance with this section.
(§ 1, Ord. 1724-NS, eff. April 19, 2024)
CHAPTER 7. PROCEDURE FOR ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES
Sec. 1-7.01. Maintenance of property: Abatement of nuisances by repair,
rehabilitation, demolition or removal.
   All or any part of premises found to constitute a public nuisance shall be
abated by rehabilitation, demolition, or repair under the procedures set forth
in this Chapter.
   The procedures set forth in this Chapter shall not limit or restrict the
City from enforcing City laws or abating public nuisances in any other manner
provided by law.
(§ 1, Ord. 352-NS, eff. March 8, 1973)
Sec. 1-7.02. Notices of hearings for summary abatement of nuisances.
   (a)   Notices. When a City department head, or his or her designee, finds
that any premises or property within the City is neglected, maintained or used
in violation of any City code sections under that department’s administration,
he or she shall cause a written notice to be mailed and conspicuously posted on
the premises. This notice shall be entitled in letters not less than one inch
(1) in height and substantially in the following form:
Notice of Hearing to Determine Existence
of Public Nuisance and Order to Abate
In Whole or Part
(Abatement Cost Lien)
      NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that on the             day of                ,
the                  Department of the City of Thousand Oaks intends to
ascertain whether certain premises or property situated in the City of Thousand
Oaks, California, known and designated as                       , constitute a
public nuisance subject to an order to abate by cleaning or clearing the
property, rehabilitation of the premises or by the repair or demolition of
structures situated thereon. If the premises or property, whole or in part, are
found to constitute a public nuisance as defined by section          of the
Thousand Oaks Municipal Code, and if the same are not promptly abated by the
owner as ordered by the hearing officer, such nuisances may be abated by
municipal personnel or its contractors. If abated by municipal personnel or its
contractors, the cost of these proceedings, all prior code enforcement efforts
concerning this condition of the property, and the cleaning, clearing,
rehabilitation, repair, or demolition by the City will constitute a special
assessment and a Nuisance Abatement Lien upon such land until paid. The City
may foreclose on any such lien in order to reimburse the City for these costs.
      The alleged violations consist of the following:
      The methods of abatement available are:
      All persons having any objection to, or interest in, said matters are
hereby notified to attend a hearing in the                Department of the
City of Thousand Oaks to be held at              on                ,         ,
at the hour of                .m., when their testimony and evidence will be
heard and given due consideration.
   Dated:                                        
                                                        
   Department Head
   (b)   Mailing/posting. Service of the notice shall be by posting on the
affected property and by registered or certified mail (postage fully prepaid)
addressed to the owner of the property at the address appearing on the last
equalized assessment roll. The notice shall be posted on the property and
mailed at least ten (10) days before the time fixed for such hearing. Proof of
the posting and service of the notice shall be made by affidavit filed in the
department.
(§ 1, Ord. 352-NS, eff. March 8, 1973, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1146-NS, eff.
April 21, 1992)
Sec. 1-7.03. Department head hearings to abate nuisances.
   (a)   Hearing evidence. At the time stated in the notice, the department
head, or his or her designated hearing officer, shall hear and consider all
relevant evidence, objections, or protests and shall receive testimony from the
owner, witnesses, City personnel, and interested persons relative to such
alleged public nuisance and on the proposed cleaning, clearing, rehabilitation,
repair, or demolition of such premises. The property owner shall have an
opportunity to present any evidence and question any witness concerning the
issue before that hearing officer. The formal rules of the California Evidence
Code need not be followed. The hearing may be continued from time to time.
   (b)   Decision and order to abate. After the conclusion of the hearing, the
hearing officer shall, based upon such hearing, determine whether the premises
or property, or any part thereon, as maintained constitutes a public nuisance.
If the hearing officer finds that the public nuisance does exist and that there
is sufficient cause to abate that situation by cleaning, clearing,
rehabilitating, demolishing, or repairing the property or premises, the hearing
officer shall prepare an order for the owner to abate said nuisance within a
specified period of time, but in no event less than twenty (20) days, or the
City may abate the nuisance at the owner’s expense and place a special
assessment against and a Nuisance Abatement Lien on the property. The hearing
officer’s decision will be final unless appealed.
   (c)   Service of order. Within ten (10) days of the decision, a copy of the
order to abate and notice of appeal right shall be served upon the owner
pursuant to Section 1-7.02(b) of this Chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 352-NS, eff. March 8, 1973, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1146-NS, eff.
April 21, 1992)
Sec. 1-7.04. Appeal to City Council.
   (a)   Appeal. Any decision of the hearing officer finding a public nuisance
may be appealed to the City Council within ten (10) days of the date of service
of the written order by paying the appeal processing fee and filing a written
appeal on the City’s form with the department which conducted the hearing.
   (b)   Hearings. After receiving the written appeal, it shall be forwarded to
the City Clerk who shall set a date for hearing the appeal by the Council,
which date shall not be less than ten (10) days after the date the appeal was
filed. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at
least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing to each appellant by the
City Clerk, either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the
appellant personally or by mailing a copy, postage prepaid, addressed to the
appellant at his address shown on the appeal. Continuances of the hearing may
be granted by the Council on the motion of either party for good cause shown on
the Council’s own motion.
   (c)   Decisions. Upon the conclusion of the hearing of such appeal, the
Council shall:
   (1)   Terminate the proceedings;
   (2)   Confirm the action and decision of the hearing officer; or
   (3)   Modify the decision based upon evidence adduced at the hearing.
   In the case of Subsections (2) or (3) of this Subsection (c), the resolution
shall declare the premises to be a public nuisance and order the private
abatement of the nuisance within a specified period by having such premises,
properties, buildings, or structures, cleaned, cleared, rehabilitated,
repaired, or demolished in the manner and means specified. Any property owner
shall have the right, at his or her expense, to have any such property or
premises cleaned, cleared, rehabilitated or to have such structures demolished
or repaired in accordance with such order, provided the same is done prior to
the expiration of the abatement period. Upon abatement in full by the owner,
the proceedings shall terminate.
   (d)   Notices. A copy of the abatement order of the Council shall be served
upon the owners of such property in accordance with the provisions of Section
1-7.02(b) of this Chapter within ten (10) days of Council’s decision.
(§ 1, Ord. 352-NS, eff. March 8, 1973, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1146-NS, eff.
April 21, 1992)
Sec. 1-7.05. Action by Council to abate nuisances when no appeal.
   In the absence of timely abatement by the owner as ordered, the City
Council, or the City Manager for abatement costs of less than Seven Thousand
Five Hundred and no/100ths ($7,500.00) Dollars, upon receiving the report from
the department head, may order the abatement of the same by City personnel or
through a City contract and direct the placement of a special assessment and a
Nuisance Abatement Lien on the property for all City costs.
(§ 1, Ord. 352-NS, eff. March 8, 1973, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1146-NS, eff.
April 21, 1992)
Sec. 1-7.06. City expenses: Records of costs.
   The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall keep an account of the
costs, including incidental expenses, of abating such nuisance on each separate
lot or parcel of land where the work is done. The term “incidental expenses”
shall include, but not be limited to, the actual expenses, City administration
costs and other costs of the City for all prior code enforcement efforts and
hearings concerning the condition of the property, the preparation of the
abatement work specifications, contracts, and staff time in inspecting the
work, as well as the costs of printing, posting and mailing required by this
Chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 352-NS, eff. March 8, 1973, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1146-NS, eff.
April 21, 1992)
Sec. 1-7.07. Nuisance abatement lien and special assessment procedures.
   (a)   Lien. Any person failing to abate a public nuisance as ordered
pursuant to this Chapter, shall be obligated to pay all City expenses of
abating the nuisance and all administrative costs associated therewith. A
Nuisance Abatement Lien in favor of the City for such expenses of the City
shall be created and recorded, pursuant to this Section, against the property
on which the nuisance is maintained. The lien shall specify the amount of the
lien, the name of the City, the date of the abatement order, the street
address, legal description and assessor’s parcel number of the parcel on which
the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the recorded owner of the
parcel.
   (b)   Notice of proposed recording. At least ten (10) days prior to
recording the lien an itemized notice of the lien amount and proposed recording
shall be served upon the property owner of record of the parcel of land on
which the nuisance was abated by the City, based on the last equalized
assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current prior to
recordation of the lien. The notice shall be served in the same manner as a
summons in a civil action in accordance with Article 3 of Chapter 4 of Title 5
of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure (commencing with Section 415.10). If
the owner of record, after diligent search, cannot be found, the notice may be
served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a
period of ten (10) days, and publication thereof in a newspaper of general
circulation published in the county in which the property is located.
   (c)   Recording. The City’s Nuisance Abatement Lien shall then be recorded
in the Ventura County Recorder’s Office, and from the date of recording, shall
have the force, effect, and priority of a judgment lien.
   (d)   Special assessment. The City’s total costs described in this chapter
may also be collected as a special assessment against the lot or parcel on
which the nuisance existed. After recordation of the Nuisance Abatement Lien
the City may provide a copy of the notice of proposed recordation, proof of
service, and the recorded lien to the Tax Collector and he or she shall add the
described special assessment payments to the next regular tax bill levied
against the respective lots or parcels and the amounts shall be collected and
subject to the same penalties and the same procedure under foreclosure and sale
as in the case of tax delinquencies.
   (e)   Satisfaction. In the event that the lien or special assessment is
discharged, released, or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, a
notice of the discharge containing the information specified in the lien shall
be recorded by the City.
   (f)   Fees. Any fees incurred by the City for processing, recording of the
lien and providing notice to the property owner may be recovered by the City as
part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien.
(§ 1, Ord. 352-NS, eff. March 8, 1973, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1146-NS, eff.
April 21, 1992)
Sec. 1-7.08. Maintenance of property: Alternative proceedings.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the Council from ordering the City
Attorney to commence a civil proceeding to abate a public nuisance under
applicable provisions of the Civil Code of the State as an alternative to the
proceedings set forth in this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 352-NS, eff. March 8, 1983, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1146-NS, eff.
April 21, 1992)
CHAPTER 8. CITY COUNCIL
Article 1. Council Meetings and Procedures.
Sec. 1-8.101. Regular meetings.
   The City Council regular meetings and/or study sessions open to the public
should be held at least twice each month on Tuesdays, at such times fixed
annually by resolution in the Council Chambers of City Hall in the City, or at
such time and place as properly noticed pursuant to California law. If by
reason of fire, flood, damage or emergency, it shall be unsafe to meet in City
Hall, the meetings may be held for the duration of the unsafe situation at such
other place as designated by the Mayor or, if the Mayor should fail to act, by
three (3) members of the City Council. When the day for a regular meeting falls
on a legal holiday, no meeting shall be held and may be rescheduled with proper
notice.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1231-NS,
eff. April 25, 1995, and § 1, Ord. 1421-NS, eff. December 17, 2003)
Sec. 1-8.102. Adjourned meetings.
   Council meetings should be adjourned on or before 12:00 a.m. (midnight). The
Council meeting may continue past that hour upon affirmative vote of the
majority of the Council. Upon adjournment, the remaining agenda items shall be
continued to the following meeting unless otherwise directed by the Council.
   Meetings may be adjourned to a time, place and date certain but not beyond
the next regular meeting. Once adjourned, the meeting may not be reconvened.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984)
Sec. 1-8.103. Study sessions.
   The Council may meet in a study sessions at dates, times and places fixed by
the City Council, in accordance with law, for the purpose of hearing staff
reports and reviewing, discussing and debating matters of interest to the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1231-NS,
eff. April 25, 1995)
Sec. 1-8.104. Special meetings.
   Special meetings may be called at any time by the Mayor or by three (3)
members of the Council on twenty-four (24) hour notice, as set forth in the
Government Code, to each Councilmember and to each news media with a request
for notice on file. Such notice shall be delivered personally or by any other
means which ensures receipt at least twenty-four (24) hours before the time of
such special meeting. The call and notice shall specify the date, time, place
and the business to be transacted. No other business shall be considered at
such meetings. No ordinances (other than urgency ordinances) may be adopted,
nor may resolutions or orders for the payment of money be made. Such written
notice may be dispensed with as to any Councilmember who is actually present at
the meeting at the time it convenes.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1421-NS,
eff. December 17, 2003)
Sec. 1-8.105. Meetings to the public: Exception for closed sessions.
   All regular and special meetings of the Council shall be public. However,
the Council may hold closed sessions during any meeting, from which the public
may be excluded, for the purpose of considering the matters authorized by law,
or with the City Attorney pursuant to the attorney-client privilege concerning
pending or threatened litigation. No member of the Council, City employee or
other person present during a closed session shall disclose to any person the
content or substance of any discussion which took place or confidential
documents presented during a closed session unless the Council shall authorize
the disclosure of such information by majority vote.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984)
Sec. 1-8.106. Agenda: Public input.
   An agenda shall be prepared and, as required by State law, posted for all
meetings. No Council substantive action shall be taken on any matter unless
that matter appears on the agenda or such non-agenda action is authorized under
the Brown Act. However, for any item not appearing on the agenda, any
Councilmember may briefly respond to comments or questions of the public,
briefly report on their own activities, request information from staff or
request the matter be placed on a future agenda.
   All matters to be submitted to the Council should be delivered to the City
Clerk not later than the time requested by the Clerk for such submittals.
   The City Clerk shall prepare the agenda under the direction of the City
Manager. The agenda and back-up material should be delivered to the
Councilmembers on the Thursday evening preceding the Tuesday Council meeting to
which the agenda pertains. The agenda shall be posted and accessible to members
of the public per the Brown Act.
   Each agenda shall contain an opportunity for the public to address the City
Council on any item of interest to the public. The Mayor subject to a
Councilmember’s right of appeal shall determine the time allotted to each
speaker or for the entire public comments section of the meeting.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984, as amended by § 1, Ord. 954-NS,
eff. February 10, 1987, § 1, Ord. 1231-NS, eff. April 25, 1995, § 3, Ord. 1421-
NS, eff. December 17, 2003, and § 1, Ord. 1711-NS, eff. 5-5-2023)
Sec. 1-8.107. Mayor.
   The Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem shall be selected by the Council among its
members annually at one of its meetings in December of each year. In a City
election year, the selection shall be made only after certification of the
election results by the County. The Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem shall serve at the
pleasure of the Council for a term of approximately one year, or until the next
Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem selection. The Mayor Pro Tem shall act as the Mayor in
the absence or disability of the Mayor.
(§ 1, Ord. 870-NS, eff. October 2, 1984, as amended by § 1, Ord. 958-NS, eff.
April 21, 1987, and § 1, Ord. 1153-NS, eff. June 23, 1992)
Sec. 1-8.108. Council correspondence.
   (a)   On agenda. Correspondence shall not be placed on the agenda unless it
concerns matters determined by a Councilmember, City Manager or City Attorney
which should be considered by the Council at a public meeting. Such
correspondence need not be read aloud at a Council meeting unless requested by
a majority vote of the Council.
   (b)   Authority of the City Manager. The City Manager is authorized to open
and examine all mail or other written communications, except personal mail,
addressed to the Council and to give it immediate attention to the end that all
administrative business referred to in such communications, and not necessarily
requiring Council action, may be acted upon between Council meetings. Copies of
such correspondence shall be distributed to each member of the Council.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984, as amended by § 2, Ord. 954-NS,
eff. February 10, 1987)
Sec. 1-8.109. Quorum.
   A majority of the Council is sufficient to do business, and motions may be
passed two (2) to one if only three (3) Councilmembers attend, but ordinances
for adoption, resolutions, granting franchises, and the payment of money shall
require at least three (3) affirmative votes.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984)
Sec. 1-8.110. Minutes.
   (a)   The City Clerk shall prepare the minutes and any directions for
changes in the minutes shall be only by majority Council action and shall
conform to fact.
   (b)   The minutes should be a clear and concise statement of the Council
actions, motions made and the vote thereon.
   (c)   Whenever the Council acts as a quasi- judicial proceeding, such as a
development permit matter, a summary of the witnesses' testimony shall be
completed and included.
   (d)   The minutes may be approved under the consent calendar without reading
if each Councilmember has received a copy.
   (e)   Official records and approved minutes may not be physically altered
and/or items may not be "expunged." Altering or defacing approved minutes is a
felony in violation of Government Code §§ 6200 and 6201.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1711-NS,
eff. 5-5-2023)
Sec. 1-8.111. Presiding officer.
   The Mayor shall be the presiding officer at all meetings of the Council. In
the absence of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem shall preside. In the absence of
both the Mayor and the Mayor Pro Tem, the Mayor shall appoint a temporary
presiding officer from those Councilmembers present to serve until the arrival
of the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem or until adjournment. Wherever in this article
the term “Mayor” is used, the term shall apply equally to the presiding
officer.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984, as amended by § 2, Ord. 870-NS,
eff. October 2, 1984)
Sec. 1-8.112. Powers and duties of the presiding officer.
   (a)   Participation. The presiding officer may move, debate and vote from
the chair.
   (b)   Seating arrangement. Following each councilmanic election and at such
other times as the Mayor may deem it necessary, the Mayor shall establish the
seating arrangement of the members of the Council.
   (c)   Processing motions. The Mayor, or such member of the City staff, as
the Mayor may designate, should verbally restate each question immediately
prior to calling for the vote. Following the vote, the City Clerk shall
announce whether the question carried or was defeated. The Mayor may publicly
explain the effect of a vote for the audience or direct a member of the City
staff to do so before proceeding to the next item.
   (1)   Motions out of order. The Mayor may, at any time with Council
approval, permit a member to introduce an ordinance, resolution or motion out
of the agenda order.
   (2)   Division of question. If the question contains two (2) or more
divisible propositions, the Mayor may, or upon the request of a member, divide
the question.
   (d)   Precedence of motions. When a motion is pending, no motion shall be
entertained except the following motions which shall have precedence in the
order indicated:
   (1)   Motion to adjourn (not debatable). A motion to adjourn shall be in
order at any time except as follows:
   (i)   When repeated without intervening business or discussion;
   (ii)   When made as an interruption of a member while speaking;
   (iii) When the previous question has been ordered; and
   (iv)   While a vote is being taken.
   A motion to adjourn “to another time” is debatable only as to the time of
adjourned meeting,
   (2)   Motion to fix hour of adjournment. This motion is to set a definite
time at which to adjourn. It is undebatable and unamendable except as to the
time set.
   (3)   Motion to table. This motion is to temporarily bypass the Subject. The
motion is undebatable and shall preclude all amendments or debate of the
subject under consideration. If it shall prevail, the matter may be “taken from
the table” at any time prior to the end of the next regular meeting.
   (4)   Motion to call the question. This motion is to close debate on the
main motion. It is undebatable. If the motion fails, debate is reopened. If the
motion passes, Council shall vote on the main motion.
   (5)   Motion to amend. This motion is debatable only as to the amendment. A
motion to amend an amendment shall be in order, but one to amend an amendment
to an amendment shall not. An amendment modifying the intention of a motion
shall be in order, but an amendment relating to a different matter shall not be
in order. A substitute motion on the same subject shall be acceptable.
   (6)   Motion to postpone. A motion to postpone indefinitely shall be fully
debatable. If adopted, the principal question shall be declared lost. Motions
to postpone to a definite time shall be amendable and debatable as to the
propriety of the postponement and the time set.
   (e)   Signing documents. The Mayor shall sign all ordinances, resolutions,
contracts and other documents necessitating a signature which were adopted in
that officer’s presence unless unavailable, in which case the signature of an
alternate presiding officer may be used.
   (f)   Sworn testimony. The Mayor or the Council may require any person
addressing the Council to be sworn as a witness and to testify under oath.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1231-NS,
eff. April 25, 1995)
Sec. 1-8.113. Rules of debate.
   (a)   Recognition to speak. Every Councilmember desiring to speak shall
first address the Mayor and be recognized by such. The member shall solely
discuss the question under debate, avoiding personalities and indecorous
language.
   (b)   Questions to staff. Every Councilmember desiring to question the City
staff, after recognition by the Mayor, shall address the questions to the City
Manager, Assistant City Manager, City Clerk, City Attorney or appropriate
department head who shall be entitled either to answer or designate a member of
staff for that purpose.
   (c)   Interruption. A Councilmember, once recognized, shall not be
interrupted when speaking unless called to order by the Mayor or a point of
order or personal privilege is raised by another Councilmember. If a
Councilmember, while speaking, is called to order, the member shall cease
speaking until the question of order is determined. Members of the City staff,
after recognition by the Mayor, shall hold the floor until the completion of
their remarks or until recognition is withdrawn by the presiding officer.
   (d)   Points of order. The Mayor shall determine all “points of order”
subject to the right of any Councilmember to appeal the Mayor’s decision to the
Council. If an appeal is taken, the question shall be, “Shall the decision of
the Mayor be sustained?” A majority vote of those Councilmembers present shall
conclusively determine such question of order.
   (e)   Point of personal privilege. The right of a Councilmember to address
the Council on a question of personal privilege shall be limited to cases in
which the member’s integrity, character or motives are questioned. A
Councilmember raising a point of personal privilege may interrupt another
Councilmember who has the floor only if the Mayor recognizes the privilege.
   (f)   Privilege of closing the debate. The Councilmember moving the adoption
of an ordinance, resolution, or motion shall have the privilege of making the
closing remarks during debate.
   (g)   Limitation of debate. To encourage the full participation of all
members of the Council, no Councilmember or Councilmembers shall be permitted
to monopolize the discussion of the question. If a Councilmember has already
spoken and other Councilmembers wish to speak, the latter Councilmembers should
be recognized in preference to the Councilmember who has already spoken.
However, if no other Councilmembers seek recognition, the Mayor may recognize
the Councilmember who has already spoken.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18. 1984, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1231-NS,
eff. April 25, 1995, and § 3, Ord. 1711-NS, eff. 5-5-2023)
Sec. 1-8.114. Addressing the Council.
   (a)   Manner of addressing the Council. Prior to the start of the meeting,
persons wishing to address the Council shall fill out a speaker card and submit
it to the City Clerk. When called upon by the Mayor, that person shall limit
discussion to the subject to be discussed, and, unless further time is granted
by the Council, limit their remarks to time allocated to the speaker by the
Mayor. All remarks shall be addressed to the Council as a whole and not to
individual staff or any member thereof. No question shall be asked of a
Councilmember or of City staff without the permission of the Mayor.
   (b)   Spokesperson for groups of persons. In order to expedite matters and
to avoid repetitious presentations whenever any group of persons wishes to
address the Council on the same subject matter, it shall be proper for the
Mayor to request that a spokesperson be chosen by the group and, in case
additional matters are to be presented by any other member of such group, to
limit the number of such persons addressing the Council. A written statement
card may be filled out and submitted to the City Clerk indicating the person's
opinion in writing. Those statements will be provided to City Councilmembers
and made part of the meeting record.
   (c)   After motion. After a motion has been made or a public hearing has
been closed, no member of the public shall address the Council from the
audience on the matter under consideration without first securing permission to
do so by the Council.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984, as amended by § 4, Ord. 1231-NS,
eff. April 25, 1995, and § 4, Ord. 1711-NS, eff. 5-5-2023)
Sec. 1-8.115. Rules of decorum.
   (a)   Councilmembers. While the Council is in session, the members shall
preserve order and decorum, and a member shall neither, by conversation or
otherwise, delay or interrupt the proceedings nor disturb any member while
speaking nor refuse to obey the orders of the presiding officer.
   (b)   Employees. City staff shall observe the same rules of order and
decorum.
   (c)   Persons addressing the Council. Any person making impertinent or
slanderous remarks or who becomes disruptive while addressing the Council,
shall be called to order by the Mayor and if such conduct continues, may, at
the discretion of the Mayor, be ordered barred from the Council Chamber during
that meeting.
   (d)   Members of the audience. Any person in the audience who engages in
disorderly conduct, such as hand clapping, stamping of feet, whistling, using
profane language, yelling and similar demonstrations, which conduct disturbs
the peace and good order of the meeting, or who refuses to comply with the
lawful orders of the Mayor, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
instructions from the Mayor, it shall be the duty of the sergeant-at-arms to
remove any such person from the Council Chamber and to place him/her under
arrest.
   (e)   Decorum guidelines. At the Mayor's discretion, the following
guidelines should be followed until decorum is observed:
   Person(s) addressing the Council.
      1.   State: "Please speak to matters within the City's jurisdiction."
      2.   Turn off public lectern.
      3.   Quickly bang gavel loudly 2-3 times.
      4.   State: "Please speak to matters within this jurisdiction. Outbursts
or disruptions will not be tolerated. If this behavior continues, this meeting
will be recessed until decorum is observed.”
   If disruption continues:
      5.   State: "We have a member(s) of the public who are being disruptive,
therefore, I will call a recess until decorum is observed."
      6.   City Council and Staff exit to Conference Room.
      7.   Once decorum is observed.
      8.   Return to Chambers.
   Member(s) of the audience.
      1.   Quickly bang gavel loudly 2-3 times.
      2.   State: "Outbursts or disruptions will not be tolerated. Please cease
and desist. If this behavior continues, this meeting will be recessed until
decorum is observed."
   If disruption continues:
      3.   State: "We have a member(s) of the public who are being disruptive,
therefore I will call a recess until decorum is observed."
      4.   City Council and Staff exit to Conference Room.
      5.   Once decorum is observed.
      6.   Return to Chambers.
   If behavior continues after calling a recess, the individual(s) may be
removed. If disruption continues, order the meeting room cleared and continue
in session. Ask the sergeant-at-arms to clear the public from the Chambers.
Representatives of the press or other news media, except those participating in
the disturbance, shall be allowed to attend any session held pursuant to this
section.
   (f)   Persons authorized to be within the City Council/staff dais area. No
person, except members of the Council and the City staff, shall be permitted
within the City Council/staff dais area without the consent of the Mayor.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984, as amended by § 5, Ord. 1711-NS,
eff. 5-5-2023)
Sec. 1-8.116. Enforcement of decorum.
   The City Manager, Chief of Police, or such member or members of the Police
Department or as the City Manager may designate, shall be sergeant-at-arms of
the Council and shall carry out all orders given by the Mayor for the purpose
of maintaining order and decorum. The Council may have the Mayor enforce the
rules of decorum.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984)
Sec. 1-8.117. Motions: Seconds not required.
   A motion by any Councilmember may be considered by the Council without
receiving a second. Motions may be adopted by the “no objection” method unless
any Councilmember prefers a voice or roll call vote. The minutes shall reflect
a “no objection” vote as “unanimously carried.” Approval of the minutes should
be effected only by a voice or roll call vote on the consent calendar.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984)
Sec. 1-8.118. Voting procedures.
   A roll call vote of the Council may be registered by designating or
answering “Yes” for an affirmative vote or “No” for a negative vote on the
member's name being called. The Council shall follow the roll call procedure
for ordinances, resolutions, franchises and orders for the payment of money. A
roll call vote shall not be necessary for any other action unless a member of
the Council demands it. The result of all roll call votes shall be announced by
the Mayor or Clerk and recorded in the minutes. Any member may change his/her
vote before the next order of business.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984)
Sec. 1-8.119. Disqualification for conflicts of interest.
   Any Councilmember who is disqualified from voting on a particular matter by
reason of a conflict of financial interest shall publicly state, or have the
Mayor state, the disqualification in open meeting. The disqualified member
should not remain in his/her seat during the debate and shall not debate or
vote on such matter. A Councilmember stating such disqualification shall not be
counted as a part of a quorum and shall be considered absent for the purpose of
determining the outcome of any vote on such matter.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984)
Sec. 1-8.120. Failure to vote.
   Every Councilmember should vote unless disqualified by reason of a conflict
of interest. A Councilmember who abstains from voting in effect consents that a
majority of the quorum may decide the question.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984)
Sec. 1-8.121. Lost motions and tie votes.
   A lost motion is one that fails to receive the necessary number of votes to
carry. Lost motions may be renewed at any subsequent Council meeting. To revive
a lost motion at the same meeting, the proper action shall be a motion to
reconsider.
   Tie votes shall be lost motions and may be reconsidered.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS. eff. September 18, 1984)
Sec. 1-8.122. Changing the vote.
   A Councilmember may change his/her vote only if a request is made
immediately following the announcement of the vote by the City Clerk and prior
to the next item. A Councilmember who publicly announces that he/she is
abstaining from voting on a particular matter shall not subsequently be allowed
to withdraw the abstention.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984, as amended by § 5, Ord. 1231-NS,
eff. April 25, 1995)
Sec. 1-8.123. Reconsideration and recision.
   After a motion and vote by the Council, any action may be reconsidered or
rescinded in the following manner:
   (a)   Reconsideration. This motion shall be in order at the same meeting, be
amendable and debatable. Such motion can be made by any Councilmember
regardless of how he/she previously voted on the matter. If the motion to
reconsider passes, it overrules and cancels the prior action.
   (b)   Recision. A motion to rescind (repeal, cancel or nullify) prior
Council action shall be in order at any meeting. Rescinding shall operate
prospectively only and not retroactively to the date of the original action. It
shall not adversely affect any substantial intervening legal rights which
create an estoppel situation.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984)
Sec. 1-8.124. Ordinance, resolutions and contracts.
   (a)   Preparation.
   (1)   Ordinances. All ordinances shall be approved by the City Attorney and
shall be presented to the Council only when requested by the Council, Mayor,
City Manager or City Attorney.
   (2)   Resolutions. All resolutions shall be approved by the City Attorney.
In matters of urgency, a resolution may be presented verbally in motion form,
together with instructions for written preparation for later execution. Urgency
resolutions should be avoided except when absolutely necessary.
   (b)   Prior to approval by the administrative staff. All ordinances,
resolutions and contract documents shall, before presentation to the Council,
have been approved as to form and legality by the City Attorney and shall have
been reviewed for administration by the City Manager or a designated
representative.
   (c)   Enactment of ordinances.
   (1)   Introduction. Ordinances shall be introduced for the first reading by
motion. When ordinances, other than urgency ordinances, are altered after their
introduction, they shall be adopted only at a regular or adjourned meeting held
at least five (5) days after such alteration. Corrections of typographical or
clerical errors shall not be considered alterations.
   (2)   Reading and adoption. After reading the title, full reading may be
waived by a motion adopted by the unanimous vote of the Council. Ordinances
shall be adopted (second reading) by motion and roll call vote at least five
(5) days after introduction.
   (3)   Urgency ordinances. An urgency ordinance for the immediate
preservation of the public peace, health or safety may be passed immediately
upon its introduction and either at a regular or special meeting. It shall
declare the facts constituting the urgency, and it shall be passed by four (4)
affirmative votes.
   (4)   Publication and effective date. After its adoption, the City Clerk
shall publish the ordinance or a summary at least once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City. Ordinances shall take effect on the thirty-
first (31st) day following its final passage. An ordinance shall take effect
immediately if it is an ordinance:
   (i)   Relating to an election;
   (ii)   Of an urgency nature;
   (iii) Relating to street improvement proceedings;
   (iv)   Relating to taxes for the usual and current expenses of the City; or
   (v)   Covered by particular provisions of law prescribing the manner of its
passage and adoption.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984, as amended by § 6, Ord. 1711-NS,
eff. 5-5-2023)
Sec. 1-8.125. Hearings.
   (a)   Application of provisions: Hearing defined. The procedural rules of
this section apply to hearings before the Council.
   (b)   Rights of interested persons. At the hearing, the Council shall afford
any interested person or their authorized representative, or both, the
opportunity to present evidence and statements, arguments or contentions orally
and/or in writing.
   (c)   Presentation of evidence.
   (1)   Oral evidence. Oral evidence may be taken on oath or affirmation if
requested by the Mayor or Council.
   (2)   Exhibits and documents. Documentary evidence, exhibits and documents
used shall, unless otherwise directed, be considered as evidence and part of
the record.
   (3)   Communications and petitions. All communications and petitions shall
be read aloud either in full or by synopsis. A reading in full shall bemade at
the request of any Councilmember. All such communications and petitions may be
introduced into evidence at the discretion of the Council.
   (4)   Staff reports. If time provides, a written staff report should be
prepared and orally reviewed as a part of the staff presentation. Such report
shall be considered as evidence and part of the record.
   (5)   Large maps and displays. Large size maps and displays presented for
use at the hearing shall be displayed in full view of the Council. When
practicable, such maps or displays, or authentic reductions thereof, shall be
introduced into evidence.
   (6)   Admissible evidence. The hearing need not be conducted according to
technical rules of evidence. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is
the sort of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the
conduct of serious affairs. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be
excluded.
   (d)   Continuances. Any hearing may, by minute action, be continued to any
subsequent regular or adjourned meeting.
   (e)   Decisions. Consistent with State law, the Council shall render a
decision or determination on the matter within a reasonable period after the
close of the hearing. Such decision or determination shall be by motion at a
regular or adjourned meeting. Any Councilmember shall be disqualified from
discussing, participating or voting on a matter who: (1) was not present during
the entire hearing and did not review the written reports and submittals and
view the full video of such missed portions; (2) has a conflict of financial
interest in the matter; or (3) has a conflict or remote interest under
Government Code Sections 1090 and 1091.
   (f)   Records. A verbatim mechanical recording may be made of the oral
evidence presented at the hearing. Such recording, together with all documents,
maps, exhibits and displays admitted into evidence, shall be retained for a
period of one year after the date of the close of the hearing. In lieu of
retaining such recording, a typewritten transcript thereof may be prepared
which shall be retained for the same period of time.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984, as amended by § 6, Ord. 1231-NS,
eff. April 25, 1995, and § 7, Ord. 1711-NS, eff. 5-5-2023)
Sec. 1-8.126. Consent calendars.
   The Council agenda may include a consent calendar consisting of routine
items. The adoption or approval of all items on the consent calendar shall be
accomplished by one motion passed on a roll call vote.
   (a)   Confirming resolutions. Resolutions confirming the prior action of the
Council may be placed on the consent calendar for adoption. The City Clerk
shall record the Council vote on the resolution in accordance with the vote
taken by the Council at the time the original action was taken at the prior
meeting.
   (b)   Supporting documentation. Items on the consent calendar should be
supported by documentation relative to each item.
   (c)   Removal of items from consent calendar. The motion to adopt the
consent calendar shall not be debatable. If any Councilmember desires Council
discussion or debate on any item on the consent calendar, such item shall be
removed from the calendar and discussed or debated. In such case, the Council
shall consider the approval or adoption of the consent calendar, as amended,
with the removal of such item.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984, as amended by § 8, Ord. 1711-NS,
eff. 5-5-2023)
Sec. 1-8.127. Conceptual approval.
   Council may take action by conceptual approval of a plan, project, activity,
appropriation or other action which is not a final approval. Any persons, firms
or corporations who expend time or funds in reliance on such approval shall do
so at their own risk, and the City shall have no liability or responsibility
for any detriment incurred thereby.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984)
Sec. 1-8.128. Rules of order.
   Except as otherwise provided in this Code, other rules adopted by the
Council, or applicable provisions of State law, the procedures of the Council
shall be governed by the most recent edition of Mason's Manual of Legislative
Procedure.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984, as amended by § 7, Ord. 1231-NS,
eff. April 25, 1995, and § 4, Ord. 1421-NS, eff. December 17, 2003)
Sec. 1-8.129. Failure to observe rules of order.
   These rules are adopted to expedite the transaction of the business of the
Council in an orderly fashion and are procedural only, and the failure to
strictly observe such rules shall not affect the jurisdiction of the Council or
invalidate any action taken at a meeting which is otherwise held in conformity
with law.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984)
Sec. 1-8.130 Use of electronic signatures.
   (a)   Purpose. Electronic signatures are widely used in business settings,
and increase efficiency and overall customer service. It allows for expedited
execution of documents, cuts down on the use of paper and provides a more
seamless document management process. The purpose of this section is to allow
the City to utilize electronic signatures in compliance with California law and
City policy.
   (b)   Definitions.
   (1)   "Electronic signature" has the same meaning as in Section 1633.2 of
the California Civil Code, as may be amended.
   (2)   "Digital signature" has the same meaning as in Section 16.5 of the
California Government Code, as may be amended.
   (3)   "UETA" means the Uniform Electronic Transactions Act, commencing at
Section 1633.1 of the California Civil Code.
   (c)   Electronic signatures. Whenever a signature is required, the City may
agree that an electronic signature, which includes, but is not limited to, a
digital signature, satisfies that requirement, provided it is in accordance
with the UETA.
   (d)   The use of electronic signatures shall be governed by approved City
Administrative Policy.
   (e)   This section is intended to enable the City to use electronic
signatures to the fullest extent allowed by law, and does not limit the City's
ability to use electronic or digital signatures in any way.
(§ 1, Ord. 1679-NS, eff. 7-10-2020)
Article 2. Council Salaries
Sec. 1-8.201. Council salaries.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Section 36516 of the Government Code, each
member of the Council shall receive a prescribed salary, the amount of which is
based upon the population of the City as determined by estimates made by the
State Department of Finance.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984)
Sec. 1-8.202. Population and salaries.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984; repealed by § 5, Ord. 1421-NS, eff.
December 17, 2003)
Sec. 1-8.203. Council compensation.
   Except as their salary may be increased by this section, each member of the
City Council shall receive a salary of One Thousand Seven Hundred and Fifty and
no/100ths ($1,750.00) Dollars per month, which shall be payable at the same
time and in the same manner as salaries are paid to the other officers and
employees of the City, effective December 2008, upon the seating of newly
elected Council following the November 2008 election. In addition to said
salary, the City shall contribute to the Public Employees Retirement System and
provide such other miscellaneous benefits for that Councilmember as set forth
in a Council resolution, provided any benefits are available to the general
City employees.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984, as amended by § 1, Ord. 896-NS,
eff. August 24, 1985, § 1, Ord. 1064-NS, eff. March 13, 1990, § 1, Ord. 1163-
NS, eff. October 20, 1992 § 1, Ord. 1268-NS, eff. September 24, 1996 and § 1,
Ord. 1342-NS, eff. August 27, 1999, § 1, Ord. 1382-NS, eff. October 4, 2001, §
1, Ord. 1415-NS, eff. October 2, 2003, and § 1, Ord. 1457-NS, eff. December,
2006, and § 1, Ord. 1500-NS, eff. April 3, 2008)
Sec. 1-8.204. Increases.
   Following any new or later population estimate by the Finance Department
placing the City in a different population group under Government Code Section
36516, the salary of each Councilmember may be increased to that sum prescribed
for said population group. If no new population group is obtained, the salary
may be increased by the annual five (5%) percent limit set forth in Section
36516 of said code.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984, as amended by § 1, Ord. 896-NS,
eff. August 24, 1985, § 1, Ord. 1064-NS, eff. March 13, 1990, § 1, Ord. 1163-
NS, eff. October 20, 1992 and § 1, Ord. 1268-NS, eff. September 24, 1996)
Sec. 1-8.205. Deemed separate from reimbursement for expenses.
   The salaries prescribed herein are and shall be exclusive of any amounts
payable to each member of the Council as reimbursement for actual and necessary
expenses incurred by him or her in the performance of official duties for the
City.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984)
CHAPTER 9. COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS
Article 1. Planning Commission
Sec. 1-9.101. Created.
   There is hereby created a Planning Commission for the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984)
Sec. 1-9.102. Membership.
   The Planning Commission shall consist of five (5) members. Such members
shall not be officials or employees of the City but shall be residents of the
City.
   The Community Development Director, the City Attorney, or their designated
representative, shall be ex officio members of the Planning Commission.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1250-NS,
eff. January 9, 1996)
Sec. 1-9.103. Membership: Appointment.
   After following procedures of Government Code Section 54970, each
Councilmember shall have the right to nominate a person for one position on the
Planning Commission which nomination shall be approved and appointed by the
Council.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984)
Sec. 1-9.104. Membership: Terms.
   Each appointment of a Commissioner shall be for a term equal to that of the
Councilmember who nominated the Commissioner and shall expire when that council
seat is vacated or on the next election day for that nominating Councilmember,
whichever event occurs first.
   If after any council seat is vacated or a councilmanic election a new
commissioner has not been selected, or a commissioner’s term has not been
renewed, that commissioner shall serve until the new appointment or renewal is
made.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984)
Sec. 1-9.105. Membership: Vacancies.
   A vacancy on the Planning Commission occurring by death, resignation,
removal, or any other cause before the expiration of a corresponding
Councilmember’s term shall be filled by nomination of that Councilmember and
appointment by the Council for the unexpired term.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984)
Sec. 1-9.106. Membership: Removal.
   A member of the Planning Commission may be removed by a majority vote of all
the members of the Council.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984)
Sec. 1-9.107. Duties and functions.
   The Planning Commission shall perform the duties and functions set forth in
the State law and in the planning and zoning regulations set forth in Title 9
of this Code, together with such other duties and functions as may be delegated
by the City Council.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1250-NS,
eff. January 9, 1996)
Article 2. Thousand Oaks Cultural Heritage Board and Regulations
Sec. 1-9.201. Purpose.
   This article is to promote the economic and general welfare of the City by
preserving and protecting landmarks, and points of historic interest in the
City, be they publicly or privately owned, and having a special historic or
aesthetic character or interest, or by relocating or recreating an historic
monument for the use, education and view of the general public in order to
remind the citizens of this community, and to visitors and tourists of this
community, of the rich historic, cultural, and natural heritage of the City and
Conejo Valley.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1420-NS,
eff. December 17, 2003)
Sec. 1-9.202. Thousand Oaks Cultural Heritage Board.
   The Thousand Oaks Cultural Heritage Board is hereby established, and the
Thousand Oaks City Council and Ventura County Cultural Heritage Board shall
perform the duties and functions as set forth herein to preserve landmarks and
points of historic interest in the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1015-NS,
eff. December 6, 1988, Ord. 1276-NS, eff. February 12, 1997, and § 1, Ord.
1420-NS, eff. December 17, 2003)
Sec. 1-9.203. Definitions.
   (a)   Landmark. For purposes of this article, “landmark” shall mean any
object, building, structure, site, area, place, or natural formation which has
historic, architectural, archaeological, cultural or aesthetic significance to
the City of Thousand Oaks, and:
   (1)   Exemplifies or reflects special elements of the City’s social,
aesthetic, engineering, architectural or natural history;
   (2)   Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to
the broad patterns of the City’s cultural heritage;
   (3)   Is associated with the lives of persons important to the City;
   (4)   Has yielded or has the potential to yield information important to the
prehistory or history of the City; or,
   (5)   Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, region, or
method of construction, represents the work of a master, or possesses high
artistic values.
   (b)   Point of Historic Interest. For purposes of this article, “point of
historic interest” shall mean any object, building, structure, site, area,
place, or natural formation which has historic, architectural, archaeological,
cultural or aesthetic significance to the City of Thousand Oaks that:
   (1)   No longer exists or was associated with historic events, important
persons or embodied a distinctive character or architectural style;
   (2)   Has been altered to the extent that the integrity of the original
workmanship, materials or type has been substantially compromised; or,
   (3)   Is a site of an historic event which has no distinguishable
characteristics other than that an historic event occurred there and the site
is not of
sufficient historic significance to justify the establishment of a landmark.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1015-NS,
eff. December 6, 1988, Ord. 1276-NS, eff. February 12, 1997, and § 1, Ord.
1420-NS, eff. December 17, 2003)
Sec. 1-9.204. Thousand Oaks City Council functions.
   The City Council shall preserve landmarks and points of historic interest
not in conflict with the public health, safety, and general welfare, and is the
final authority whether an item is designated a landmark of point of historic
interest.
   (a)   The functions of the City Council shall be to:
   (1)   Identify and refer potential landmarks and points of historic interest
which it has a reason to believe are, or will become in the near future, an
historic landmark or point of historic interest, to the Ventura County Cultural
Heritage Board to evaluate consistent with its functions identified in section
1-9.205;
   (2)   Deliberate whether to ratify the decision of the Ventura County
Cultural Heritage Board regarding the designation of a landmark or point of
historic interest;
   (3)   Amend this article when circumstances indicate;
   (4)   Determine which designated landmarks and points of historic interest
shall be marked with uniform and aesthetic markers, and appropriate public
funds therefore;
   (5)   Hear and consider applications for certificates of appropriateness for
any alteration to a landmark or point of historic interest as provided in
Section 1-9.206;
   (6)   Apply to the appropriate state agency for state registration of
landmarks or points of historic interest which meet state registration
criteria, and where the registration would assist in preservation; and,
   (7)   Develop guidelines, standards and criteria for fulfilling its duties
and functions under this article as well as running of its meetings.
   (b)   The City Council may, in its discretion, inspect and investigate a
potential landmark and point of interest rather than refer the item to Ventura
County Cultural Heritage Board in the manner set forth in subsection (a)(1), as
follows:
   (1)   The City shall perform the functions of the Ventura County Cultural
Heritage Board set forth in Section 1-9.205; and,
   (2)   The City Council shall post an agenda and hold a public hearing for
the purpose of identifying the landmark or point of historic-interest. Such
hearing shall be held at least fifteen (15) days or more after the property
owner of the potential landmark or place of historic interest has been notified
of the time and place of the hearing by registered mail.
   (c)   The City shall compile and maintain a list of all current historic,
cultural and natural landmarks, monuments and points of historic interest which
shall be declared as such. This information shall be made available to the
public.
   (d)   The City Council may apply to the appropriate state agency for state
registration of landmarks or sites which have historic significance, which
meet-state registration criteria, and where the registration would assist in
preservation. The City Council may find that even though an item has been
designated a landmark or point of historic interest, it does not warrant
registration as a state “historical landmark.” The City Council shall determine
the appropriate state registration, if any.
   (e)   In the event the City Council does not ratify the Ventura County
Cultural Heritage Board’s decision regarding the designation or rejection of an
item as a landmark or point of historic interest, the item shall remain
undesignated absent further review consistent with this article.
(§ 2, Ord. 1015-NS, eff. December 6, 1988, as amended by Ord. 1276-NS, February
12, 1977, and § 1, Ord. 1420-NS, eff. December 17, 2003)
Sec. 1-9.205. Ventura County Cultural Heritage Board Functions.
   The functions of the Ventura County Cultural Heritage Board shall be to:
   (a)   Inspect and investigate all potential landmarks and points of historic
interest referred to it by the City Council consistent with the standards of
review set forth in the Ventura County Ordinance Code Sections 1360 through
1373, and determine whether the item is suitable for designation as a landmark
or point of historic interest in the City of Thousand Oaks.
   (b)   Evaluate the historic, architectural, archaeological, cultural or
aesthetic significance of the potential landmark or point of historic interest
to the City of Thousand Oaks including whether the item:
   (1)   Exemplifies or reflects special elements of the City's social,
aesthetic, engineering, architectural or natural history;
   (2)   Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to
the broad patterns of the City's cultural heritage;
   (3)   Is associated with the lives of persons important to the City;
   (4)   Has yielded or has the potential to yield information important to the
prehistory or history of the City;
   (5)   Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, region, or
method of construction, represents the work of a master, or possesses high
artistic values;
   (6)   Has interest to the general public or is limited in interest to a
special group of persons;
   (c)   Determine whether designation of the item as a landmark or point of
historic interest:
   (1)   Would require the expenditure by the City of any amount of money not
commensurate with the value of the item to be preserved;
   (2)   Infringe upon the rights of a private owner thereof to make any and
all reasonable uses thereof which are not in conflict with the purposes of this
Article.
   (d)   Establish the authenticity of the item's physical identity evidenced
by lack of deterioration and significant survival of characteristics that
existed during its period of importance, including the retention of location,
design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling and association.
   (e)   Conduct a public hearing, with due notice to the property owner of the
potential landmark or place of historic interest, to determine whether the item
is suitable for designation.
(§ 2, Ord. 1015-NS, eff. December 6, 1988, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1420-NS,
eff. December 17, 2003)
Sec. 1-9.206. Prohibition of alteration: Certificate of appropriateness/removal
of designation.
   (a)   Designation and prohibition on alteration. A property owner or tenant
is prohibited from defacing, demolishing, adding to, altering, relocating or
removing the specified portion of any structure, land formation or other item
that is designated a landmark or point of historic interest, except as provided
in this article.
   (b)   Landmark alteration; Certificate of appropriateness. If a property
owner desires to demolish, add to, alter, relocate or remove the specified
portion of any structure, land formation or other item that is designated a
landmark or point of historic interest, he or she must apply to the City for a
Certificate of Appropriateness. The issuance of any other City entitlement
permit for the parcel on which the structure or land formation designated a
landmark or point of historic interest shall be conditioned upon the City
Council’s acting upon such a Certificate, and the required one hundred eighty
(180) day waiting period.
   Upon a filing of a request for a Certificate, the City Council shall have
ninety (90) days from the date of filing for review of the application and to
set a noticed public hearing on the matter. If the request for a Certificate is
disapproved by the City Council, the property owner shall be prohibited from
demolishing, adding to, altering, relocating or removing the specified portion
of the structure or land formation designated as a landmark or monument, or any
plaque or other aesthetic marker identifying the point of historic interest,
for one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the Council’s disapproval
action.
   During such Certificate review and one hundred eighty (180) day period, the
City Council may take steps necessary to preserve any structure or land
formation designated as a landmark or point of historic interest, such as, but
not limited to, the creation of civic and citizens preservation committees, the
establishment of private and/or public funding efforts for acquisition or
restoration of the declared landmark or point of historic interest, or the
requesting of grant monies for acquisition or restoration.
(§ 2, Ord. 1015-NS, eff. December 6, 1988, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1420-NS,
eff. December 17, 2003)
CHAPTER 10. CODE OF ETHICS FOR OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Sec. 1-10.01. Declaration of policy.
   The proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials
and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that
government decisions and policy be made in the proper channels of the
governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and
that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In
recognition of these goals, there is hereby established a code of ethics for
all officials and employees, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid. The
purpose of this chapter is to establish ethical standards of conduct for all
such officials and employees by setting forth those acts or actions that are
incompatible with the best interests of the City and by directing the
disclosure by such officials and employees of private financial or other
interests in matters affecting the City. The provisions of this chapter and
such rules and regulations as may be established are hereby declared to be in
the best interest of the City and for the protection of the public health,
safety and welfare of its citizens.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984)
Sec. 1-10.02. Responsibilities of public office.
   Public officials and employees are agents of public purpose and hold office
for the benefit of the public. They are bound to uphold the United States and
State Constitution and to carry out impartially the laws of the nation, State
and the City and thus to foster respect for all governments. They are bound to
observe, in their official acts, the highest standards of performance and to
discharge faithfully the duties of their office, regardless of personal
considerations. Recognizing that the public interests must be their primary
concern, their conduct in both their official and private affairs should be
above reproach.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984)
Sec. 1-10.03. Dedicated service.
   All officials and employees of the City owe a duty of loyalty to the
political objectives expressed by the electorate and the programs developed by
the Council to attain those objectives. Appointive officials and employees
should adhere to the rules of work and performance established as the standards
for their positions by the appropriate authority.
   Officials and employees should not exceed their authority or breach the law,
or ask others to do so, and owe a duty to cooperate fully with other public
officials and employees unless prohibited from so doing by law or by the
officially recognized confidentiality of their work.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984)
Sec. 1-10.04. Fair and equal treatment.
   (a)   Interest in appointments. The canvassing of members of the Council,
directly or indirectly, in order to obtain preferential consideration in
connection with any appointment to the municipal service, shall disqualify the
candidate for appointment except with reference to positions filled by
appointment by the Council.
   (b)   Use of public property. No official or employee shall request or
permit the use of City-owned vehicles, equipment, materials, or property for
personal convenience or profit, except when such services are available to the
public generally or are provided as municipal policy for the use of such
official or employee in the conduct of official business.
   (c)   Obligations to citizens. No official or employee shall grant any
special consideration, treatment or advantage to any citizen beyond that which
is available to every other citizen.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984)
Sec. 1-10.05. Conflicts of financial interest.
   With regards to conflicts of financial interests, the following shall be
deemed the “Conflict of Interest Code” of the City of Thousand Oaks as required
by Government Code Section 87300 et seq.:
   (a)   Incorporation of state statutes and regulations. The definitions and
disclosure requirements contained in the Political Reform Act of 1974
(Government Code Section 81000 et seq.), and in the regulations of the Fair
Political Practices Commission (2 Cal. Code of Regs. Section 18730, et seq.),
and any amendments to the Act or regulations, are incorporated by reference
into this section.
   (b)   Designated persons. The City Council shall adopt and periodically
review a resolution designating City employees, boardmembers, commissioners,
committee members, officers and City consultants (herein designated persons),
who must file conflict of financial interest statements. In that resolution
designating persons required to file, the City Council shall set forth the
corresponding disclosure categories for such persons. By said resolution the
City Council has determined that these persons make or participate in the
making of decisions which may foreseeably have a material effect on said
person’s financial interests. All persons holding positions listed in this
resolution shall file conflict of interest statements consistent with the
disclosure categories and this section.
   For purposes of this chapter the term “designated employee” as used in
Government Code Section 81000 et seq. and 2 Cal. Code of Regs. Section 18730,
et seq. shall be included within the definition of designated persons as used
herein.
   (c)   Disclosure categories. Being listed as a city designated person under
this section does not establish any additional disclosure obligation for those
persons who are also specified in Government Code Section 87200 (City
Councilmembers, Planning Commissioners, City Manager, City Attorney, City
Treasurer and candidates for City Council) and, as a result, obligated to file
under state law.
   This section does not establish any additional disclosure obligation for any
designated person who is designated in a conflict of interest code for another
agency, if all of the following apply:
   (1)   The geographical jurisdiction of the City is the same as or is wholly
included within the jurisdiction of the other agency;
   (2)   The disclosure category assigned in the code of the other agency is
the same as the City’s; and
   (3)   The filing officer is the same for both agencies.
   Designated persons who are required to file statements of economic interests
under any other agency’s conflict of interest code may expand their statement
to cover all reportable interests required for both jurisdictions, and file
copies of this expanded statement with both entities in lieu of filing separate
and distinct statements, provided that each copy of such expanded statement
filed in place of an original is signed and verified by the designated person
as if it were an original.
   (d)   Statements of economic interests. Place of filing. Designated persons
shall file their statements of economic interests with the City Clerk who is
deemed the filing officer for purposes of this section.
   (e)   Manner of disqualification. When a designated person determines that
he or she should not make a governmental decision because he or she has a
disqualifying interest in it, the determination not to act must be accompanied
by disclosure of the disqualifying interest. In the case of a voting body, this
determination and disclosure shall be made part of the agency’s official
record; in the case of the City Manager or City Attorney this determination and
disclosure shall be made in writing to the City Council; and in the case of
other designated employees, this determination and disclosure shall be made in
writing to the designated employee's supervisor.
   (f)   Assistance of the commission and counsel. Any designated person who is
unsure of his or her duties under this Code may request assistance from the
City Attorney or the Fair Political Practices Commission pursuant to Government
Code Section 83114, provided that nothing in this section requires the City
Attorney to issue any formal or informal opinion.
   (g)   Violations. Designated persons violating any provision of this section
are subject to the administrative, criminal and civil sanctions provided in the
Political Reform Act, Government Code Sections 81000 through 91014. In
addition, a decision in relation to which a violation of the disqualification
provisions of this section, or of Government Code Section 87100 or 87450, has
occurred may be set aside by the Superior Court as void pursuant to Government
Code Section 91003.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984, as amended by § 1, Ord. 911-NS,
eff. March 4, 1986, § 1, Ord. 1226-NS, eff. January 3, 1995, § 1, Ord. 1329-NS,
eff. January 7, 1999, and Ord. 1601-NS, eff. January 16, 2014)
Sec. 1-10.06. Political activities.
   No appointive official or employee shall orally, by letter or otherwise
solicit or participate in soliciting any assessment, subscription or
contribution to any political party during working hours on the premises of any
governmental property owned by the City and shall at all times conform to the
provisions of Sections 3202 and 3203 of the Government Code of the State.
   No official or employee, whether elected or appointed, shall promise any
appointment to any position with the City as a reward for any political
activity.
(§ 1, Ord. 929-NS, eff. September 2, 1984)
Sec. 1-10.07. Applicability of chapter provisions.
   When a Councilmember or other official or employee has doubt as to the
applicability of a provision of this chapter to a particular situation, he/she
should apply to the Council for an advisory opinion and be guided by that
opinion when given. The Councilmember or other officials or employees shall
have the opportunity to present their interpretations of the facts at issue and
of the applicable provisions of this chapter before such advisory decision is
made. The provisions of this chapter shall be operative in all instances
covered by such provisions, except when superseded by applicable statutory
provisions or when the application of a statutory provision is discretionary
but determined to be more appropriate or desirable.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984)
Sec. 1-10.08. Ex parte communications.
   No official or employee shall encourage, make or accept any ex parte or
other unilateral application or communication that excludes the interests of
other parties in a matter under consideration when such application or
communication is designed to influence the official decision or conduct of the
official or other officials, employees or agencies in order to obtain a more
favored treatment or special consideration to advance the personal or private
interests of him/herself or others. The purpose of this provision is to
guarantee that all interested parties to any matter shall have equal
opportunity to express and represent their interests.
   Any written ex parte communication received by an official or employee in
matters where all interested parties should have an equal opportunity for a
hearing shall be made a part of the record by the recipient.
   Any oral ex parte communication received under such conditions should be
written down in substance by the recipient and also be made a part of the
record.
   A communication concerning only the status of a pending matter shall not be
regarded as an ex parte communication.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984)
Sec. 1-10.09. Avoidance of impressions of corruptibility.
   Public officials and employees, whether appointed or elected, full time or
part time, paid or unpaid, should conduct their official and private affairs so
as not to give a reasonable basis for the impression that any such official or
employee can be improperly influenced in the performance of his/her public
duties. Such officials or employees should so conduct themselves as to maintain
public confidence in their performance of the public trust in the government
they represent. They should not be a source of embarrassment to that government
and should avoid even the appearance of conflict between their public duties
and private interests.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984)
Sec. 1-10.10. Discrimination in appointments.
   No person shall be appointed to, removed from, or in any way favored or
discriminated against with respect to any appointive administrative office
because of such person's race, color, age, religion, sex, national origin,
political opinions, affiliations, or functional limitation as defined by
applicable State or federal laws, if otherwise qualified for the position or
office. This provision shall not be construed to impair administrative
discretion in determining the requirements of a position or in a job assignment
of a person holding such a position, subject to review by the Council.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984)
Sec. 1-10.11. Investments creating a conflict of interest.
   No Councilmember, official or employee, whether paid or unpaid, should seek
to acquire or obtain any financial interest which would create or may create a
conflict or incompatibility with the performance of his or her official duties.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984, as amended by § 2, Ord. 911-NS,
eff. March 4, 1986)
Sec. 1-10.12. City allegiance and proper conduct.
   (a)   Incompatible employment. No Councilmember, official or employee shall
engage in or accept any private employment, or render services for private
interest, when such employment or service is incompatible with proper discharge
of his or her official duties or would tend to impair his or her independence
or judgment or action in the performance of those duties.
   (b)   Disclosure of confidential information. No Councilmember, official or
employee shall, without proper authorization of the Council, disclose
confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the
City, nor shall he or she use such information to advance the financial
interest of himself, herself or others.
   (c)   Gifts and favors. No Councilmember, official or employee shall
knowingly accept any gift which creates a conflict of financial interest and is
given by any person, firm, or corporation which to his or her knowledge is
interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever in business
dealings with the City. No Councilmember, official or employee shall accept any
gift regardless of amount, retainer or compensation that is contingent upon a
specific action by the City Council, a City commission or a City agency.
   (d)   Representing private interest before the City agencies or courts. No
Councilmember, official or employee whose salary is paid in whole or in part by
the City shall appear on behalf of business or private interests of another
before any agency of the City where such appearance would create a potential of
having to abstain from officials participating on that matter or be
incompatible with that Councilmember’s, official’s or employee’s official
duties. In addition, he or she shall not represent any private interest of
another person or entity in any action or proceeding against the interest of
the City in any litigation to which the City is a party.
   A Councilmember may appear before City agencies on behalf of constituents in
the course of his or her duties as a representative of the electorate or in the
performance of public or civic obligations.
   (e)   Interest in City contracts. Regardless of whether he or she abstained
from participating in the City decision to award or enter into the contract, no
Councilmember, official or employee shall have an investment or monetary
interest in any contract with the City made by them in their official capacity,
or by any board or body of which they are members, except as permitted by
Government Code Section 1090, et seq.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984, as amended by § 2, Ord. 911-NS,
eff. March 4, 1986, and § 2, Ord. 1226-NS, eff. January 3, 1995)
Sec. 1-10.13. Future employment.
   It shall be improper for any former officer or employee to appear as a
compensated representative at any time before the Council, or any of its
agencies in which they were formerly employed, in connection with any case or
other matter in which such former officer or employee was duly connected in a
policy-making capacity or managerial capacity while an officer or employee of
the City for one (1) year following the termination of the officer or employee.
Such officer or employee may be released from the obligation imposed by the
provisions of this section upon the submission of a written request to the
Council in advance of his/her proposed appearance and a certification that,
while an officer or employee of the City, took no action or obtained no
information which would prejudice his/her conduct or presentation, either at
the time he/she was an officer or employee, or at the time of the presentation.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984; Ord. 1668-NS, eff. January 10,
2020)
Sec. 1-10.14. Giving testimony.
   It is the duty of municipal employees to answer questions submitted to them
by respectfully constituted authority that may reflect upon the employees’
fitness for municipal office or employment. If any City officer or employee,
after reasonable notice and an opportunity to answer, is called upon or
requested to give testimony or to produce evidence upon relevant matters
pertaining to his/her office or position in connection with any lawful or
constitutional inquiry conducted by the Council, the Ventura County Grand Jury,
and State or federal legislative committee, or the Attorney General of the
State, such officer shall, to the best of his/her ability, answer such
inquiries or shall submit a statement of his/her reasons for refusal thereof to
the Council for its consideration. The Council, where permitted by law, shall
thereafter inform such officer or employee whether or not such officer or
employee is required, as a condition of continued employment, to answer such
questions and the officer or employee continues to refuse to answer the
questions thus propounded, such officer or employee shall resign immediately on
the request of the Council or shall forfeit his/her position at the suit of the
City. Nothing in this provision shall be construed to impair a constitutional
or civil right.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984)
Sec. 1-10.15. Sanctions.
   In addition to any other penalties or remedies provided by law, any
violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a cause for
suspension, removal from office or employment or other disciplinary action
after notice and hearing conducted by the appropriate appointed authority or,
in the case of the Council, a majority of such Council.
(§ 1, Ord. 868-NS, eff. September 18, 1984)
CHAPTER 11. CITY SEAL AND CITY FLAG
Sec. 1-11.101. Form of seal.
   The official seal of the City of Thousand Oaks shall be in the form of a
circle with three (3) sections as noted: upper right hand corner of shield
denotes California bear and star; upper left hand section depicts Ventura
County and the lower third of shield represents an oak tree.
(Ord. 1027-NS, eff. May 16, 1989)
Sec. 1-11.102. Unauthorized use of City seal.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to make or use the seal of the City of
Thousand Oaks, or any cut, facsimile, or reproduction thereof, or make or use
any seal or any design which is an imitation of said seal, or the design
thereof, or which may be mistaken therefor or the design thereof, without
authorization from the City, which may be given provided the purpose is for
official business of the City of Thousand Oaks, its Council, officers or
departments.Use of the City seal in candidate or committee campaign literature
or for candidate/ committee campaign purposes in any manner is prohibited.
(Ord. 1027-NS, eff. May 16, 1989, as amended by § 2 (part), Ord. 1484-NS, eff.
August 9, 2007)
Sec. 1-11.103. City flag.
   (a)   The City of Thousand Oaks shall have an official flag to be known as
“The Flag of the City of Thousand Oaks” which shall depict the City seal. The
City flag may be utilized at City facilities and for City business purposes as
approved by the City Manager or designee.
   (b)   The City flag may be purchased from the City by private business
entities located in the City of Thousand Oaks under the restriction that the
flag will be flown on a flag pole(s) in conjunction with the National and State
flags, and will be flown in conformance with City, State and Federal flag
statutes, protocols and guidelines.
(Ord. 1484-NS, eff. August 9, 2007)
Sec. 1-11.104. Custodian of City seal and City flag.
   The City Clerk of the City of Thousand Oaks shall be the official custodian
of the official seal and official flag of the City.
(Ord. 1027-NS, eff. May 16, 1989, as amended by § 2 (part), Ord. 1484-NS, eff.
August 9, 2007)
CHAPTER 12. CITY BADGES
Sec. 1-12.101. Issuance of badges.
   (a)   Except as authorized by Council Resolution, no City badge shall be
issued to, or be carried, worn or displayed by any City official or employee.
   (b)   Those badges authorized by Council Resolution shall be issued by the
City Clerk, and shall have placed upon them a serial number. The City Clerk
shall maintain records containing the number of each badge, the date of
issuance, and the name and residence address of the person to whom the badge is
issued.
   (c)   Each official or employee to whom a badge is issued must reimburse the
City for the cost thereof if the badge be lost or destroyed through his/her
negligence, or if the badge is not returned at the termination of his/her
service with the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 1117-NS, eff. September 3, 1991)
Sec. 1-12.102. Presentation of badge upon termination.
   (a)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, the City may present
to an employee or official his/her badge upon termination of his/her service
with the City. Prior to the presentation, the City shall cause the badge to be
affixed permanently to a plaque or within a frame, which will effectively
preclude improper use of the badge.
   (b)   No person shall remove from the plaque or frame any badge presented
under this section, or wear such a badge, or display it, except while it is
attached to the plaque or within the frame.
(§ 1, Ord. 1117-NS, eff. September 3, 1991)
Sec. 1-12.103. Unlawful use of city badges.
   It shall be unlawful for any person other than one designated by Council
Resolution pursuant to this chapter to wear, exhibit, or use the badge of a
City official or employee, with the intent of fraudulently impersonating a City
official or employee, or of fraudulently inducing the belief that he/she is a
City official or employee. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a violation of this Code pursuant to Section 1-2.01 of
Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code.
(§ 1, Ord. 1117-NS, eff. September 3, 1991)
CHAPTER 13. CITY ELECTION CAMPAIGNS:
CONTRIBUTION LIMITS AND DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS.*
*Chapter 13 entitled "Disclosure of Contributions Concerning City Recall,
Initiative or Referendum Efforts," consisting of Sections 1-13.01–1-13.09
codified from Ordinance No. 1285-NS, repealed by Section 2, Ordinance No. 1325-
NS, effective August 13, 1998. Chapter 13, entitled "City Election Campaigns:
Contribution Limits and Disclosure Requirements," consisting of Sections 1-
13.01 - 1-13.08, as established by Ordinance No. 1325-NS, and amended by
Ordinances No. 1356-NS, 1367-NS, 1410-NS, 1425-NS, 1437-NS, 1453-NS, 1463-NS,
1496-NS, 1533-NS, and 1572-NS, were subsequently repealed and replaced by Ord.
1592-NS, effective December 21, 2013.
Sec. 1-13.01. Purpose.
   The purposes of this chapter are;
   (a)   To eliminate the possibility of corruption or the appearance of
corruption in local elections, arising as a result of disproportionately large
political contributions, by adopting the least restrictive limits possible on
the amounts of money any person may contribute or otherwise cause to be
available to candidates for the City Council and those who support or oppose
such candidates; and
   (b)   To promote informed actions by the electors of the City by requiring
the full and truthful disclosure of contributions and expenditures in election
campaigns; and
   (c)   To inhibit improper or illegal campaign activity, and to provide for
enforcement of this chapter; and
   (d)   Pursuant to California Government Code Section 81013, and Elections
Code Section 10202, to impose contribution limitations, disclosure
requirements, and prohibitions in addition to those imposed by state law, but
that do not prevent any person from complying with state law.
(§ 3, Ord. 1592-NS, eff. December 21, 2013)
Sec. 1-13.02. Definitions.
   The definitions set forth in the California Political Reform Act, as it now
exists or may be amended (Government Code Sections 81000, et seq.), and the
regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, shall govern the interpretation of
this chapter except as to those terms defined in this section:
   “Candidate” means an individual: (i) who is listed on the ballot; or (ii)
who has qualified to have write-in votes on his or her behalf counted by
election officials for nomination or election to the City Council; or (iii) who
receives a contribution or makes an expenditure or gives his or her consent for
any other person to receive a contribution or make an expenditure with a view
to bringing about his or her nomination or election to the City Council,
whether or not the specific City Council office for which he or she will seek
nomination or election is known at the time the contribution is received or the
expenditure is made, and whether or not he or she has announced his or her
candidacy or filed a declaration of candidacy at such time. Candidate also
includes any member of the City Council who is the subject of a recall effort.
   For the purpose of this chapter, a member of the City Council becomes the
subject of a recall effort, and therefore becomes a candidate, at such time as
the notice of intention to circulate petitions is served on that member.
Thereafter, any action taken by a person to advocate the recall of the
candidate shall be deemed to be opposing the candidate, and any action taken by
a person to oppose the recall of the candidate shall be deemed to be supporting
the candidate.
   An individual who becomes a candidate shall retain his or her status as a
candidate until such time as that status is terminated pursuant to Section
84214 of the California Government Code. Candidate does not include any person
within the meaning of Section 301(b) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of
1971.
(§ 3, Ord. 1592-NS, eff. December 21, 2013)
Sec. 1-13.03. Contribution limitations.
   (a)   Limits on contributions by persons and committees.
   (1)   No person or committee shall make to any candidate, including the
controlled committee of such candidate, and no such candidate or such
candidate’s controlled committee, shall solicit or accept any contribution that
will cause the amount contributed by the contributor to the candidate or the
candidate’s controlled committee to exceed Seven Hundred Fifty and no/100ths
($750.00) Dollars for any single election.
   (2)   Except for independent expenditure committees or other committees not
controlled by the candidate, no person shall make to any committee, which
supports or opposes any candidate or candidates for City Council, and no such
committee shall accept from any such person a contribution or contributions
totaling more than Seven Hundred Fifty and no/100ths ($750.00) Dollars for any
single election.
   (3)   The City Council shall adjust the contribution limits established in
this subsection in March of every odd-numbered year to reflect any increase or
decrease in the California Consumer Price Index since the last such adjustment
of the contribution limit. Such adjustments shall be rounded to the nearest Ten
and no/100ths ($10.00) Dollar amount. The base contribution limit will be re-
evaluated every five years.
   (4)   The limitations of this subsection shall not apply to contributions of
a candidate's personal funds to his or her controlled campaign committee on
behalf of his or her own candidacy, and shall apply to contributions from the
candidate's spouse.
   (b)   Restrictions on when contributions may be received.
   (1)   No candidate, including the candidate's controlled committee, and no
committee primarily formed to support or oppose any candidate or candidates for
City Council, shall accept any contributions (including candidate's personal
funds) more than six (6) calendar months prior to any election in which the
candidate is attempting to be on the ballot or is a write-in candidate. In the
case of a recall effort, the pre-election fund-raising period set forth in this
subsection shall commence on the date a notice of intent to circulate a recall
petition is served on the officer.
   (2)   No candidate or the controlled committee of such candidate, and no
committee primarily formed to support or oppose any candidate or candidates for
City Council, shall accept any contributions (including candidate's personal
funds) after the earlier of (i) ninety (90) days after the date of their
candidate's withdrawal as a candidate, defeat or date of the election; or (ii)
the date on which outstanding bills or debts owed by the candidate or committee
are paid in full. Contributions received during such ninety (90) day period
shall be used only to pay outstanding bills or debts owed by the candidate or
committee for that election, or to comply with the provisions of Government
Code Section 84308.
   (3)   If, at the end of the period specified in Section 1-13.03(b)(2), there
remains any unexpended balance in the campaign bank account of any such
candidates or committees, such unexpended funds remaining in the account shall
be either kept for the purpose of maintaining available funds to comply with
the requirements under Government Code Section 84308, should an occurrence
requiring such arise; or be disposed of by either returning the funds to
contributors pro rata; turning such funds over to the General Fund of the City
of Thousand Oaks; or donated to any bona fide charitable, educational, civic,
religious, or similar tax exempt, nonprofit organization, where no substantial
part of the proceeds will have a material financial effect on the former
candidate or elected officer, any member of his or her immediate family, or his
or her campaign treasurer. Under no circumstances shall such unexpended funds
be redesignated or used for any future election other than the election for
which the funds were contributed.
   (c)   Limitations on loans. Any loan or extension of credit for a period of
more than sixty (60) days, other than loans to the candidate from commercial
lending institutions without a guarantor made in the regular course of business
on the same terms available to members of the public, shall be considered a
contribution from the maker and/or guarantor of the loan or the creditor, and
shall be subject to all applicable contribution limits.
   (d)   Anonymous contributions. No person shall make to any candidate for
City Council or the candidate's controlled committee, or to any committee that
supports or opposes any such candidate or candidates, and no such candidate or
committee shall solicit or accept, any anonymous contribution that exceeds
Twenty-five and no/100ths ($25.00) Dollars.
   (e)   Cash contributions. No person shall make to any candidate for City
Council or such candidate's controlled committee, or to any committee that
supports or opposes any such candidate or candidates, and no such candidate or
committee shall solicit or accept a cash contribution that exceeds Twenty-five
and no/100ths ($25.00) Dollars. No contribution that causes the total amount
contributed by the donor to the recipient to exceed Twenty-five and no/100ths
($25.00) Dollars, other than an in-kind contribution as defined by the
Political Reform Act, shall be accepted or made unless it is made by written
instrument, or by electronic transaction approved by the Fair Political
Practices Commission, containing the name of the donor and the name of the
payee.
   (f)   Assumed name contributions. No contribution shall be made, directly or
indirectly, by any person or combination of persons acting jointly in a name
other than the name by which they are identified for legal purposes, nor in the
name of another person or combination of persons. No person shall make a
contribution in his or her name of anything belonging to another person or
received from another person on the condition that it be used as a
contribution. Upon discovery by a candidate for elective office, or his or her
campaign treasurer or committee, or ballot measure committee, that a
contribution has been received in violation of this subsection, the amount
received in violation of this subsection shall be promptly paid from available
campaign funds to the Treasurer of the City for deposit in the General Fund of
the City, and shall not be used to benefit any candidate or committee.
   (g)   Local aggregate contribution limit. No person shall contribute more
than the local aggregate contribution limit to all candidates for the City
Council and their controlled committees. For the purpose of this subsection,
the local aggregate contribution limit shall be calculated by multiplying Seven
Hundred Fifty and no/100ths ($750.00) dollars by the number of members of the
City Council to be elected at that election and adding Seven Hundred Fifty and
no/100ths ($750.00) Dollars to the resulting amount.
   (h)   Family contributions. Contributions by a husband and wife shall be
treated as separate contributions and shall not be aggregated. Contributions by
children under eighteen (18) years of age shall be treated as contributions by
their parents and attributed one-half (½) to each parent or the total amount to
a single custodial parent.
   (i)   Aggregation of contributions. For purposes of determining when
contributions are aggregated: “Entity” means any person, other than an
individual; “Majority owned” means an ownership of more than fifty percent.
   (1)   The contributions of an entity whose contributions are directed and
controlled by any individual shall be aggregated with contributions made by
that individual and any other entity whose contributions are directed and
controlled by the same individual;
   (2)   If two or more entities make contributions that are directed and
controlled by a majority of the same persons, the contributions of those
entities shall be aggregated;
   (3)   Contributions made by entities that are majority owned by any person
shall be aggregated with the contributions of the majority owner and all other
entities majority owned by that person, unless those entities act independently
in their decision to make contributions.
(§ 3, Ord. 1592-NS, eff. December 21, 2013; § 1, Ord. 1609-NS, eff. October 16,
2015; § 1, Ord. 1635-NS, eff. December 29, 2017; Ord. 1666-NS, eff. December 6,
2019; Ord. 1687-NS, eff. October 1, 2021; § 1, Ord. 1723-NS, eff. January 5,
2024)
Sec. 1-13.04. Filing requirements.
   (a)   Generally. Filing requirements of this chapter that are in any way
additional or different from those set forth in Government Code Section 84100,
et seq. shall apply only to candidates for elective office seeking election to
the City Council, to such candidates' controlled committees, or to committees
not controlled by candidates but that are formed or existing primarily to
support or oppose a candidate or any measure which is being voted on only in a
municipal election in the City of Thousand Oaks.
   (b)   Times for filing campaign reports. Committees shall file all required
campaign statements and semi-annual statements in compliance with the Political
Reform Act and this chapter. In addition to the statements required to be filed
by the Political Reform Act, any candidate or committee which is required to
file pre-election statements in connection with an election for a member of the
City Council shall file with the City Clerk an additional pre-election
statement not later than the close of public business hours on the Tuesday
immediately preceding the election. In order not to overlap with the last
reporting period under state law, such additional campaign statements shall
cover the period beginning sixteen (16) days before the election and ending ten
(10) days prior to the election. Such statements shall be filed with the City
Clerk by personal delivery or by guaranteed overnight delivery service.
   (c)   Reporting of late contributions and late independent expenditures. For
the period starting ten (10) days prior to the election, and notwithstanding
the One Thousand and no/100ths ($1,000.00) Dollar threshold contained in
California Government Code Sections 82036, 82036.5, 84203, and 84204, any late
contribution or late independent expenditure of One Hundred and no/100ths
($100.00) Dollars or more in connection with any election for the City Council
or any City measure, shall be reported to the City Clerk in the form prescribed
by the Fair Political Practices Commission for that purpose within twenty-four
(24) hours of the receipt of the contribution or the expenditure in compliance
with those state law sections.
   (d)   A late filing fee consistent with State law may be imposed for all
filings required pursuant to this Section. The City Clerk shall deposit any
funds received under this subsection into the General Fund of the City.
   (e)   Duties of City Clerk upon receipt of filing. Upon receipt of any
filing required by this chapter, the City Clerk shall make such documents
available for review by the public the next business day, and shall cause such
documents to be posted on the City's website, if one exists, within three (3)
business days.
   (f)   Acceptance for filing campaign reports. An elected officer, candidate,
committee, or other person required to file statements, reports, or other
documents required by Chapter 4 (Government Code Section 84100 et seq.) of the
Political Reform Act is permitted and may subsequently be required to file
those statements, reports, or other documents electronically with the City
Clerk who is authorized to establish, amend, and implement procedures as
necessary or convenient to ensure the system's efficient administration and
that such system complies with the Political Reform Act. This section shall
have the following exceptions:
      (i)   Subsection (f) shall not apply in any instance in which the
original statement, report, or other document is required to be filed with the
California Secretary of State and a copy is required to be filed with the City.
Said copy may be provided as a hard copy or filed electronically with the City
Clerk at the filer's discretion.
      (ii)   Subsection (f) shall not apply to an elected officer, candidate,
committee, or other person who receives contributions totaling less than Two
Thousand ($2,000) Dollars and makes expenditures totaling less than Two
Thousand ($2,000) Dollars in a calendar year.
(§ 3, Ord. 1592-NS, eff. December 21, 2013; § 1, Ord. 1725-NS, eff. April 19,
2024)
Sec. 1-13.05.   Printed disclosure on advertisements of major contributors.
   Any proponent, opponent or committee, which disseminates an advertisement in
favor of or opposed to any City recall, City measure, initiative or referendum
effort, shall provide a written disclosure in that advertisement identifying
the contributing person (herein the “major contributor”) who has made a loan or
cumulative loans of Two Thousand and no/100ths ($2,000.00) Dollars or more, a
monetary contribution of Two Thousand and no/100ths ($2,000.00) Dollars or
more, or cumulative contributions totaling Two Thousand and no/100ths
($2,000.00) Dollars or more, or provided nonmonetary contributions with a total
value of Two Thousand and no/100ths ($2,000.00) Dollars or more, to that
proponent, opponent or committee during the previous twelve (12) month period
prior to the printing, copying, publication or broadcasting of the
advertisement. If the advertisement is by means of a radio or televised spot,
then disclosure shall be by an oral audible announcement of all major
contributors. If the loan is from a bank, savings and loan or other recognized
financial institution, the name of that bank, savings and loan or financial
institution need not be listed, but any co-signor or guarantor of the loan must
be listed as a major contributor. If the advertisement is in a typed or printed
format, this disclosure shall be in a clear and legible form in at least ten
(10) point type. If there are more than two (2) major contributors of Two
Thousand and no/100ths ($2,000.00) Dollars or more, the proponent, opponent or
committee shall only be required to disclose the two (2) highest major
contributors.
(§ 3, Ord. 1592-NS, eff. December 21, 2013)
Sec. 1-13.06. Recordkeeping.
   It shall be the duty of each candidate, treasurer and principal officer of
any committee to maintain such detailed accounts, records, bills, copies of
checks, and receipts that are necessary to prepare the campaign statements
required by this chapter and the Political Reform Act. Such records shall be
maintained and retained by the filer pursuant to the provisions of the
Political Reform Act and regulations promulgated by the Fair Political
Practices Commission.
(§ 3, Ord. 1592-NS, eff. December 21, 2013)
Sec. 1-13.07. Remedies.
   (a)   Liability for violations. In the case of any violation of this chapter
by a committee, the treasurer and any principal officers or, in the case of a
controlled committee, the candidate may be liable for violations as provided
herein. If two (2) or more persons are liable for any violation, they shall be
jointly and severally liable.
   (b)   Misdemeanor violations and fines. Any person or candidate for elective
office who knowingly or willfully violates any provision of Sections
1-13.03(a) through (g), inclusive, Sections
1-13.04(b) through (d), inclusive, Section
1-13.05, or Section
1-13.06 is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable by a fine
not exceeding One Thousand and no/100ths ($1,000.00) Dollars or by imprisonment
in the County Jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such
fine and imprisonment. Allegations that such violations have occurred shall be
referred directly to the Ventura County District Attorney for investigation and
prosecution.
   (c)   Civil injunctive relief and civil penalties.
   (1)   Any person residing in the City may sue in Ventura County Superior
Court to enjoin violations of, or to compel compliance with, the provisions of
this chapter. Any person who is found by a court of competent jurisdiction in
such an action to have intentionally or negligently violated any provision of
this chapter may be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed three (3) times
the amount in controversy. In determining the amount of a civil penalty, if
any, the court shall take into consideration the seriousness of the violation
and the degree of culpability of the defendant. The prevailing party in any
such action shall be entitled to seek and be awarded its attorneys fees and
court costs. Any action for civil injunctive relief and/or civil penalty must
be filed within one year of the date of the alleged violation.
   (2)   Complaints for violations of this chapter and the Political Reform Act
may also be referred to the Fair Political Practices Commission for
investigation and enforcement.
(§ 3, Ord. 1592-NS, eff. December 21, 2013)
CHAPTER 14. TERM LIMITS
Sec. 1-14.01.   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to create more competitive elections by
ensuring that periodically the advantages of incumbency of a City Council
member will yield to increased citizen participation in seeking elective
office.
(Part 1, Ord. 1583-NS, eff. December 21, 2012)
Sec. 1-14.02. Limits.
   No person shall serve more than three consecutive terms as a member of the
Thousand Oaks City Council, either by election or appointment, until at least
four years after the expiration of the third consecutive term in office. After
a four year absence, a new three consecutive term limit applies.
(Part 1, Ord. 1583-NS, eff. December 21, 2012)
Sec. 1-14.03. Appointed terms.
   Any person, who, whether by appointment or election, serves a partial term
of office as a member of the City Council for more than two years shall be
deemed, for the purpose of this Chapter, to have served a full four-year term.
(Part 1, Ord. 1583-NS, eff. December 21, 2012)
Sec. 1-14.04. Applicability.
   This provision shall apply prospectively only, so that any City
Councilmember commencing a term of office on or after the effective date of
this initiative may serve up to three consecutive terms from and after that
date.
(Part 1, Ord. 1583-NS, eff. December 21, 2012)
CHAPTER 15. ELECTIONS TO FILL COUNCIL VACANCIES.
Sec. 1-15.01. Purpose.
   The interests of the citizens of the City of Thousand Oaks are best served
by allowing voters to choose Councilmembers for themselves. The purpose of this
chapter is to ensure that members of the Thousand Oaks City Council have
received the direct approval from the voters and are thus elected to their
respective positions on the Council.
(Part 1, Ord. 1580-NS, eff. August 17, 2012)
Sec. 1-15.02. Election to fill Council vacancy.
   All vacancies of the Thousand Oaks City Council shall be filled through
election. If a vacancy occurs on the Thousand Oaks City Council, this chapter
requires that a special election be called immediately to fill the Council
vacancy.
(Part 1, Ord. 1580-NS, eff. August 17, 2012)
Sec. 1-15.03. Date of election to fill Council vacancy.
   The special election called for purposes of this chapter shall be held on
the next regularly established election date not less than 114 days from the
call of the special election.
(Part 1, Ord. 1580-NS, eff. August 17, 2012)
Sec. 1-15.04. Interim appointment.
   A person may be appointed to fill a vacancy on the Council and this person
will hold office only until the date of the special election.
(Part 1, Ord. 1580-NS, eff. August 17, 2012)
CHAPTER 16. DISTRICT-BASED ELECTIONS.
Sec. 1-16.01. Purpose.
   The City's at-large voting system used to elect members of the City Council
was challenged under the California Voting Rights Act. In response, the City
Council voted to voluntarily transition from at-large elections to district-
based elections. The purpose of this chapter is to establish the respective
districts; set forth the schedule for district elections; and set forth the
other procedures applicable to the City's transition from at-large elections to
district-based elections.
(Part 2, Ord. 1715-NS, eff. July 18, 2023)
Sec. 1-16.02. District-based electoral system.
   Pursuant to California Government Code Section 34886 and the schedule
established in Section
1-16.03 of this chapter, beginning in November 2024, members of the City
Council shall be elected on a district-based electoral system from five (5)
single-member City Council Districts. For purposes of this chapter, the term
'district-based electoral system' shall mean the election of members of the
City Council by the voters of the district alone. The City's district-based
electoral system shall be conducted in accordance with California Government
Code Section 34871(a).
(Part 2, Ord. 1715-NS, eff. July 18, 2023)
Sec. 1-16.03. Establishment of City Council Electoral Districts.
   (a)   Pursuant to Section
1-16.02 of this chapter, Members of the City Council shall be elected on a
district-based electoral system, from the five City Council Districts described
as follows, which shall continue in effect until they are amended or repealed
in accordance with law:
   (1)   City Council District 1 shall comprise all that portion of the City
reflected in Exhibit A (attached to Ordinance 1715-NS and incorporated herein
by reference).
   (2)   City Council District 2 shall comprise all that portion of the City
reflected in Exhibit A.
   (3)   City Council District 3 shall comprise all that portion of the City
reflected in Exhibit A.
   (4)   City Council District 4 shall comprise all that portion of the City
reflected in Exhibit A.
   (5)   City Council District 5 shall comprise all that portion of the City
reflected in Exhibit A.
   (b)   Members of the City Council shall be elected in the electoral
districts established by this section and subsequently reapportioned pursuant
to applicable State and federal law.
   (c)   Except as provided in subdivision (d) herein and notwithstanding any
other provision of this chapter, once the ordinance codified in this chapter is
fully phased in, the member of the City Council elected to represent a district
must reside in that district and be a registered voter in that district, and
any candidate for City Council must live in, and be a registered voter in, the
district in which he or she seeks election at the time nomination papers are
issued, pursuant to Elections Code Section 10227. Termination of residency in a
district by a Member of the City Council shall create an immediate vacancy for
that Council district unless a substitute residence within the district is
established within thirty (30) days after the termination of residency.
   (d)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, and consistent
with the requirements of California Government Code Section 36512, the members
of the City Council in office at the time the ordinance codified in this
chapter takes effect shall continue in office until the expiration of the full
term to which he or she was elected and until his or her successor is
qualified. At the end of the term of each member of the City Council, that
member of the City Council's successor shall be elected on a district-based
system in the districts established in Section
1-16.02 of this chapter.
(Part 2, Ord. 1715-NS, eff. July 18, 2023)
Sec. 1-16.04. Election schedule.
   Except as otherwise required by California Government Code Section 36512,
the members of the City Council shall be elected in Council Districts Nos. 4
and 5 beginning at the General Municipal Election in November, 2024, and every
four years thereafter, as such Council Districts shall be amended. Members of
the City Council shall be elected from Council Districts Nos. 1, 2, and 3
beginning at the General Municipal Election in November, 2026, and every four
years thereafter, as such Council Districts shall be amended.
(Part 2, Ord. 1715-NS, eff. July 18, 2023)
TITLE 2. PERSONNEL
CHAPTER 1. OFFICERS
Article 1. Bonds
      
2-1.101–Bonds for City Clerk, City Treasurer and Finance Director
      
2-1.102–Persons filling more than one office
      
2-1.103–Premiums
Article 2. City Manager
      
2-1.201–Office created
      
2-1.202–Appointment: Qualifications
      
2-1.203–Residence
      
2-1.204–Eligibility of Councilmember
      
2-1.205–Absence or disability
      
2-1.206–Compensation
      
2-1.207–Expense reimbursements
      
2-1.208–Relationship with Council
      
2-1.209–Cooperation of City officers
      
2-1.210–Attendance at meetings
      
2-1.211–Contracts and purchases during emergencies
      
2-1.212–Purchase of supplies, services, and equipment
      
2-1.213–Powers and duties
      
2-1.214–Removal
      
2-1.215–Removal: Limitation
Article 3. Director of Finance
      
2-1.301–Office created
      
2-1.302–Appointment
      
2-1.303–Exclusion of duties as City Treasurer
      
2-1.304–Bond
Article 4. Health Officer
      
2-1.401–Appointment
      
2-1.402–Duties
Article 5. Office of the City Attorney
      
2-1.501–Creation
      
2-1.502–Compensation
      
2-1.503–Functions
      
2-1.504–Removal
      
2-1.505–Removal: Limitation
      
2-1.506–Relationship with Council
      
2-1.507–Cooperation of City officers
CHAPTER 2. PERSONNEL
Article 1. Personnel System
      
2-2.101–Adoption of personnel system
      
2-2.102–Definitions
      
2-2.103–Administration
      
2-2.104–Application
      
2-2.105–Adoption and amendment of rules or policies
      
2-2.106–Appointments
      
2-2.107–Criminal conduct: Ineligibility for employment
      
2-2.108–Layoffs and reemployment
      
2-2.109–Discrimination
      
2-2.110–Right of appeal
CHAPTER 1. OFFICERS
Article 1. Bonds
Sec. 2-1.101. Bonds for City Clerk, City Treasurer and Finance Director.
   In accordance with Government Code Section 36518 penal bonds to the City
shall be acquired in the below described amounts for the following officers:
   (a)   City Clerk, One Hundred Thousand and no/100ths ($100,000.00) Dollars;
   (b)   City Treasurer, One Hundred Thousand and no/100ths ($100,000. 00)
Dollars;
   (c)   Director of Finance, One Hundred Thousand and no/100ths ($100,000.00)
Dollars;
   (d)   All other Employees, One Hundred Thousand and no/100ths ($100,000.00)
Dollars Blanket Coverage.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Sec. 2-1.102. Persons filling more than one office.
   If any person fills two (2) or more of the offices set forth in this
article, only one (1) bond shall be required for such person in an amount equal
to the greatest sum for any such offices held.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Sec. 2-1.103. Premiums.
   The premiums for such bonds shall be paid by tile City.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Article 2. City Manager
Sec. 2-1.201. Office created.
   The office of full time City Manager is hereby established and created.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Sec. 2-1.202. Appointment: Qualifications.
   The City Manager shall be appointed by a majority vote of the Council, and
shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the Council. The City Manager
shall be chosen by the Council solely on the basis of executive and
administrative qualifications with special reference to actual experience in,
or knowledge of, accepted practices in respect to the duties of the office.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Sec. 2-1.203. Residence.
   The City Manager need not be a resident of the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Sec. 2-1.204. Eligibility of Councilmember.
   No Councilmember shall receive an appointment to the office of City Manager
during that Councilmember’s term, nor within one (1) year after the expiration
of their term.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Sec. 2-1.205. Absence or disability.
   The Assistant City Manager shall serve as Manager Pro Tempore during any
temporary absence or disability of the City Manager. In the event of the
absence or disability of the City Manager and Assistant City Manager, the City
Manager may designate up to two (2) qualified City employees to perform the
duties of the City Manager during the period of absence or disability of the
City Manager.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Sec. 2-1.206. Compensation.
   The City Manager shall receive such compensation as the Council shall from
time to time determine and fix by resolution.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Sec. 2-1.207. Expense reimbursements.
   The City Manager shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or
paid by the City Manager in the performance of designated City duties or
incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the City under the direction
of the Council. Reimbursement shall only be made when a verified itemized claim
setting forth the sums expended has been approved by the Council.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Sec. 2-1.208. Relationship with Council.
   Neither the Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any
subordinates of the City Manager. The City Manager shall take orders and
instructions from the Council, as a body, only when sitting in a duly held
meeting of the Council, and no individual Councilmember shall give any orders
or instructions to the City Manager. The provisions of this section shall not
be construed to prevent any Councilmember from discussing matters of the City
with the City Manager and staff.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Sec. 2-1.209. Cooperation of City officers.
   It shall be the duty of all City officers to assist the City Manager in
administering the affairs of the City efficiently, economically, and
harmoniously so far as may be consistent with their duties as prescribed by the
laws and regulations of the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Sec. 2-1.210. Attendance at meetings.
   The City Manager shall attend all meetings of the Council unless excused
therefrom or when removal is under consideration. City Manager may attend any
and all meetings of the commissions, boards, or committees created by the
Council. At such meetings the City Manager shall be heard by such commissions,
boards, or committees as to all matters upon which the City Manager wishes to
address the members thereof.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Sec. 2-1.211. Contracts and purchases during emergencies.
   The City Manager is authorized to award and enter into any contract on
behalf of the City where the City’s total payment obligation does not exceed
Five Thousand and no/100ths ($5.000.00) Dollars or such amount as authorized by
Council resolution. In addition, in the event of an accident, disaster, or
other circumstances creating a public emergency, the City Manager may award
contracts and make purchases for the purpose of meeting such emergency. The
City Manager shall file promptly with Council a report showing such emergency
and the necessity for such action, together with an itemized account of all
expenditures.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Sec. 2-1.212. Purchase of supplies, services, and equipment.
   The City Manager shall purchase all materials, supplies, services, and
equipment for which funds are provided in the budget. No purchase shall be
made, contract let, or obligation made for any item or service which exceeds
the current budget appropriation without a supplemental appropriation by the
Council. No expenditures shall be submitted or recommended to the Council
except on the report and approval of the City Manager. The provisions of this
section shall not apply to purchases required under a sealed bid presented to
the Council.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Sec. 2-1.213. Powers and duties.
   The City Manager shall be the administrative head of City government under
the direction and control of the Council. The City Manager is responsible for
the efficient administration of all the affairs of the City under the City
Manager’s control. In addition to the City Manager’s general powers as
administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, the City Manager shall
also have the following powers and duties:
   (a)   City Clerk. The City Manager, or the City Manager’s designee, shall
perform and fulfill the duties and obligations of the office of the City Clerk,
   (b)   Law enforcement. Enforce all laws and ordinances of the City and
assure the proper performance of all franchises, contracts, permits, licenses,
and privileges granted by the Council;
   (c)   Reorganization of departments, offices and positions. Consolidate.
combine, or reorganize departments, offices, positions, or units under the City
Manager’s supervision as may be indicated in the interests of the efficient,
effective, and economical conduct of the City’s business. With the approval of
the Council, the City Manager may be the head of one or more departments;
   (d)   Legislation recommendations. Recommend to the Council for adoption
such measures and ordinances as deemed necessary or expedient;
   (e)   Financial reports. Advise the Council of the financial condition and
requirements of the City;
   (f)   Budget. Prepare and submit the annual budget to the Council and be
responsible for its administration after adoption;
   (g)   Investigation. Investigate the operation and performance of the City
and any department or division under the City Manager’s supervision, and
investigate all complaints concerning the administration of the City
government, the services maintained by public utilities in the City, and the
franchises, permits, or privileges granted by the City;
   (h)   Supervision of public property. Exercise general supervision over all
public buildings, public parks, public equipment, and other public property
under the control and jurisdiction of the Council; and
   (i)   Additional duties. Perform such other duties and exercise such other
powers as may be delegated from time to time by the Council.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Sec. 2-1.214. Removal.
   The Council upon three (3) affirmative votes may remove the City Manager at
its pleasure and without cause upon providing written notice of a termination
date. Rights of the City Manager to severance pay and any other arrangements
incident to termination shall be in accordance with any contractual arrangement
entered into between the City Council and the City Manager at the time of or
after his/her appointment by the Council that is not inconsistent with this
section.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Sec. 2-1.215. Removal: Limitation.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, the
City Manager shall not be removed from office during a period of ninety (90)
days next succeeding any general municipal election at which election a member
of the Council is elected. This provision is to allow any newly elected member
of the Council or a reorganized Council to observe the actions and ability of
the City Manager in the performance of the powers and duties of that office.
After the expiration of such period, the provisions of Section 2-1.214 shall
apply.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Article 3. Director of Finance
Sec. 2-1.301. Office created.
   The office of Director of Finance is hereby established.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Sec. 2-1.302. Appointment.
   The Council designates the City Manager as Director of Finance. The City
Manager may appoint a designee to fulfill duties of Director of Finance and
supervise that designee.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Sec. 2-1.303. Exclusion of duties as City Treasurer.
   The provisions of this article shall not be construed to require the
Director of Finance to perform any of the duties given by law to the City
Treasurer. The City Manager may, however, appoint the Director of Finance to
fill a vacancy in the office of City Treasurer when it occurs, in which case
the Director of Finance shall exercise the functions of both offices. The
appointment by the City Manager is subject to confirmation by the City Council.
Should the Director of Finance be appointed to serve as City Treasurer, the
City Clerk shall countersign all checks, bonds, and financial documents issued
by the City, which are required by law to be signed by two (2) municipal
officers.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Sec. 2-1.304. Bond.
   The Director of Finance shall execute a bond to the City as set forth in
Section 2-1.101 of Article 1 of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1374-NS, eff.
April 26, 2001)
Article 4. Health Officer
Sec. 2-1.401. Appointment.
   The County Health Officer appointed by the Board of Supervisors of the
County shall serve as the Health Officer for the City concurrently with the
City’s Code Enforcement Officers who may also discharge all or a portion of the
functions and duties of the Health Officer.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985, as amended by § 12, Ord. 907-NS, eff.
February 11, 1986)
Sec. 2-1.402. Duties.
   It shall be the duty of the Health Officer to enforce all the laws of the
City pertaining to causes of sickness, nuisances, and sources of filth within
the City, all orders, quarantine regulations, and rules prescribed by the Board
of Health of the State, and all statutes of the State relating to vital
statistics. The Health Officer shall generally supervise all matters pertaining
to the health and sanitary conditions of the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Article 5. Office of the City Attorney
Sec. 2-1.501. Creation.
   The Office of the City Attorney is hereby established. It shall consist of
the City Attorney and other positions authorized by the Council. The City
Attorney shall administer the department and be responsible for the successful
performance of its functions. The City Attorney shall serve under the direct
supervision and control of the Council as its and the City’s legal advisor.
   The City Attorney may retain or employ other attorneys, assistants, or
special counsel as may be needed to take charge of any litigation or legal
matters or to assist the City Attorney therein.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Sec. 2-1.502. Compensation.
   The City Attorney shall receive such compensation as the Council shall from
time to time determine and fix by resolution.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Sec. 2-1.503. Functions.
   The functions of the Office of the City Attorney shall be to:
   (a)   Represent and appear for the City, its Council, boards, and
commissions in all legal actions or proceedings in which they are concerned or
are a party; and represent and appear for any City officer or employee, or a
former City officer or employee, in all actions or proceedings in which such
officer or employee is a party defendant due to the performance of official
duties;
   (b)   Advise the Council and all City officers in all matters of law
pertaining to their offices;
   (c)   Furnish service at meetings of the Council, except when excused or
disabled, and give advice or opinions on the legality of all matters under
consideration by the Council, or by any of the boards and commissions, or
officers of the City;
   (d)   Prepare ordinances, resolutions, contracts, and other legal
instruments as shall be required or may be deemed necessary by the City
Attorney for the proper conduct of the business of the City and approve the
form of such contracts and bonds given to the City;
   (e)   Prosecute on behalf of the people all criminal cases for violations of
City ordinances; and
   (f)   Perform such other legal duties as may be required by the Council or
as may be necessary to complete the performance of the foregoing functions.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Sec. 2-1.504. Removal.
   The Council upon three affirmative votes may remove the City Attorney at its
pleasure and without cause upon providing written notice of a termination date.
Rights of the City Attorney to severance pay and any other arrangements
incident to termination shall be in accordance with any contractual arrangement
entered into between the City Council and the City Attorney at the time of or
after his/her appointment by the Council that is not inconsistent with this
section.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Sec. 2-1.505. Removal: Limitation.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, the
City Attorney shall not be removed from office during or within a period of
ninety (90) days next succeeding any general municipal election at which
election a member of the Council is elected. This provision is to allow any
newly-elected member of the Council or a reorganized Council to observe the
actions and ability of the City Attorney in the performance of the powers and
duties of that office. After the expiration of such period, the provisions of
Section 2-1.504 shall apply.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Sec. 2-1.506. Relationship with Council.
   Neither the Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any
subordinates of the City Attorney. The City Attorney shall take orders and
instructions from the Council, as a body, and no individual Councilmember shall
give any orders or instructions to the City Attorney. The provisions of this
section shall not be construed to prevent any Councilmember from discussing
matters with the City Attorney and staff.
(§1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Sec. 2-1.507. Cooperation of City officers.
   All City officers shall assist the City Attorney in administering the duties
of that office efficiently, economically, and harmoniously so far as may be
consistent with their duties as prescribed by the laws and regulations of the
City.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
CHAPTER 2. PERSONNEL
Article 1. Personnel System
Sec. 2-2.101. Adoption of personnel system.
   In order to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with
personnel matters; to attract to municipal service the best and most competent
persons available; to assure that appointments and promotions of employees will
be based on merit and fitness, and to provide a reasonable degree of security
of qualified employees, a personnel system is hereby adopted.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Sec. 2-2.102. Definitions.
   The definitions of the terms as used in this chapter and to implement the
objectives of this chapter shall be those set forth in the Personnel Rules and
Regulations.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Sec. 2-2.103. Administration.
   The City Manager or the City Manager’s designee shall be the Personnel
Officer, and shall:
   (a)   Administer all the provisions of this chapter and of the personnel
rules not specifically reserved to the Council or other City officers;
   (b)   Prepare, or cause to be prepared, a position classification plan,
including class specifications, and revisions of the plan. The Titles and
salaries and any revisions thereof shall become effective upon approval by the
Council by resolution; and
   (c)   Perform any other duties that may be required to administer the
personnel system.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Sec. 2-2.104. Application.
   Unless otherwise specifically provided, the provisions of this chapter shall
apply to all officers, positions, and employees in the service of the city,
except:
   (a)   Elective officers;
   (b)   Members of appointive boards, commissions, and committees;
   (c)   The City Manager, Assistant City Manager, and other management
positions in the City Manager’s office;
   (d)   The City Attorney, Assistant City Attorney, and the Deputy City
Attorney;
   (e)   All Department Heads;
   (f)   All Council-appointed officers;
   (g)   Persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional,
technical, or any other services;
   (h)   Volunteer personnel;
   (i)   Emergency employees who are hired to meet the immediate requirements
of an emergency condition, such as extraordinary fire, flood, or earthquake
which threatens life or property;
   (j)   Employees, other than those listed elsewhere in this section, who are
not regularly employed in permanent positions; and
   (k)   Any position primarily funded under a State or Federal employment
program.
   Separate Personnel Rules and Regulations shall be established for those
officers and employees listed in this section. Persons serving in offices,
positions and employments excluded from the competitive service serve at the
pleasure of their appointing authority, and may be removed pursuant to the
Personnel Rules and Regulations for those officers and employees listed in this
section.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Sec. 2-2.105. Adoption and amendment of rules or policies.
   The Personnel Officer shall recommend Personnel Rules and Regulations for
all nonexcluded employees to the Council for adoption, as well as revisions and
amendments to such rules and regulations.
   The rules shall establish regulations governing the personnel system,
including, but not limited to:
   (a)   The preparation, revision, and maintenance of a position
classification plan covering all positions in the competitive service,
including the employment standards for each class;
   (b)   The publishing of appropriate announcements of all tests, employment
opportunities, and the acceptance of applications for employment;
   (c)   The establishment of the examination process and the establishment and
use of resulting employment lists containing the persons eligible for
appointment;
   (d)   The certification and appointment of persons from employment lists and
the making of provisional appointments;
   (e)   The establishment of probationary periods;
   (f)   The transfer, promotion, demotion, reinstatement, disciplinary action,
layoff, and reemployment of employees in the competitive service;
   (g)   The separation of employees from the City service;
   (h)   The establishment of appeal procedures.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Sec. 2-2.106. Appointments.
   (a)   Appointments to vacant positions in the competitive service shall be
made in accordance with the Personnel Rules and Regulations. Appointments and
promotions shall be based on merit and fitness to be ascertained so far as
practicable by competitive examinations process.
   Appointments shall be made by the officer or body in whom the power to make
appointments is vested.
   (b)   The City Manager and the City Attorney shall be appointed by a
majority vote of the City Council. The City Attorney shall be subject to
removal as provided in Sections 2-1.504 and 2-1.505. The City Manager shall be
subject to removal as provided in Sections 2-1.214 and 2-1.215 of this Code.
   (c)   The City department heads, the Assistant City Manager, and all
management classes in the City Manager’s office shall be appointed by the City
Manager, and shall hold their positions for and during the pleasure of the City
Manager. The City Treasurer and the City Clerk shall be appointed by the City
Manager and shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager. Appointment,
removal or demotion of the City Treasurer and City Clerk are subject to the
confirmation of City Council.
   (d)   The Assistant City Attorney and Deputy City Attorney and all other
management employees in the City Attorney’s Office shall be appointed by the
City Attorney and shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the City
Attorney. The City Attorney Office staff shall be appointed by the City
Attorney pursuant to the Personnel Rules and Regulations.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Sec. 2-2.107. Criminal conduct: Ineligibility for employment.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the conviction, including
pleas of guilty and nolo contendere, of a felony may be grounds for
disqualification of an applicant for employment. Such conviction may be
disregarded if it is found and determined that mitigating circumstances exist.
   Pursuant to the Penal Code of the State, the following officers of the City
are hereby authorized to have access to and to utilize State summary criminal
history information when it is needed to assist them in fulfilling the
employment duties set forth in this section: the Personnel Officer and City
Attorney.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Sec. 2-2.108. Layoffs and reemployment.
   The order of layoff of employees shall be established by the Personnel Rules
and Regulations.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Sec. 2-2.109. Discrimination.
   No person in the competitive service, or seeking admission thereto, shall be
employed, promoted, demoted, or discharged, or in any way favored or
discriminated against because of race, color, national origin, religion, age,
sex and functional limitations as defined by applicable State or Federal law.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
Sec. 2-2.110. Right of appeal.
   Any employee in the competitive service shall have the right to appeal any
disciplinary action or alleged violation of this chapter, or the rules or
policies adopted hereunder except in those instances where the right of appeal
is specifically prohibited by this chapter or the Personnel Rules and
Regulations adopted hereunder.
   All appeals shall be concluded as expeditiously as possible and in
accordance with the requirements and procedures set forth in the Personnel
Rules and Regulations adopted pursuant to this article.
(§ 1, Ord. 889-NS, eff. May 28, 1985)
TITLE 3. FINANCE
CHAPTER 1. BUSINESS TAXES
      
3-1.01–Definitions
      
3-1.02–Revenue measure
      
3-1.03–Effect on other laws
      
3-1.04–Business tax certificates and business tax payments required
      
3-1.05–Business tax certificates: Issuance: Appeals: Hearings
      
3-1.06–Unlawful businesses not authorized
      
3-1.07–Branch establishments
      
3-1.08–Evidence of doing business
      
3-1.09–Constitutional apportionment
      
3-1.10–Exemptions
      
3-1.11–Effect of other fees paid
      
3-1.12–Contents of business tax certificates
      
3-1.13–First business tax certificates: Applications
      
3-1.14–Renewal business tax certificates
      
3-1.15–Statements and records
      
3-1.16–Information confidential
      
3-1.17–Failure to file statements or corrected statements
      
3-1.18–Certificates of occupancy, fire inspections, health clearances, and zone
clearances
      
3-1.18.1–Suspension and revocation of fight to engage in business
      
3-1.19–Additional powers of the Collector
      
3-1.20–Business tax certificates nontransferable: Changed locations and
ownership
      
3-1.21–Duplicate business tax certificates
      
3-1.22–Posting and keeping business tax certificates
      
3-1.23–Business taxes: How and when payable
      
3-1.24–Delinquent taxes: Penalties
      
3-1.25–Penalties for violations
      
3-1.26–Refunds of overpayments
      
3-1.27–Enforcement
      
3-1.28–Business taxes a debt
      
3-1.29–Remedies cumulative
      
3-1.30–Effect of provisions on past actions: Unexpired business tax
certificates
      
3-1.31–Rules and regulations
      
3-1.32–Business taxes: Gross receipts
      
3-1.33–Classifications: Procedure for review
      
3-1.34–Classifications: Notices of action: Procedure for hearings
      
3-1.35–Business taxes: Flat rates
      
3-1.36–Severability
CHAPTER 2. BILLIARD ROOMS (Repealed)
CHAPTER 3. CARD ROOMS
      
3-3.01–Defined
      
3-3.02–Prohibited
      
3-3.03–Permits nontransferable
      
3-3.04–Hours of operation
      
3-3.05–Minors
CHAPTER 4. CLAIMS AND DEMANDS
      
3-4.01–Authority
      
3-4.02–Procedures
      
3-4.03–Filing
      
3-4.04–Claims covered by insurance
      
3-4.05–Payment
      
3-4.06–Payment: Approval
      
3-4.07–Facsimile signatures
CHAPTER 5. FUNDS
Article 1. Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund
      
3-5.101–Created
      
3-5.102–Deposits
      
3-5.103–Expenditures
Article 2. Tree Trust Fund (Repealed)
Article 3. Planned Local Drainage Fund No. 1 (Repealed)
CHAPTER 6. JUNK COLLECTORS, JUNK, SECONDHAND, AND ANTIQUE DEALERS, AND
PAWNBROKERS
      
3-6.01–Definitions
      
3-6.02–Permits: Required
      
3-6.03–Permits: Applications: Form
      
3-6.04–Permits: Applications: Approval
      
3-6.05–Permits: Fees
      
3-6.06–Permits: Revocation: Reissuance
      
3-6.07–Separate businesses
      
3-6.08–Separate locations: Junk, secondhand, and antique dealers
      
3-6.09–Reports of purchases and receipts
      
3-6.10–Reports of purchases and receipts: Filing by Chief of Police
      
3-6.11–Reports of purchases and receipts: Junk collectors
      
3-6.12–Records of purchases and receipts
      
3-6.13–Records of purchases and receipts: Materials: Inspections
      
3-6.14–Retention of material
      
3-6.15–Retention of materials: Segregation of metals
      
3-6.16–Hours of operation
      
3-6.17–Signs: Junk, secondhand, and antique dealers
      
3-6.18–Temporary permits
CHAPTER 7. MOTOR VEHICLE RACES  (Repealed)
CHAPTER 8. PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
      
3-8.01–Definitions
      
3-8.02–Permits: Required: Exception
      
3-8.03–Permits: Applications: Form
      
3-8.04–Permits: Applications: Approval
      
3-8.05–Permits: Form
      
3-8.06–Permits: Fees
      
3-8.07–Photographs and fingerprints: Criminal conduct: Ineligibility for
permits
      
3-8.08–Temporary permits
CHAPTER 9. PRIVATE PATROL SYSTEMS
      
3-9.01–Definitions
      
3-9.02–Badges/Insignia
      
3-9.03–Uniforms
      
3-9.04–Facsimiles
      
3-9.05–Vehicles
      
3-9.06–Reports of violations of laws
      
3-9.07–Employment of registered persons
      
3-9.08–Permits: Carrying and displaying
CHAPTER 10. PURCHASING AND PROFESSIONAL SERVICES AND PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS
Article 1. Definitions
      
3-10.101–Purpose
      
3-10.102–Definitions
      
3-10.103–Purchasing Agent: Powers and duties
      
3-10.104–City Council authorizes City Manager to implement administrative
regulations
      
3-10.105–Purchase orders
      
3-10.106–Encumbrance of funds
      
3-10.107–Solicitation exceptions
      
3-10.108–Contracts
Article 2. Supplies, General Services and Equipment
      
3-10.201–Bidding procedures
      
3-10.202–Special equipment/supplies; sole source purchases
      
3-10.203–Cooperative, piggyback, and multiple awarded bid purchasing with other
agencies
      
3-10.204–Recycled supply products specification
      
3-10.205–Urgencies
      
3-10.206–Local preference
      
3-10.207–Staging of purchases prohibited
      
3-10.208–Inspection and tests
      
3-10.209–General services
Article 3. Public Work Projects
      
3-10.301–Uniform construction cost accounting procedures
      
3-10.302–Bidding procedures for various project amounts
      
3-10.303–Approval and adoption of plans
      
3-10.304–Negotiate contract or purchase order procedures
      
3-10.305–Informal bidding procedures
      
3-10.306–Formal bidding procedures
      
3-10.307–Rejection of bids
      
3-10.308–Emergencies; Procedure
      
3-10.309–Staging of public works
      
3-10.310–Bid protests
Article 4. Professional, Management, General or Special Services
      
3-10.401–Award of professional, management, general or special services
contracts based upon competence
Article 5. Waiving of Purchasing Procedures
      
3-10.501–Waiving of purchasing procedures
Article 6. Federal Grant Purchasing Procedures
      
3-10.601–Federal grant purchasing procedures
CHAPTER 11. PROPERTY TAXES
      
3-11.01–Transfer of assessment and tax collection duties
      
3-11.02–Transfer of other duties
      
3-11.03–Abolition of offices
CHAPTER 12. REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAXES
      
3-12.01–Title
      
3-12.02–Tax imposed
      
3-12.03–Person responsible for payment
      
3-12.04–Exemptions: Debt security instruments
      
3-12.05–Exemptions: Governmental agencies
      
3-12.06–Exemptions: Bankruptcies, receiverships, and reorganizations
      
3-12.07–Exemptions: Securities and Exchange Commission orders
      
3-12.08–Exemptions: Partnerships
      
3-12.09–Exemptions: Inter vivos gifts or death
      
3-12.10–Exemptions: Foreclosure or deed in lieu thereof
      
3-12.11–Exemptions: Separation or dissolution of marriage
      
3-12.12–Exemptions: Reconveyance to state or agency thereof
      
3-12.13–Exemptions: Conveyance to nonprofit corporation
      
3-12.14–Administration
      
3-12.15–Claims for refunds
      
3-12.16–Operative date
CHAPTER 13. SALES AND USE TAXES
      
3-13.01–Short title
      
3-13.02–Rate
      
3-13.03–Operative date
      
3-13.04–Purpose
      
3-13.05–Contract with State
      
3-13.06–Sales tax
      
3-13.07–Place of sale
      
3-13.08–Use tax
      
3-13.09–Adoption of State laws
      
3-13.10–Adoption of State laws: Limitations
      
3-13.11–Permits not required
      
3-13.12–Exclusions
      
3-13.12.5–Exclusions and exemptions
      
3-13.12.6–Application of provisions relating to exclusions and exemptions
      
3-13.13–Amendments
      
3-13.14–Enjoining collection forbidden
CHAPTER 14. TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAXES
      
3-14.01–Title
      
3-14.02–Definitions
      
3-14.03–Tax imposed
      
3-14.04–Payment by transient
      
3-14.05–Duties of operators
      
3-14.06–Records
      
3-14.07–Registration by operators
      
3-14.08–Certificates: Posting
      
3-14.09–Certificates: Form
      
3-14.10–Reports by operators
      
3-14.11–Payment of taxes
      
3-14.12–Taxes held in trust
      
3-14.13–Late penalties
      
3-14.14–Additional late penalties
      
3-14.15–Fraud
      
3-14.16–Interest
      
3-14.17–Penalties and interest merged with taxes
      
3-14.18–Determination of taxes by Tax Collector
      
3-14.19–Applications for hearings
      
3-14.20–Hearings by Tax Collector
      
3-14.21–Notices of appeals
      
3-14.22–Notices of Council hearings
      
3-14.23–Hearings by Council
      
3-14.24–Hearings by Council: Decisions
      
3-14.25–Overpayment by operators: Filing of claims
      
3-14.26–Overpayment by operators: Credits
      
3-14.27–Overpayment by operators: Refunds
      
3-14.28–Overpayment by transients: Refunds
      
3-14.29–Records required for refunds
      
3-14.30–Debt to City
      
3-14.31–Actions to collect
      
3-14.32–Violations
      
3-14.33–Security requirement
      
3-14.34–Successors or assignees of business: Withholding tax from purchase
money: Certificates of no tax due
      
3-14.35–Successors or assignees of business: Liability for tax
      
3-14.36–Exemptions
CHAPTER 15. TEMPORARY SHOWS
      
3-15.01–Permits: Required
      
3-15.02–Permits: Fire permits prerequisite to issuance
      
3-15.03–Permit fees: Exemptions
      
3-15.04–Permit fees
CHAPTER 16. FEES IN CONNECTION WITH THE CONSTRUCTION OF DWELLING UNITS
      
3-16.01–Fees in connection with construction of new dwelling units
      
3-16.02–Fees payable upon applications for building permits
       
3-16.03–Definitions
      
3-16.04–Exemptions
      
3-16.05–Fees solely for revenue
      
3-16.06–Severability
CHAPTER 17. SWAP MEETS
      
3-17.01–Definitions
      
3-17.02–Business tax certificates required: Applications: Conditions
      
3-17.03–Permit fees: Swap meet exhibitors: Collection and payment to City
      
3-17.04–Restrictions on issuance of business tax certificates: Conditions,
among others, that may be imposed
      
3-17.05–Additional regulations
      
3-17.06–Prohibited sales, trades, exchanges, or bartering
      
3-17.07–Information required to be submitted by exhibitors to operators
      
3-17.08–Transmitting information to the Chief of Police
      
3-17.09–Violations: Penalties
CHAPTER 18. GENERAL CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT TAXES
      
3-18.01–Title
      
3-18.02–Purpose
      
3-18.03–Definitions
      
3-18.04–Imposition of taxes: Amount
      
3-18.05–Fees payable upon applications for building permits
      
3-18.06–General Capital Improvement Fund
CHAPTER 19. MUNICIPAL SOLAR UTILITY
      
3-19.01–Findings
      
3-19.02–Intent
      
3-19.03–Definitions
      
3-19.04–Regulations of solar leasing operations
CHAPTER 20. MISCELLANEOUS FEES: COST RECOVERY
      
3-20.01–Purpose
      
3-20.02–Miscellaneous service fees
CHAPTER 21. CANNABIS BUSINESS TAX
      
3-21.01–Title
      
3-21.02–Authority and purpose
      
3-21.03–Intent
      
3-21.04–Definitions
      
3-21.05–Tax imposed
      
3-21.06–Reporting and remittance of tax
      
3-21.07–Payments and communications: Timely remittance
      
3-21.08–Payment: When taxes deemed delinquent
      
3-21.09–Notice not required by the City
      
3-21.10–Penalties and interest
      
3-21.11–Refunds and credits
      
3-21.12–Refunds and procedures
      
3-21.13–Personal cultivation not taxed
      
3-21.14–Administration of the tax
      
3-21.15–Appeal procedure
      
3-21.16–Enforcement: Action to collect
      
3-21.17–Apportionment
      
3-21.18–Constitutionality and legality
      
3-21.19–Audit and examination of premises and records
      
3-21.20–Other licenses, permits, taxes, fees or charges
      
3-21.21–Payment of tax does not authorize unlawful business
      
3-21.22–Deficiency determinations
      
3-21.23–Failure to report, nonpayment, or fraud
      
3-21.24–Tax assessment: Notice requirements
      
3-21.25–Tax assessment: Hearing, application and determination
      
3-21.26–Relief from taxes: Disaster relief
      
3-21.27–Conviction for violation: Taxes not waived
      
3-21.28–Violation deemed misdemeanor
      
3-21.29–Remedies cumulative
      
3-21.30–Amendment or repeal
CHAPTER 1: BUSINESS TAXES*
*   Chapter 1 entitled “Business Licensing,” consisting of Article 1 entitled
“General Provisions,” Article 2 entitled “General Revenue Provisions,” and
Article 3 entitled "Miscellaneous Businesses," codified from Ordinance No. 99,
as amended by Ordinance Nos. 139 and 218, replaced by Section 1, Ordinance No.
176-NS, effective December 4, 1970.
Sec. 3-1.01. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Arcade” shall mean a general enclosure in which is conducted the
business of operating or exhibiting any phonograph, graphophone, talking
machine, kinetoscope, biography, projectoscope, or any other instrument or
machine of like character and exhibiting, showing, or letting the use of any
microscope, lung tester, muscle tester, galvanic battery, weighing machine, or
machine of like character.
   (b)   “Business” shall mean and include professions, trades, vocations,
enterprises, establishments, occupations, and all and every kind of calling,
any of which are conducted and/or carried on for the purpose of earning in
whole or in part a profit or livelihood, whether or not a profit or livelihood
actually is earned thereby, whether paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise.
   (c)   “Business tax certificate” shall mean the same as business license and
shall be that document issued as evidence of payment of business taxes as
provided in this chapter.
   (d)   “City” shall mean the City of Thousand Oaks, a municipal corporation
of the State, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized,
consolidated, enlarged, or reincorporated form.
   (e)   “Collection agency” shall mean an establishment for the collection of
accounts, notes,
obligations, or debts for others for a compensation or fee; provided, however,
this definition shall not include attorneys-at-law.
   (f)   “Collector” shall mean the Director of Finance or other City officer
charged with the administration of the provisions of this chapter.
   (g)   “Construction” shall mean any undertaking to construct, alter, repair,
add to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck, or demolish any building, highway,
road, excavation, or other structure, project, development, or improvement, or
any part thereof, including the erection of scaffolding or other structures or
works in connection therewith.
   (h)   “Contractor” shall mean those persons defined as contractors by the
provisions of Section 7026 of the Business and Professions Code of the State,
as amended, and shall also include specialty contractors and any person who
contracts to hire out trucks, tractors, or excavating, or other equipment in
connection with a construction project, whether at rates by the hour or day or
for a contract amount.
   (i)   “Fixed place of business” shall mean a location within the City where
the licensee maintains or conducts his business for a continuous period of at
least sixty (60) days and intends to remain permanently in business. A person
does not have a fixed place of business within the meaning of this subsection
when he establishes a business within the intention and determination to remain
in business for a short period of time only, whether such period is a definite
or indefinite one, such as a period of one or more weeks or months, or until a
particular stock of merchandise is disposed of, or until the local market for
the commodity has been exhausted.
   (j)   “Gross receipts” shall mean and include the total amounts actually
received or receivable from sales and the total amounts actually received or
receivable for the performance of any act or service, of whatever nature it may
be, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such act or
service is done as a part of, or in connection with, the sale of materials,
goods, wares, or merchandise. “Gross receipts” shall include all receipts, cash
credits, and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on
account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of the material used, labor
or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses
whatsoever.
   “Gross receipts” shall not include:
   (1)   Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales;
   (2)   Any tax required by law to be included in, or added to, the purchase
price and collected from the consumer or purchaser;
   (3)   Such part of the sale price of property returned by purchasers upon
rescission of the contract of sale as is refunded either in cash or by credit;
   (4)   Amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an agent
or trustee to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom collected
provided the agent or trustee has furnished the Collector with the names and
addresses of the others and the amounts paid to them;
   (5)   Receipts of refundable deposits, except that refundable deposits
forfeited and taken into the income of the business shall not be excluded;
   (6)   As to a real estate agent or broker, the sales price of real estate
sold for the account of others except that portion which represents commission
or other income to the agent or broker;
   (7)   As to a retail gasoline dealer, a portion of his receipts from the
sale of the motor vehicle fuels equal to the motor vehicle fuel license tax
imposed by and previously paid pursuant to the provisions of Part 2 of Division
2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State;
   (8)   As to a retail gasoline dealer, the special motor fuel tax imposed by
Section 4041 of Title 26 of the United States Code if paid by the dealer or
collected by him from the consumer or purchaser; and
   (9)   As to a person who breeds and sells animals, all receipts from sales
of animals contained within the first litter of any animal owned or controlled
by the taxpayer; and provided, further, that the license tax herein shall only
be applicable to persons who breed animals for the purpose of selling part or
all of its litter.
   (k)   “Itinerant merchant” shall mean and include all persons, both
principals and agents, who engage in a temporary and transient business for a
period less than three (3) months in the City selling goods, wares, or
merchandise and who, for the purpose of carrying on such business, hire, lease,
or occupy any room, building, structure, lot, or premises for the exhibition or
sale of such goods, wares, and merchandise; provided, however, this definition
shall not apply to commercial travelers or selling agents selling their goods
to merchants, dealers, or traders where such goods are to become a part of said
merchants’, dealers’, or traders’ stock-in-trade in their regular place of
business, whether selling for present or future delivery, by sample or
otherwise, as the same are defined in this section.
   (l)   “Junk dealer” shall mean any person having a fixed place of business
in the City who engages in the business of buying, selling, or otherwise
dealing in or acquiring, old bottles, scraps, pieces of metal, rags, old rope,
or any old or used article not to be used in its former state or condition.
   (m)   “Newspaper, daily” shall mean daily newspapers with wire service and
news gathering media and with distribution principally to paid subscribers.
   (n)   “Personal loan by other than a pawnbroker” shall mean every person who
engages in the business of lending money, either for himself or for any other
person, upon personal security, evidences of debt, assignments of salary,
salary warranties, salary demands, automobiles, or any other personal property
and is required to be licensed by the State pursuant to the provisions of those
acts known as “California Small Loan Act” or the “Personal Property Brokers
Act.”
   (o)   “Person” shall mean and include all domestic and foreign corporations,
associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind,
clubs, Massachusetts businesses or common law trusts, societies, and
individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the City other than as
an employee.
   (p)   “Purchaser of commercial paper or factors” shall mean every person who
engages in the business of purchasing for himself, or any other person,
automobile contracts, commercial paper, evidences of debt, assignments of
salary, salary warranties, salary demands, time checks, or other evidences of
salary or to become due, where such person or the person he represents was not
a party to the originator of the loan document or in any way a contributor to
the original obligation.
   (q)   “Sale” shall include the transfer, in any manner or by any means
whatsoever, of title to property for a consideration; the serving, supplying,
or furnishing for a consideration of any property; and a transaction whereby
the possession of property is transferred and the seller retains the title as
security for the payment of the price. The definitions set forth in this
subsection shall not be deemed to exclude any transaction which is or which in
effect results in a sale within the contemplation of law.
   (r)   “Savings and loan association” shall mean any institution incorporated
to conduct, or conducting, the business of receiving and lending money in
accordance with the laws of the State or United States regulating savings and
loan associations.
   (s)   “Secondhand furniture dealer” shall mean any person dealing in,
buying, selling, or exchanging secondhand household furniture or household
goods only; provided, however, this definition shall not include any person,
firm, or corporation who handles or deals in secondhand household furniture or
household goods only as an incident to his regular business or one who conducts
or maintains a furniture store and whose principal business consists of buying,
selling, or dealing in new and unused household furniture or household goods.
   (t)   “Solicitor” shall mean any person who goes from place to place or from
house to house taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of, or seeking
to make concurrent sales and delivery of, goods, wares, and merchandise of any
nature whatsoever or for services to be furnished or performed, whether or not
such person has a sample or is collecting advance payments. “Solicitor” shall
include peddlers, hawkers, drummers, and canvassers. The provisions of this
chapter shall not apply to children under the age of sixteen (16) years engaged
in the solicitation or obtaining of subscriptions or advertising for, or sales
of newspapers or magazines published for the dissemination of local or
telegraphic news and intelligence of a general character and printed or
published at regular intervals.
   (u)   “Principal solicitor” shall mean a person who controls, employs,
supervises, manages, or otherwise exercises authority over one or more persons
engaged in activities which make them subject to the license tax. If a
principal solicitor should elect, the individual solicitor need not pay a
license tax but shall obtain a permit, and the principal solicitor shall pay a
license tax.
   (v)   “Sworn statement” shall mean an affidavit sworn before a person
authorized to take oaths or a declaration or certification made under penalty
of perjury.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970, as amended by § 12, Ord. 496-NS, eff.
October 10, 1974, and §§ 2 and 3, Ord. 1374-NS, eff. April 26, 2001)
Sec. 3-1.02. Revenue measure.
   The provisions of this chapter are enacted solely to raise revenue for
municipal purposes and are not intended for regulation.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970)
Sec. 3-1.03. Effect on other laws.
   Any person required by the provisions of this chapter to pay a business
license tax for transacting and carrying on any business shall not be relieved
from the payment of any other applicable tax or fee required by the provisions
of this Code and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of other
laws of the City.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970)
Sec. 3-1.04. Business tax certificates and business tax payments required.
   There are hereby imposed upon the business, professions, trades,
occupations, and callings set forth in this chapter business taxes in the
amounts set forth in this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person to
transact and carry on any business, trade, profession, occupation, or calling
in the City without first having procured a business tax certificate from the
City so to do and paying the tax set forth in this chapter or without complying
with any and all applicable provisions of this Code.
   (a)   Conflicts with United States and State laws. The provisions of this
chapter shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a business tax
certificate prior to doing business within the City if such requirement is
superseded by applicable laws of the United States or of the State. Any person
not required to obtain a business tax certificate prior to doing business
within the City nevertheless shall be liable for the payment of the tax imposed
by the provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   Any person not required to obtain a business tax certificate prior to
doing business within the City because of conflicts with applicable statutes of
the United States or the State shall be liable for payment of the tax imposed
by the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970)
Sec. 3-1.05. Business tax certificates: Issuance: Appeals: Hearings.
   (a)   Appeals: Filing. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Collector
with respect to the issuance or refusal to issue such certificate may appeal to
the Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within fifteen
(15) days after service of the notice of decision.
   (b)   Appeals: Hearings. The Council shall thereupon fix a time and place
for hearing such appeal. The hearing shall be held not later than thirty (30)
days from the date of filing the notice of appeal.
   (c)   Appeals: Hearings: Notices. The City Clerk shall give ten (10) days’
prior written notice to such person of the time and place of the hearing by
serving the notice personally or by depositing it in the United States Post
Office at Thousand Oaks, California, postage prepaid, addressed to such person
at his last known address.
   (d)   Appeals: Council action. The Council shall have the authority to
determine all questions raised on such appeal. The Council shall render its
decision not later than thirty (30) days following the date on which the
hearing is closed. No such determination shall conflict with any substantive
provision of this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970)
Sec. 3-1.06. Unlawful businesses not authorized.
   No business tax certificate issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, or the payment of any tax required under the provisions of this
chapter, shall be construed as authorizing the conduct or continuance of any
illegal business, or of a legal business in an illegal manner, or to conduct
within the City the business for which a business certificate has been issued
without complying with all the provisions of the laws of the City and State and
Federal laws, including, but not limited to, those requiring a permit from any
board, commission, department, or office of the City.
   The Collector shall not issue any business tax certificate, other than a
renewal business tax certificate, to any fixed place of business within the
City until such time as it is shown that the business has met the requirements
of the zoning, building, fire, health, and permit laws of the City. For the
purpose of providing the requisite evidence of such compliance, the Collector
shall provide the forms for the signature of the appropriate officers.
   Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall constitute
grounds for the refusal, suspension, or revocation of the business tax
certificate.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970)
Sec. 3-1.07. Branch establishments.
   A separate business tax certificate shall be obtained for each branch
establishment or location of the business transacted and carried on and for
each separate type or category of business at the same location. Each business
tax certificate shall authorize the holder to transact and carry on only the
business described thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such
business tax certificate; provided, however, warehouses used in connection with
or incidental to a business taxed under the provisions of this chapter shall
not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970)
Sec. 3-1.08. Evidence of doing business.
   When any person shall by use of signs, circulars, cards, telephone books, or
newspapers advertise, hold out, or by any other means represent that he is in
business in the City, or when any person holds an active license or permit
issued by a governmental agency indicating that he is in business in the City,
and such person fails to deny by a sworn statement given to the Collector that
such person is not conducting a business in the City after being requested to
do so by the Collector, then these facts shall be considered prima facie
evidence that such person is conducting a business in the City.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970)
Sec. 3-1.09. Constitutional apportionment.
   None of the business license taxes provided for in this chapter shall be so
applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative
of the equal protection and due process clauses of the Constitution of the
United States and the State. In any case where a business tax is believed by a
business tax certificate holder or applicant for a business tax certificate to
place an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of such
constitutional clauses, he may apply to the Collector for an adjustment of the
business tax. Such application may be made before, at, or within one year after
the payment of the prescribed business tax. The applicant shall, by sworn
statement and supporting testimony, show his method of business, his gross
volume or estimated gross volume of business, and such other information as the
Collector may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such
undue burden or violation. The Collector shall then conduct an investigation
and, after having first obtained the written approval of the City Attorney,
shall fix as the business tax for the applicant an amount that is reasonable
and nondiscriminatory or, if the business tax has already been paid, shall
order a refund of the amount over and above the business tax so fixed. In
fixing the business tax to be charged the Collector shall have the power to
base the business tax upon a percentage of gross receipts or any other measure
which will assure that the business tax assessed shall be uniform with that
assessed on businesses of like nature, so long as the amount assessed does not
exceed the business tax as prescribed by the provisions of this chapter. Should
the Collector determine the gross receipts measure of business tax to be the
proper basis, he may require the applicant to submit, either at the time of
termination of the applicant’s business in the City or at the end of each three
(3) month period, a sworn statement of the gross receipts and pay the amount of
business tax therefor; provided, however, no additional business tax during any
one calendar year shall be required after the business tax certificate holder
shall have paid an amount equal to the annual business tax as prescribed in
this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 12, 1970)
Sec. 3-1.10. Exemptions.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to apply to
any person transacting and carrying on any business exempt by virtue of the
Constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or of the State from
the payment of such taxes as are prescribed in this chapter.
   Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to the provisions of this section
shall file a sworn statement with the Collector stating the facts upon which an
exemption is claimed, and in the absence of such statement substantiating the
claim, such person shall be liable for the payment of the taxes imposed by this
chapter.
   The Collector shall, upon a proper showing contained in the sworn statement,
issue a business tax certificate to such person claiming an exemption pursuant
to the provisions of this section without payment to the City of the business
tax required by this chapter. Such certificate shall show on its face that it
is issued to an exempt holder pursuant to the provisions of this section.
   The Collector, after giving notice and a reasonable opportunity for a
hearing to a business tax certificate holder, may revoke any business tax
certificate granted pursuant to the provisions of this section upon proof that
the exempt holder of such business tax certificate is not entitled to the
exemption as provided in this section.
   (a)   Disabled veterans. No business tax payable pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter shall be payable by any honorably discharged soldier, sailor,
marine, or airman of the United States who suffers from a service-connected
disability and due to this disability is unable to obtain his livelihood by
means of manual labor and who is at the time of application a qualified voter
of the State; subject, however, to the following restrictions, limitations,
regulations and conditions:
   (1)   Every applicant shall furnish a certificate of physical disability
executed by a qualified surgeon of the armed forces and also proof of honorable
discharge.
   (2)   When an exempt business tax certificate is issued, it shall be
nontransferable and for the exclusive use of the named.
   (3)   The applicant shall furnish a recent photograph of sufficient size to
be attached to such business tax certificate at all times.
   (4)   The named shall identify himself whenever requested to do so by any
citizen, police officer, or by the Director of Finance or any of his deputies.
   (5)   Every business tax certificate issued pursuant to the provisions of
this section shall expire sixty (60) days from and after the date of issuance,
and a new business tax certificate may thereafter be issued pursuant to the
provisions of this section.
   (6)   It shall be unlawful for any person to transfer or convey the
certificates mentioned in subsection (1) of this subsection to any person for
the purpose of securing the business tax certificate required by the provisions
of this chapter.
   (7)   Failure to comply with any and all the restrictions, limitations,
regulations, and conditions of this subsection (a) shall be grounds for the
revocation of such business tax certificate and for refusing its renewal.
   (b)   Charitable, religious, and nonprofit organizations. Any applicant for
a business tax certificate to solicit funds for charitable, religious, or
nonprofit purposes shall be required to register with the License Department of
the City, identify himself, and establish his authority to act for the
charitable, religious, or nonprofit cause which he purports to represent. The
provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to require the
payment of a business tax certificate to conduct, manage, or carry on any
business, occupation, or activity of any institution or organization recognized
as a tax exempt institution or organization by the Franchise Tax Board of the
State or Internal Revenue Service of the United States carried on wholly for
the benefit of religious, charitable, or nonprofit purposes and from which
profit is not derived either directly or indirectly by any person. Nor shall
any business tax be required for the conducting of any entertainment, concert,
exhibition, or lecture on scientific, historical, literary, religious, or moral
subjects whenever the receipts or net proceeds of any such entertainment,
concert, exhibition, or lecture are appropriated or turned over to any
religious organization or school or to any bona fide religious or benevolent
purpose within the City; nor shall any business tax be required for the
conducting of any entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition, or lecture by any
religious, charitable, fraternal, educational, military, State, County, or
municipal organization or association whenever the receipts of any such
entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition, or lecture are to be appropriated
for the purpose and objects for which such organization or association was
formed and from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by
any individual, by any individual; provided, however, the provisions of this
section shall not be deemed to exempt any person, organization, or association
from complying with the provisions of this Code requiring a permit from the
Council or any commission or officer to conduct, manage, or carry on any
profession, trade, calling, or occupation.
   Such exemption shall not be construed to extend to any person, business,
corporation or organization receiving a fee, wage, stipend, salary, emolument,
remuneration, compensation, or pay for the performance of the business,
occupation, or activity. Any such person, business, corporation, or
organization shall be subject to the business tax provisions of this chapter.
The person, business, corporation, or organization shall deduct the appropriate
business tax from the moneys conveyed for services rendered and shall cause the
same to be conveyed to the Director of Finance prior to the business,
occupation, or activity being undertaken.
   (1)   Volunteer workers receiving no remuneration whatsoever shall be exempt
from the business tax provisions of this chapter.
   (2)   Any employee or servitor of a religious organization within the City
shall be exempt from the business tax for the service or activity performed.
   (c)   Part-time occupations. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply
to any natural person engaged in the business, trade, occupation, or calling of
part-time household servant or similar domestic worker, or to any minor under
the age of eighteen (18) or adult over the age of sixty-five (65) engaged in
any part-time occupation provided the gross income of such natural person,
minor, or adult over sixty-five (65) from the business, trade occupation, or
calling does not exceed One Thousand Two Hundred and no/100ths ($1,200.00)
Dollars per year.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1392-NS, eff.
June 7, 2002)
Sec. 3-1.11. Effect of other fees paid.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to impose a business
tax on any holder of any franchise from the City where the holder of the
franchise pays fees to the City by virtue of an obligation imposed by the
franchise.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970)
Sec. 3-1.12. Contents of business tax certificates.
   Every person required to have a business tax certificate pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall make an application, for the same to the
Collector of the City, and, upon the payment of the prescribed business tax,
the Collector shall issue to such person a business tax certificate which shall
contain the following information:
   (a)   The name of the person to whom the business tax certificate is issued;
   (b)   The business taxed;
   (c)   The place where such business is to be transacted and carried on;
   (d)   The date of the expiration of such business tax certificate; and
   (e)   Such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter.
   Whenever the business tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
is measured by the number of vehicles, devices, machines, or other pieces of
equipment used, or whenever the business tax is measured by the gross receipts
from the operation of such items, the Collector shall issue only one business
tax certificate; provided, however, the Collector may issue for each tax period
for which the business tax has been paid one identification sticker, tag,
plate, or symbol for each item included in the measure of the tax or used in a
business where the tax is measured by the gross receipts from such items.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970)
Sec. 3-1.13. First business tax certificates: Applications.
   Upon a person making an application for the first business tax certificate
to be issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or for a newly
established business, such person shall furnish to the Collector a sworn
statement, upon a form provided by the Collector, setting forth the following
information:
   (a)   The exact nature or kind of business for which a business tax
certificate is requested;
   (b)   The place where such business is to be carried on and, if the same is
not to be carried on at any permanent place of business, the places of
residence of the owners of the business;
   (c)   In the event an application is made for the issuance of a business tax
certificate to a corporation or a partnership, the application shall set forth
the names and places of residence of the officers and partners thereof;
   (d)   In the event an application is made for the issuance of a business tax
certificate to a person doing business under a fictitious name, the application
shall set forth the names and places of residence of those owning the business;
   (e)   In all cases where the amount of business tax to be paid is measured
by gross receipts, the application shall set forth such information as may be
therein required and as may be necessary to determine the amount of the
business tax to be paid by the applicant; and
   (f)   Any further relevant information which the Collector may require to
enable him to issue the type of business tax certificate applied for.
   If the amount of the business tax to be paid by the applicant is measured by
gross receipts, he shall estimate the gross receipts for the period to be
covered by the business tax certificate to be issued. Such estimate, if
accepted by the Collector as reasonable, shall be used in determining the
amount of business tax to be paid by the applicant.
   The Collector shall not issue to any such person another business tax
certificate for the same or any other business until such person shall have
furnished to the Collector the sworn statement and paid the business tax
required by the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970)
Sec. 3-1.14. Renewal business tax certificates.
   In all cases the applicant for the renewal of a business tax certificate
shall submit to the Collector for his guidance in ascertaining the amount of
the business tax to be paid by the applicant a sworn statement, upon a form to
be provided by the Collector, setting forth such information concerning the
applicant’s business during the preceding year as may be required by the
Collector to enable him to ascertain the amount of the business tax to be paid
by such applicant pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970)
Sec. 3-1.15. Statements and records.
   No statement shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor
shall the filing of the same preclude the City from collecting by appropriate
action such sum as is actually due and payable pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.
   Such statement and each of the several items therein contained shall be
subject to audit and verification by the Collector, his deputies, or authorized
employees of the City who are hereby authorized to examine, audit, and inspect
such books and records of any business tax certificate as may be necessary, in
their judgment, to verify or ascertain the amount of business tax due.
   All persons subject to the provisions of this chapter shall keep complete
records of business transactions, including sales, receipts, purchases, and
other expenditures, and shall retain all such records for examination by the
Collector. Such records shall be maintained for a period of at least three (3)
years. No person required to keep records pursuant to the provisions of this
section shall refuse to allow authorized representatives of the Collector to
examine such records of reasonable times and places.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970)
Sec. 3-1.16. Information confidential.
   It shall be unlawful for the Collector or any person having an
administrative duty under the provisions of this chapter to make known in any
manner whatever information pertaining to the business affairs or operations,
or other information, obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of
any person required to obtain a business tax certificate or pay a business tax
or of any other person visited or examined in the discharge of an official
duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any
particular thereof, set forth in any statement or application, or to permit any
statement or application, or copy of either, or any book containing any
abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person; provided,
however, nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent:
   (a)   The disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment by,
another City official, employee, or agent for the sole purpose of administering
or enforcing any provisions of this chapter or collecting taxes imposed by the
provisions of this chapter;
   (b)   The disclosure of information to, or the examination of records by,
Federal or State officials or the tax officials of another city or county, or
city and county, if a reciprocal arrangement exists, or to a grand jury or
court of law upon subpoena;
   (c)   The disclosure of information and results of examination of records of
particular taxpayers, and relating to particular taxpayers, to a court of law
in a proceeding brought to determine the existence or amount of any business
tax liability of the particular taxpayers to the City;
   (d)   The disclosure, after the filing of a written request to that effect,
to the taxpayer himself, or to his successors, receivers, trustees, executors,
administrators, assignees, and guarantors, if directly interested, of
information as to the items included in the measure of any paid tax, any unpaid
tax, or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest, and penalties;
provided, however, the City Attorney shall approve each such disclosure, and
the Collector may refuse to make any disclosure referred to in this subsection
when in his opinion the public interest would suffer thereby;
   (e)   The disclosure of the names and addresses of persons to whom business
tax certificates have been issued and the general type or nature of their
business;
   (f)   The disclosure by way of public meeting or otherwise of such
information as may be necessary in order to permit it to be fully advised as to
the facts when a taxpayer files a claim for refund of business taxes, or
submits an offer of compromise with regard to a claim asserted against him by
the City for business taxes, or when acting upon any other matter;
   (g) The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or
business done in the City; or
   (h)   The disclosure of information and examination of records of any
business tax certificate holder who is a litigant in any lawsuit involving the
City and such information is relevant to the issues in such lawsuit.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970)
Sec. 3-1.17. Failure to file statements or corrected statements.
   If any person fails to file any required statement within the time
prescribed, or, if after demand therefor made by the Collector, such person
fails to file a corrected statement, or if any person subject to the tax
imposed by the provisions of this chapter fails to apply for a business tax
certificate, the Collector may determine the amount of business tax due from
such person by means of such information as he may be able to obtain.
   If the Collector is not satisfied with the information supplied in
statements or applications filed, he may determine the amount of any business
tax due by means of any relevant information he may be able to obtain.
   If such determination is made, the Collector shall give a notice of the
amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United
States Post Office at Thousand Oaks, California, postage prepaid, addressed to
the person so assessed at his last known address. Such person, may, within
fifteen (15) days after the mailing or serving of such notice, make application
in writing to the Collector for a hearing on the amount of the business tax. If
such application is made, the Collector shall cause the matter to be set for
hearing before the Council. The Collector shall give at least ten (10) days’
notice to such person of the time and place of the hearing in the manner set
forth in this section for serving notices of assessment. The Council shall
consider all relevant evidence produced and shall make findings thereon which
shall be final. Notice of such findings shall be served upon the applicant in
the manner set forth in this section for serving notices of assessment.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970)
Sec. 3-1.18. Certificates of occupancy, fire inspections, health clearances,
and zone clearances.
   No person, firm, or corporation may commence any business in any new
structure or in any structure previously occupied by another business or person
without first having obtained the following:
   (a)   A certificate of occupancy, or temporary certificate of occupancy, or
a waiver of such certificate from the Community Development Department;
   (b)   A health clearance or a waiver of the same from the Health Officer
when the business is that of manufacturing, preparing, storing, serving,
selling, offering for sale, or donating any food for human consumption; and
   (c)   A zoning clearance from the Community Development Director.
   Prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy, the Building Official
may request the Fire Department, to cause an inspection to be made of the
subject property for compliance with fire regulations. The responsible officer
in the Fire Department, upon receiving such request, shall cause such
inspection to be made and shall set forth his findings in writing to the
Community Development Department within five (5) days.
   The Director of Finance shall notify the applicant of the certificate of
occupancy requirement at the time of application and, upon receipt of the
inspection fee, may process the application. In the event a certificate of
occupancy is not issued, the Building Official Director shall notify the
Director of Finance of such fact, who shall suspend any business tax
certificate issued.
   The applicant shall deposit with the Director of Finance, in addition to the
minimum business tax set forth in this chapter, the sum as specified in the
City's Master Fee Resolution for each initial or first application by such
business, firm, corporation, or person for a certificate of occupancy. Such fee
shall not be refundable.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970, § 1, Ord. 1478-NS, eff. July 1, 2007)
Sec. 3-1.18.1. Suspension and revocation of right to engage in business.
   (a)   Grounds. The right or privilege to engage in business may be suspended
or revoked only when it shall appear that such business is being conducted or
the premises used in violation of any law of the State or the City, or the
premises are being used for a purpose wholly or partially foreign to that for
which the certificate of payment was issued.
   (b)   Power to suspend. The Health Officer, Building Inspector, or Director
of Finance may suspend any approval issued or granted by such officer for
violation of the provisions of any law of the State or the City or other
applicable law or regulation. In such event, such officer shall, in writing,
immediately notify the permittee and the Director of Finance of such
suspension. When any privilege to engage in business has been suspended as
provided in this section, all rights of the person affected to engage in such
business at the premises where the violation occurred shall be suspended
effective upon receipt of the notice of suspension.
   (c)   Suspensions: Appeals. Within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the
notice of suspension, any person aggrieved may file with the Director of
Finance a written request for a review of such suspension pursuant to the
provisions of Section
3-1.05 of this chapter. The provisions of said Section
3-1.05 shall govern all appeals pursuant to the provisions of this section.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970)
Sec. 3-1.19. Additional powers of the Collector.
   In addition to all other powers conferred upon him, the Collector shall have
the power, for good cause shown, to extend the time for filing any required
sworn statement or application for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days and
in such case to waive any penalty which would otherwise have accrued.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970)
Sec. 3-1.20. Business tax certificates nontransferable:  Change locations and
ownership.
   No business tax certificate issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall be transferable; provided, however, where a business tax
certificate is issued authorizing a person to transact and carry on a business
at a particular place, such business tax certificate holder may, upon
application therefore and paying a fee as specified in the City's Master Fee
Resolution, have the business tax certificate amended to authorize the transfer
of such business tax certificate to some other lawfully approved location to
which the business is or is to be moved; and provided, further, that transfer,
whether by sale or otherwise, to another person under such circumstances that
the real or ultimate ownership after the transfer is substantially similar to
the ownership existing before the transfer shall not be prohibited by the
provisions of this section. For the purposes of this section, stockholders,
bondholders, or other entities included within the definition of a person are
regarded as having the real or ultimate ownership of such corporation or other
entity.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970,§ 2, Ord. 1478-NS, eff. July 1, 2007)
Sec. 3-1.21. Duplicate business tax certificates.
   A duplicate business tax certificate may be issued by the City to replace
any business tax certificate previously issued pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter which has been lost or destroyed upon the business tax certificate
holder filing a statement of such fact and, at the time of filing such
statement, paying the City a duplicate fee as specified in the City's Master
Fee Resolution.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1478-NS, eff.
July 1, 2007)
Sec. 3-1.22. Posting and keeping business tax certificates.
   (a)   Any business tax certificate holder transacting and carrying on
business at a fixed place of business in the City shall keep the business tax
certificate posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business
is carried on.
   (b)   Any business tax certificate holder transacting and carrying on
business but not operating at a fixed place of business in the City shall keep
the business tax certificate upon his person at all times while transacting and
carrying on the business for which the certificate is issued.
   (c)   Whenever identifying stickers, tags, plates, or symbols have been
issued for each vehicle, device, machine, or other piece of equipment included
in the measure of a business tax, the person to whom such stickers, tags,
plates, or symbols have been issued shall keep firmly affixed upon each
vehicle, device, machine, or piece of equipment the identifying sticker, tag,
plate, or symbol which has been issued therefor at such locations as are
designated by the Collector. Such sticker, tag, plate, or symbol shall not be
removed from any vehicle, device, machine, or piece of equipment kept in use
during the period for which the sticker, tag, plate, or symbol is issued.
   (d)   No person shall fail to affix as required by the provisions of this
section any identifying sticker, tag, plate, or symbol to the vehicle, device,
machine, or piece of equipment for which the identification has been issued at
the location designated by the Collector. No person shall give away, sell, or
transfer such identifying sticker, tag, plate, or symbol to another person or
permit its use by another person.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970)
Sec. 3-1.23. Business taxes: How and when payable.
   Unless otherwise specifically provided, all annual business taxes provided
for in this chapter shall be due and payable in advance on January 1 each year
and shall be deemed delinquent sixty (60) days following.
   New businesses which pay business taxes in accordance with the provisions of
Section 3-1.32 of this chapter and commence operations during the tax year
shall pay a business tax for the remaining quarters or quarter of the year,
whichever is greater.
   The business tax for any annual business tax certificate issued in January,
February, or March shall be 100 percent of such tax; for any business tax
certificate issued in April, May, or June, seventy-five (75%) percent of such
tax; in July, August, or September, fifty (50%) percent of such tax; and in
October, November or December, twenty-five (25%) percent of such tax. However,
no prorated gross receipts business tax shall be less than Ten and no/100ths
($10.00) Dollars.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, business taxes, other than
annual, provided for in this chapter shall be due and payable as follows:
   (a)   Semiannual, on January 1 and July 1 of each year;
   (b)   Quarterly on January 1, April 1, July 1, and October 1 of each year;
   (c)   Monthly on the first day of each and every month;
   (d)   Weekly flat rate on Monday of each week in advance; and
   (e)   Daily flat rate each day in advance.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970, as amended by § 1, Ord. 241-NS, eff.
November 25, 1971)
Sec. 3-1.24. Delinquent taxes: Penalties.
   For failure to pay a business tax prior to the delinquency date, the
Director of Finance shall add a penalty of Ten and no/100ths ($10.00) Dollars
or ten (10%) percent of such business tax, whichever is the greater, on the
last day of each month after the delinquency thereof; provided, however, the
amount of such penalty to be added shall in no event exceed Ten and no/100ths
($10.00) Dollars or the amount of the business tax due, whichever is the
greater.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970)
Sec. 3-1.25. Penalties for violations.
   Any person knowingly violating any of the provisions of this chapter
relating to the requirements of procuring a business tax certificate, or the
requirements for displaying a business tax certificate, or the requirements for
providing and certifying information required by this chapter, or knowingly
misrepresenting to any officer or employee of the City any material fact in
providing the information required by this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
violation of this Code pursuant to Section 1-2.01 of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of
this Code.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970, as amended by § III, Ord. 770-NS,
eff. February 26, 1981)
Sec. 3-1.26. Refunds of overpayments.
   No refund of an overpayment of taxes imposed by the provisions of this
chapter shall be required unless a claim for a refund is filed with the
Collector within a period of one year from the last day of the calendar month
following the period for which the overpayment was made, and all such claims
for refunds of amounts of overpayment shall be filed with the Collector on
forms furnished by him and in the manner prescribed by him. When the Collector
determines from the evidence presented to him that an overpayment has been
made, the Collector may refund the amount overpaid.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970)
Sec. 3-1.27. Enforcement.
   It shall be the duty of the Collector, and he is hereby directed, to enforce
each and all of the provisions of this chapter. The Chief of Police shall
render such assistance in the enforcement of such provisions as may from time
to time be required by the Collector or the Council.
   The Collector, in the exercise of the duties imposed upon him by the
provisions of this chapter, and acting through his deputies or duly authorized
assistants, shall examine, or cause to be examined, all places of business in
the City to ascertain whether the provisions of this chapter have been complied
with.
   The Collector and each and all of his assistants and any police officer of
the City shall have the power and authority to enter, free of charge, at any
reasonable time, any place of business required to procure a business tax
certificate and demand an exhibition of such certificate. Any person having
such business tax certificate theretofore issued in his possession or under his
control who wilfully fails to exhibit the same on demand shall be guilty of a
violation of this Code pursuant to Section 1-2.01 of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of
this Code. It shall be the duty of the Collector and each of his assistants to
seek a complaint from the appropriate authority to be filed against any and all
persons found to be violating any of such provisions.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970, as amended by § IV, Ord. 770-NS, eff.
February 26, 1981)
Sec. 3-1.28. Business taxes a debt.
   The amount of any business tax and penalty imposed by the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed a debt to the City. An action may be commenced in the
name of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any
delinquent business tax and penalties.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970)
Sec. 3-1.29. Remedies cumulative.
   All remedies prescribed for violations of the provisions of this chapter
shall be cumulative, and the use of one or more remedies by the City shall not
bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing such provisions.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970)
Sec. 3-1.30. Effect of provisions on past actions: Unexpired business tax
certificates.
   Neither the adoption of this chapter nor the superseding by such provisions
of any portion of any other law of the City shall in any manner be construed to
affect the prosecution for a violation of any other law, which violation was
committed prior to December 4, 1970, nor be construed as a waiver of any
business tax or any penal provision applicable to any such violation, nor be
construed to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit required by any
law to be posted, filed, or deposited, and all rights and obligations thereunto
appertaining shall continue in full force and effect.
   Where a business tax certificate for revenue purposes has been issued to any
person by the business for which the business tax certificate was issued under
the provisions of any law heretofore enacted, and the term of such business tax
certificate has not expired, then the business tax prescribed for such business
by the provisions of this chapter shall not be payable until the expiration of
the term of such unexpired business tax certificate.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970)
Sec. 3-1.31. Rules and regulations.
   The Collector may promulgate rules and regulations consistent with the
provisions of this chapter as may be necessary or desirable to aid in the
interpretation and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970)
Sec. 3-1.32. Business taxes: Gross receipts.
   Every person who engages in business at a fixed place of business within the
City shall pay an annual business tax based upon gross receipts at the rates
calculated to the nearest cent as set forth for the following classifications:
Gross Receipts   Tax
$0 – $15,000   $20.00
15,001 – 30,00025.00
30,001 – 45,00030.00
45,001 – 60,00035.00
60,001 – 75,00040.00
75,001 – 90,00045.00
90,001 – 105,0050.00
 
Gross Receipts Tax
Gross         Tax
Receipts
105,001 –   60.00
130,000
130,001 –   70.00
155,000
155,001 –   80.00
180,000
180,001 –   90.00
205,000
205,001 –   100.00
255,000
255,001 –   110.00
305,000
305,001 –   120.00
355,000
355,001 –   130.00
405,000
405,001 –   140.00
455,000
455,001 –   150.00
505,000
505,001 –   190.00
605,000
605,001 –   230.00
705,000
705,001 –   270.00
805,000
805,001 –   310.00
905,000
905,001 –   350.00
1,000,000
1,000,001 – 350.00, plus 24¢ per thousand dollars of gross receipts in excess of
2,000,000     $1,000,000.00
2,000,001 – 590.00, plus 20¢ per thousand dollars of gross receipts in excess of
3,000,000     $2,000,000.00
3,000,001 – 790.00, plus 16¢ per thousand dollars of gross receipts in excess of
4,000,000     $3,000,000.00
4,000,001 – 950.00, plus 12¢ per thousand dollars of gross receipts in excess of
5,000,000     $4,000,000.00
5,000,001 and 1,070.00, plus 8¢ per thousand dollars of gross receipts in excess of
over          $5,000,000.00
 
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970, as amended by § II, Ord. 241-NS, eff.
November 25, 1971)
Sec. 3-1.33. Classifications: Procedure for review.
   In any case where a business tax certificate holder or an applicant for a
business tax certificate believes that his individual business is not assigned
to the proper classification pursuant to the provisions of this chapter because
of circumstances peculiar to it, as distinguished from other businesses of the
same kind, he may apply to the Collector for reclassification. Such application
shall contain such relevant information as the Collector may deem necessary and
require in order to determine whether the applicant's individual business is
properly classified. The Collector shall then conduct an investigation
following which he shall assign the applicant’s individual business to the
classification shown to be proper on the basis of such investigation. The
proper classification is that classification which, in the opinion of the
Collector, most nearly fits the applicant’s individual business. The
reclassification shall not be retroactive but shall apply at the time of the
next regularly ensuing calculation of the applicant's tax. No business shall be
classified more than once in one year.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970)
Sec. 3-1.34. Classifications: Notices of action: Procedure for hearings.
   The Collector shall notify the applicant of the action taken on the
application for reclassification. Such notice shall be given by serving it
personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office at Thousand
Oaks, California, postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at his last-known
address. Such applicant may, within fifteen (15) days after the mailing or
serving of such notice, make a written request to the Collector for a hearing
on his application for reclassification. If such request is made within the
time prescribed, the Collector shall cause the matter to be set for hearing
before the Council within thirty (30) days. The Collector shall give the
applicant at least ten (10) days’ notice of the time and place of the hearing
in the manner provided in this section for serving notices of the action taken
on the application for reclassification. The Council shall consider all
evidence adduced, and its findings thereon shall be final. Written notices of
such findings shall be served upon the applicant in the manner provided in this
section for serving notices of the action taken on the application for
reclassification.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970)
Sec. 3-1.35. Business taxes: Flat rates.
   Every person transacting and carrying on the businesses set forth in this
section shall pay a business tax as follows:
   (a)   Principal solicitors.
   (1)   With a fixed place of business or residence in the City, each, Two
Hundred Fifty and no/100ths ($250.00) Dollars annually; and
   (2) With no fixed place of business or residence in the City, each, Three
Hundred Fifty and no /100ths ($350.00) Dollars annually;
   (b)   Solicitors.
   (1)   With a fixed place of business or domicile in the City, Fifteen and
no/100ths ($15.00) Dollars annually; and
   (2)   With no fixed place of business or domicile in the City, Ten and no/
100ths ($10.00) Dollars per day, Twenty-five and no/ 100ths ($25.00) Dollars
per week, Fifty and no/100ths ($50.00) Dollars per month, One Hundred and no/
100ths ($100.00) Dollars per quarter, or One Hundred Fifty and no/100ths
($150.00) Dollars per year;
   (c)   Carnivals, itinerant shows, and rodeos.
   (1)   (Repealed by § III, Ord. 241-NS, eff. November 25, 1971)
   (d)   Motor vehicles for hire, with drivers.
   (1)   Taxicabs, Twenty-five and no/100ths ($25.00) Dollars per vehicle
annually;
   (2)   Commercial buses, Fifty and no/100ths ($50.00) Dollars per vehicle
annually; and
   (3)   All other types of commercial vehicles for hire, with drivers, Fifty
and no/100ths ($50.00) Dollars per vehicle annually.
   (e)   Delivery trucks and service vehicles. With no fixed place of business
in the City, Thirty-Five and no/100ths ($35.00) Dollars per vehicle annually;
   (f)   Contractors. Sixty-Seven and 50/100ths ($67.50) Dollars annually;
   (g)   Delivery by vehicle: Optional fleet rate. One Hundred and no/100ths
($100.00) Dollars per year;
   (h)   Itinerant or transient merchants. Ten and no/100ths ($10.00) Dollars
per day, Twenty-Five and no/100ths ($25.00) Dollars per week, Fifty and no/
100ths ($50.00) Dollars per month, One Hundred and no/100ths ($100.00) Dollars
per quarter, or One Hundred Fifty and no/100ths ($150.00) Dollars per year; and
   (i)   Garbage and rubbish collectors. One Hundred and no/100ths ($100.00)
Dollars per truck per year.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970, as amended by § III, Ord. 241-NS,
eff. November 25, 1971, § 1, Ord. 886-NS, eff. March 19, 1985)
Sec. 3-1.36. Severability.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the
decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The Council hereby
declares that it would have adopted this chapter and each section, subsection,
sentence, clause, phrase, or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any
one or more sections, subsections, clauses, phrases, or portions be declared
invalid or unconstitutional.
(§ 2, Ord. 176-NS, eff. December 4, 1970)
CHAPTER 2. BILLIARD ROOMS
(Sections 3-2.01 through 3-2. 1 0, recodified from Section 2241 through 2250,
T.O.O.C., as added by Ordinance No. 158, repealed by Section IV, Ordinance No.
241-NS, effective November 25, 1971)
CHAPTER 3. CARD ROOMS
Sec. 3-3.01. Defined.
   For the purposes of this chapter, “card room” shall mean any business house,
house, room, apartment, or place in which the playing of cards for money,
checks, chips, credit, or other representative of value is conducted or carried
on.
(§ 6140, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 158)
Sec. 3-3.02. Prohibited.
   No person shall keep, conduct, or maintain a card room or knowingly permit
any building, room, or place owned by him or under his charge or control to be
used as a card room, except for the carrying on of card games in private homes
for purely social purposes.
(§§ 6141 and 6142, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 158, as amended by § XXIV, Ord.
241-NS, eff. November 25, 1971, and § 4, Ord. 1374-NS, eff. April 26, 2001)
Sec. 3-3.03. Permits nontransferable.
(§ 6143, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 158, as amended by § XXIV, Ord. 241-NS,
eff. November 25, 1971, repealed by § 5, Ord. 1374-NS, eff. April 26, 2001)
Sec. 3-3.04. Hours of operation.
(§ 6145, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 158, repealed by § 5, Ord. 1374-NS, eff.
April 26, 2001)
Sec. 3-3.05. Minors.
(§ 6144, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 158, repealed by § 5, Ord. 1374-NS, eff.
April 26, 2001)
CHAPTER 4. CLAIMS AND DEMANDS
Sec. 3-4.01. Authority.
   The provisions of this chapter are enacted pursuant to the general claim
procedures applicable to local public agencies, including the City, which
procedures are governed by the provisions of Chapter 1 of Division 3.6 of the
Government Code of the State, commencing with Section 900 and following.
(§ 1, Ord. 192)
Sec. 3-4.02. Procedures.
   Pursuant to the authority contained in Section 935 of the Government Code of
the State, the following claims procedures are established for those claims
against the City for money or damages not now governed by State or local laws:
   (a)   Employee claims. Notwithstanding the exceptions contained in Section
905 of the Government Code of the State, all claims by public officers or
employees for fees, salaries, wages, overtime pay, holiday pay, compensating
time off or vacation pay, sick leave pay, and any other expenses or allowances
claimed due from the City, when a procedure for processing such claims is not
otherwise provided by State or local laws, shall be presented within the time
limitations and in the manner prescribed in Sections 910 through 915.2 of the
Government Code of the State. Such claims shall further be subject to the
provisions of Section 945.4 of said Government Code relating to the prohibition
of suit in the absence of presentation of claims and action thereon by the
Council.
   (b)   Contract and other claims. In addition to the requirements of
subsection (a) of this section, and notwithstanding the exemptions set forth in
Section 905 of the Government Code of the State, all claims against the City
for damages or money, when a procedure for processing such claims is not
otherwise provided by State or local laws, shall be presented within the time
limitations and in the manner prescribed in Sections 910 through 915.2 of said
Government Code. Such claims shall further be subject to the provisions of
Section 945.4 of the Government Code of the State relating to the prohibition
of suit in the absence of presentation of claims and action thereon by the
Council.
(§ 2, Ord. 192)
Sec. 3-4.03. Filing.
   All claims or demands against the City shall be filed with the City Clerk
and shall be presented by him to the Council at the next regular meeting
thereof for approval or rejection, whether in whole or in part, if such
presentation is required by law.
(§ 3, Ord. 192)
Sec. 3-4.04. Claims covered by insurance.
   All claims filed with the City Clerk which are covered by insurance shall be
forwarded by him after action thereon by the Council to the appropriate
insurance carrier for handling and further processing.
(§ 4, Ord. 192)
Sec. 3-4.05. Payment.
   If the Council approves a claim or demand in whole or in part, the Director
of Finance shall cause a warrant to be drawn upon the City treasury for the
amount allowed. In addition to the signature of the Director of Finance, the
signature of the City Treasurer shall be required upon all checks, drafts, or
warrants issued for and on behalf of the City.
(§ 5, Ord. 192)
Sec. 3-4.06. Payment: Approval.
   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to approve and pay all claims
against the City found by him to be covered by appropriated and unencumbered
funds of the City and to be in compliance with law, except for those claims
required by law to be approved by the Council, and to sign all checks, drafts,
or warrants for and on behalf of the City for the payment of claims. In
addition to the signature of the Director of Finance, the signature of the City
Treasurer shall be required upon all checks, drafts, or warrants issued for and
on behalf of the City.
(§ 6, Ord. 192)
Sec. 3-4.07. Facsimile signatures.
   Facsimile signatures on checks, drafts, or warrants of the City in lieu of
personal signatures are hereby authorized.
(§ 7, Ord. 192)
CHAPTER 5. FUNDS
Article 1. Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund
Sec. 3-5.101. Created.
   To comply with the provisions of Section 2113 of Chapter 3 of Division 3 of
the Streets and Highways Code of the State, there is hereby created in the City
treasury a special fund to be known as the “Special Gas Tax Street Improvement
Fund.”
(§ 1, Ord. 25)
Sec. 3-5.102. Deposits.
   All moneys received by the City from the State pursuant to the provisions of
the Streets and Highways Code of the State for the acquisition of real property
or interests therein for, or for engineering, or for the construction,
maintenance, or improvement of streets or highways by the City shall be paid
into such fund.
(§ 2, Ord. 25)
Sec. 3-5.103. Expenditures.
   All moneys in such fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes
authorized by, and subject to the provisions of, Sections 2107 through 2116 of
Chapter 3 of Division 3 of the Streets and Highways Code of the State.
(§ 3, Ord. 25)
Article 2. Tree Trust Fund
 
(Sections 3-5.201 through 3-5.203, codified from Ordinance No. 180, repealed by
Section 4, Ordinance No. 1250-NS, effective January 9, 1996)
Article 3. Planned Local Drainage Fund No. 1
 
(Sections 3-5.301 and 3-5.302, codified from Ordinance No. 184, repealed by
Section 1, Ordinance No. 313-NS, effective November 2, 1972)
CHAPTER 6. JUNK COLLECTORS, JUNK,
SECONDHAND, AND ANTIQUE DEALERS, AND PAWNBROKERS*
*   The title of Chapter 6, formerly entitled “Junk Collectors, Junk and
Secondhand Dealers, and Pawnbrokers,” amended by Section 1, Ordinance No. 743-
NS, effective April 17, 1980.
Sec. 3-6.01. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Junk collector” shall mean any person not having a fixed place of
business in the City who goes from house to house or place to place collecting,
buying, selling, or otherwise dealing in junk, such as old rags, bottles, cans,
papers, metal, or machinery which has been discarded or scrapped, and other
similar things.
   (b)   “Junk dealer” shall mean any person having a fixed place of business
in the City who engages in the business of buying, selling, or dealing in,
either at wholesale or retail, junk, such as old rags, sacks, bottles, cans,
paper, metal, or machinery which has been discarded or scrapped, and other
similar things.
   (c)   “Pawnbroker” shall mean any person who conducts or manages the
business of loaning money upon personal property, pawns, or pledges or who
conducts or manages the business of purchasing articles of personal property or
reselling or agreeing to resell such articles to the vendor or his assignee at
prices agreed upon at or before the time of purchase.
   (d)   “Secondhand dealer or antique dealer” shall mean any person who buys,
sells, or deals in secondhand or previously owned goods, wares, or merchandise,
other than motor vehicles or junk, including jewelry and precious and
semiprecious stones and metals. A person who accepts secondhand goods, wares,
or merchandise in part payment coincidentally with the sale by him of new
goods, wares, or merchandise in the regular course of his business shall not,
with respect to such goods, wares, and merchandise so acquired, be deemed to be
a secondhand dealer.
(§§ 2321.1, 2322.1, 2323.1, and 2324.1, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 158, as
amended by § 2, Ord. 743-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 3-6.02. Permits: Required.
   No person may engage in the following business without first obtaining a
permit:
   (a)   Junk collector;
   (b)   Junk dealer;
   (c)   Pawnbroker;
   (d)   Secondhand dealer; and
   (e)   Antique dealer.
(§§ 2321, 2322, 2323, and 2324, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 158, as amended by §
XXIV, Ord. 241-NS, eff. November 25, 1971, and § 3, Ord. 742-NS, eff. April 17,
1980)
Sec. 3-6.03. Permits: Applications: Form.
   Any person desiring to obtain a permit required by the provisions of Section
3-6.02 of this chapter shall make a written application to the Chief of Police
and submit the following information:
   (a)   The name and residence address of the applicant and the address of the
place, if any, where such business is to be carried on;
   (b)   The name under which the business is to be conducted; and
   (c)   The names and addresses of all persons having an interest in the
business.
(§ 2325, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 158, as amended by § XXIV, Ord. 241-NS,
eff. November 25, 1971)
Sec. 3-6.04. Permits: Applications: Approval.
   If the Chief of Police finds that the application provided for in Section 3-
6.03 of this chapter complies with all the requirements of this chapter, he
shall approve the application.
(§ 2326, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 158, as amended by § XXIV, Ord. 241-NS,
eff. November 25, 1971)
Sec. 3-6.05. Permits: Fees.
   The fee for obtaining the permit required by the provisions of this chapter
shall be as specified in the City’s Master Fee Resolution.
(§ 2328, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 158, as amended by § V, Ord. 241-NS, eff.
November 25, 1971, and § 4, Ord. 743-NS, eff. April 17, 1980, as amended by
part 1, Ord. 1434-NS, eff. July 1, 2005)
Sec. 3-6.06. Permits: Revocation: Reissuance.
   If any permit required by the provisions of this chapter is revoked after
issuance, no new permit may be granted to such permittee to carry on or conduct
such business within three (3) months after the date of revocation.
(§ 2327, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 158, as amended by § XXIV, Ord. 241-NS,
eff. November 25, 1971)
Sec. 3-6.07. Separate businesses.
   If any person shall engage in more than one of the businesses regulated by
the provisions of this chapter, such person shall be deemed to be engaged in
each such business separate and apart from the other such business. Such person
shall comply in all respects with the provisions of this chapter relating to
each such business.
(§ 2336, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 158)
Sec. 3-6.08. Separate locations: Junk, secondhand, and antique dealers.
   If any person shall engage in the business of junk dealer, secondhand
dealer, and antique dealer or either of such businesses at more than one
location within the City, such person shall be deemed to be engaged in a
separate and distinct business at each location and shall comply in all
respects with the provisions of this chapter relating to the business carried
on at each separate location.
(§ 2337, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 158, as amended by § 5, Ord. 743-NS, eff.
April 17, 1980)
Sec. 3-6.09. Reports of purchases and receipts.
   On each day, before 2:00 p.m., every junk dealer, junk collector,
pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or antique dealer shall make and deliver to the
Chief of Police a full, true, and complete report of all goods, wares, and
merchandise purchased or received during the preceding day. The report shall
contain such other information as the Chief of Police may require to carry out
the intent of this chapter. The following shall be exempted from the reporting
requirements of this section; purchases or receipts made at a properly licensed
auction; made by the dealer, collector, or broker while outside the City
limits; and made from another properly licensed dealer, collector, or broker.
The blank forms for such reports shall be supplied by the office of the Chief
of Police.
(§§ 2329, 2329.2, and 2329.3, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 158, as amended by §
6, Ord. 743-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 3-6.10. Reports of purchases and receipts: Filing by Chief of Police.
   The Chief of Police shall maintain a file of all the reports of purchases
and receipts. The files shall be open to inspection by any peace officer or law
enforcement officer within the County or to other persons upon an order of a
court of competent jurisdiction. All such reports shall be retained by the
Chief of Police for a period of three (3) years after the date the same are
filed.
(§ 2329.1, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 158)
Sec. 3-6.11. Reports of purchases and receipts: Junk collectors.
   Every junk collector, as defined in subsection (a) of Section 3-6.01 of this
chapter, shall deliver his report to the Chief of Police before any articles
purchased or received are removed from the City. Such articles at such time
shall be made available for inspection by the Chief of Police or any of his
deputies.
(§ 2329.4, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 158)
Sec. 3-6.12. Records of purchases and receipts.
   Every junk collector, junk dealer, pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, and
antique dealer shall keep a complete record of all goods, wares, merchandise,
or things purchased or received by him, which record shall contain all the
matters required by him to be shown in the reports described in Section 3-6.09
of this chapter, including, for the purposes of this section, purchases or
receipts made at auctions, outside the City, and from other licensed brokers,
dealers, and collectors.
(§ 2330, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 158, as amended by § 7, Ord. 743-NS, eff.
April 17, 1980)
Sec. 3-6.13. Records of purchases and receipts: Materials: Inspections.
   The records required by the provisions of Section 3-6.12 of this chapter and
all goods, wares, and merchandise purchased or received by any junk collector,
junk dealer, pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or antique dealer shall be open for
inspection at all times during business hours to any peace officer or law
enforcement officer within the County.
(§ 2331, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 158, as amended by § 8, Ord. 743-NS, eff.
April 17, 1980)
Sec. 3-6.14. Retention of material.
   A junk collector, junk dealer, pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or antique
dealer shall retain tangible personal property for thirty (30) days as required
by Section 21636 of the California Business and Professions Code, Division 8,
Chapter 9, Article 4, or as amended.
(§§ 2334 and 2334.1, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 158, as amended by § XXIV, Ord.
241-NS, eff. November 25, 1971, § 9, Ord. 743-NS, eff. April 17, 1980, and § 5,
Ord. 1250-NS, eff. January 9, 1996, as amended by part 2, Ord. 1437-NS, eff.
July 7, 2005)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see California Business and Professions Code, Division
8, Chapter 9, Article 4
Sec. 3-6.15. Retention of materials: Segregation of metals.
   Every person required to hold a permit pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall retain all metals purchased by him in a separate place designated
for that purpose. The entire purchase of each day shall be kept in such
designated separate place. Each day’s purchase shall be kept in its original
condition for a period of seventy-two (72) hours after purchase or receipt.
(§ 2333, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 158, as amended by § 10, Ord. 743-NS, eff.
April 17, 1980)
Sec. 3-6.16. Hours of operation.
   It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of junk
collector, junk dealer, pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or antique dealer or for
any agent or employee of any such person, to accept, purchase, or receive any
goods, wares, or merchandise, or any article or thing, or in any manner
whatsoever to engage in or conduct any such business between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(§ 2332, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 158, as amended by § 11, Ord. 743-NS, eff.
April 17, 1980)
Sec. 3-6.17. Signs: Junk, secondhand, and antique dealers.
   Every junk, secondhand, and antique dealer shall maintain on his premises a
sign printed in the English language. Such sign shall be of a size sufficient
to be read from the street in front of the place of business and shall state
that such person is a junk dealer, secondhand dealer, or antique dealer. Where
the business is conducted in an office building, the sign shall be placed at
the door to the office. Where the business is conducted in a department of any
building, the sign shall be placed at the entrance of the department.
(§2335, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 158, as amended by § 12, Ord. 743-NS, eff.
April 17, 1980)
Sec. 3-6.18. Temporary permits.
   If the applicant fulfills the provisions of Sections 3-6.03 and 3-6.05 of
this chapter, a temporary permit may be issued. Such temporary permit shall
expire thirty (30) days after the date issued. Further, the temporary permit
shall be surrendered to the Finance Department at the time the regular permit
is issued or the thirty (30) day time period elapses, whichever occurs first.
(§ VI, Ord. 241-NS, eff. November 25, 1971)
CHAPTER 7. MOTOR VEHICLE RACES
(Sections 3-7.01 through 3-7.05, recodified from Section 2262 through 2265,
T.O.O.C., as added by Ordinance No. 158, amended by Ordinance No. 241-NS,
effective November 25, 1971 and Ord. 402-NS, effective September 6-1973 were
repealed by § 2, Ord. 1556-NS, effective July 1, 2011)
CHAPTER 8. PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Sec. 3-8.01. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain works and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Hawker” shall mean a peddler who not only carries goods for sale but
solicits purchasers by shouting or by attracting notice and attention to goods
for sale by the actual exhibition or exposure of them, by placards or labels,
by the sound of a horn, or by other means.
   (b)   “Peddler” shall mean a person who goes from house to house or from
place to place seeking to make concurrent sales and deliveries of the goods,
wares, and merchandise in which he deals.
   (c)   “Solicitor,” “drummer,” or “canvasser” shall mean a person who goes
from place to place or from house to house taking or attempting to take orders
for the sale of goods, wares, and merchandise of any nature whatsoever for
future delivery or for services to be furnished or performed in the future,
whether or not such person has a sample or whether or not he collects advance
payments.
   (d)   “Telephone solicitor” shall mean a person who, by use of the
telephone, solicits invitations from owners or occupants of private residents
for the purpose of taking or attempting to take, or who takes or attempts to
take, orders for the sale of goods, wares, and merchandise of any nature
whatsoever for future delivery or for services to be furnished or performed in
the future, whether or not such person has a sample or whether or not he
collects advance payments.
   (e)   “Transient merchant” or “itinerant merchant” shall mean a person who
occupies a building or other place for the exhibition and sale of his goods or
wares with the intention and determination to remain in business for a short
period of time only, whether such period is a definite or indefinite one, or
until a particular stock of merchandise is disposed of, or until the local
market for the commodity handled by the dealer has been exhausted.
(§§ 2342 and 2342.1 through 2342.5, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 158)
Sec. 3-8.02. Permits: Required: Exception.
   (a)   Required. No person or entity shall engage in the act of or business
of peddler, hawker, transient or itinerant merchant, solicitor, drummer,
canvasser, or telephone solicitor within the City without first obtaining a
City permit as specified in this chapter. The employer, if any, of any such
peddler, hawker, transient or itinerant merchant, solicitor, drummer, canvasser
or vendor shall obtain a permit. In addition to said permit for the employer,
each employee engaged in any act of solicitation, peddling, hawking drumming
within the City for that company, employer or entity shall obtain a City
identification card. The permit and all identification cards shall not be
transferable.
   At all times when performing any act of soliciting or peddling, the employee
or such persons so engaged shall have displayed or on their person any City-
issued vendors decal (issued under Chapter 23 of Title 5 of this Code) and
permit or the employee identification card. Such persons shall exhibit the
employee identification card or permit whenever requested to do so by a law
enforcement or code enforcement officer.
   (b)   Exception. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to a
business owner or employee who merely operates a vehicle from a fixed place of
business, and engages only in delivering a service, a product, food or
merchandise to a specified address in response to a customer request, order or
invoice made to a fixed place of business.
(§§ 2341 and 2341.1, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 158, as amended by § XXIV, Ord.
241-NS, eff. November 25, 1971 and § 2, Ord. 1188-NS, eff. October 12, 1993)
Sec. 3-8.03. Permits: Applications: Form.
   Every employer applicant and employee engaged in any act referred to in
Section 3-8.02, shall personally appear before the Finance Department and the
Police Department, if so directed, and make a written application on the City
form providing the following information:
   (a)   The name, address, telephone number and description of applicant;
   (b)   The name, address, telephone number of the business, or employer, and
the nature of solicitation or business activity to be conducted within the
City;
   (c)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a
felony or misdemeanor, the nature of the offense, exclusive of any violation of
a traffic law or any misdemeanor under the State Vehicle Code;
   (d)   Picture, fingerprints, and such other information as the Chief of
Police, or his/her designee, shall require.
   The application shall contain an acknowledgement that the applicant has read
and agrees to follow the City regulations for solicitation or peddling and
shall be signed by the applicant.
(§ 2343, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 158, as amended by § XXIV, Ord. 241-NS,
eff. November 25, 1971 and § 2, Ord. 1188-NS, eff. October 12, 1993)
Sec. 3-8.04. Permits: Applications: Approval.
   If the Chief of Police finds that the application provided for in Section 3-
8.03 of this chapter complies with all the requirements of this chapter, he
shall approve the application.
(§ 2345, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 158, as amended by § XXIV, Ord. 241-NS,
eff. November 25, 1971)
Sec. 3-8.05. Permits: Form.
   (a)   Time limitation. No person shall engage in the business of peddler,
hawker, transient or itinerant merchant, solicitor, drummer, canvasser, or
vendor in a door-to-door manner or area canvassing in a residential zone,
except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Pacific Standard Time, and
between 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Pacific Daylight Savings Time. This subsection
shall not apply to any person soliciting or peddling goods or publications for
the sole and bona fide purpose of generating funds for a religious, charitable
or political organization, which has a federally recognized nonprofit tax
status.
   (b)   Posted signs. No person shall engage in the business of peddler,
hawker, transient or itinerant merchant, solicitor, drummer, canvasser, or
vendor at a premise, home or address where a sign stating “No Peddlers or
Solicitors,” or words of same import, is clearly posted.
   (c)   Form. The permit shall be on a City-approved form and contain the name
of each person and the company for whom those persons work.
(§ 2346, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 158, as amended by § XXIV, Ord. 241-NS,
eff. November 25, 1971 and § 2, Ord. 1188-NS, eff. October 12, 1993)
Sec. 3-8.06. Permits: Fees.
   The fee for the processing of applications and permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be as established by City Council resolution.
(§ 2341, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 158, as amended by § XXIV, Ord. 241-NS,
eff. November 25, 1971 and § 2, Ord. 1188-NS, eff. October 12, 1993)
Sec. 3-8.07. Photographs and fingerprints: Criminal conduct: Ineligibility for
permits.
   Each applicant for a permit to engage in the business of peddler, hawker,
transient or itinerant merchant, solicitor, drummer, canvasser, or telephone
solicitor shall be photographed and fingerprinted.
   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the conviction (including
pleas of guilty and nolo contendre) of a felony or misdemeanor shall be prima
facie disqualification of an applicant for such permit.
   The City licensing authority, however, may disregard such conviction if it
is found and determined by such licensing authority that mitigating
circumstances exist. In making such determination, the City licensing authority
shall consider the following factors:
   (a)   The type of business license or permit for which the person is
applying;
   (b)   The nature and seriousness of the offense;
   (c)   The circumstances surrounding the conviction;
   (d)   The length of time elapsed since the conviction;
   (e)   The age of the person at the time of the conviction;
   (f)   The presence or absence of rehabilitation or efforts at
rehabilitation; and
   (g)   Contributing social or environmental conditions.
   The City licensing authority shall give notice of disqualification to an
applicant disqualified under this provision. Such notice shall be in writing
and delivered personally or mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the
application.
   An applicant who is disqualified for a City business license or permit under
this provision may appeal such determination of disqualification. Such appeal
shall be in writing and filed with the City Manager within ten (10) days after
the date of the notice of disqualification. The City Manager shall hear and
determine the appeal within ninety (90) days after it is filed. The
determination of the City Manager on the appeal shall be final.
   Pursuant to Section 11105 of the Penal Code of the State, the following
officers of the City are hereby authorized to have access to and to utilize
State summary criminal history information when it is needed to assist them in
fulfilling the licensing duties set forth in this section: the City Manager,
City Attorney, and Finance Director.
(§ 2344, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 158, as amended by § XXIV, Ord. 241-NS,
eff. November 25, 1971, and § III, Ord. 619-NS, eff. April 7, 1977)
Sec. 3-8.08. Temporary permits.
   Each applicant who complies with the provisions of Sections 3-8.02, 3-8.05,
and 3-8.06 of this chapter may be issued a temporary permit to expire thirty
(30) days after the date of issuance. Such permit shall be surrendered to the
Finance Department at the time the regular permit is issued or the thirty (30)
day time period elapses, whichever occurs first.
(§ IX, Ord. 241-NS, eff. November 25, 1971)
CHAPTER 9. PRIVATE PATROL SYSTEMS*
*   Chapter 9 consisting of Sections 3-9.01–3-9.16, codified from §§ 2441–2459,
T.O.O.C., as amended by Ordinance Nos. 158 and 241-NS, repealed by Section 1,
Ordinance 1086-NS, effective October 9, 1990.
Sec. 3-9.01. Definitions.
   For purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context,
certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Private Patrol Operator” or “operator of a private patrol service”
shall mean a person who, for any consideration whatsoever, agrees to furnish,
or furnishes, a watchperson, guard, security guard, patrol person, or other
person to protect persons or property or to prevent the theft, unlawful taking,
loss, embezzlement, misappropriation, or concealment of any goods, wares,
merchandise, money, stocks, bonds, notes, documents, papers, or property of any
kind, or who performs the service of such watchperson, security patrolperson,
security guard, or other person for any such purposes.
   (b)   “Patrolperson” shall mean a person, other than a peace officer, acting
in the course of his official duties, who, for hire, guards any person, or
property as a member of a patrol service.
   (c)   “Patrol service operator” and “patrolperson” shall not include:
   (1)   A person employed exclusively and regularly by one employer in
connection with the affairs of such employer only and where there exists an
employer-employee relationship; or
   (2)   An officer or employee of the United States of America, or of the
State, or a political subdivision thereof, or any city while such officer or
employee is engaged in the performance of his or her official duties.
(§ 2, Ord. 1086-NS, eff. October 9, 1990)
Sec. 3-9.02. Badges/Insignia.
   The Chief of Police may prescribe the size, shape, and inscription upon the
badge or insignia to be worn by a patrolperson. The design shall be such as not
to confuse the public or to be readily mistaken as a badge or insignia of an
official of the State of California, an officer of the County Sheriff, a United
States marshal, or official City police officer.
(§ 2, Ord. 1086-NS, eff. October 9, 1990)
Sec. 3-9.03. Uniforms.
   No patrolperson shall wear or be required to wear any uniform which is an
imitation of, or can be mistaken for an official County sheriff, an official
City police officer, or an official state officer’s uniform.
( § 2 Ord. 1086-NS, eff. October 9, 1990)
Sec. 3-9.04. Facsimiles.
   All private patrol operators or private patrol services shall submit a
facsimile of any badge, insignia or uniform to the City’s Chief of Police for
his/her approval before being used.
(§ 2, Ord. 1086-NS, eff. October 9, 1990)
Sec. 3-9.05. Vehicles.
   Private patrol operators and private patrol services shall be prohibited
from using any vehicle which resembles the vehicles used by any official public
law enforcement agency including, but not limited to, the State, the County, or
the City. All vehicles shall be approved by the City’s Chief of Police for his/
her approval before being used.
(§ 2, Ord. 1086-NS, eff. October 9, 1990)
Sec. 3-9.06. Reports of violations of laws.
   No permittee shall perform or be required to perform, official police or
investigation activities but shall report every violation of the law. Such
report may be made by telephone or personal visit to the desk sergeant or other
person charged with the duty of receiving reports of law violations. When
requested by any law enforcement agency, a permittee shall, without unnecessary
delay, make a full written report of any violation or other occurrence.
(§ 2, Ord. 1086-NS, eff. October 9, 1990)
Sec. 3-9.07. Employment of registered persons.
   No operator of a patrol service shall employ or utilize the services in any
way of a person who does not have in his possession a valid security guard’s or
private patrol officer’s registration card issued by the State of California.
(§ 2, Ord. 1086-NS, eff. October 9, 1990)
Sec. 3-9.08. Permits: Carrying and displaying.
   Each patrolperson shall carry a valid state registration card on his/her
person at all times while engaged in employment as a private patrolperson and
shall display the registration card to any peace officer upon request.
(§ 2, Ord. 1086-NS, eff. October 9, 1990)
CHAPTER 10. PURCHASING AND PROFESSIONAL
SERVICES AND PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS*
*   Chapter 10, consisting of §§ 3-10.01–3-10.09 codified from §19, Ordinance
No. 37, as amended by Ordinance Nos. 490-NS and 725-NS, was amended in its
entirety by Section 1, Ordinance No. 1114-NS, effective July 16,
1991. Subsequently, Chapter 10 was amended in its entirety by Part 1, Ordinance
No. 1553-NS, effective May 13, 2011, and § 1, Ordinance No. 1638-NS, effective
January 12, 2018.
Article 1. Definitions
Sec. 3-10.101. Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish an efficient procedure for the
purchase of supplies, services, and equipment, and to establish a procedure for
performing or contracting for the construction of public works consistent with
state law. These procedures shall not be overly time consuming and cumbersome,
while allowing the City to obtain the best professional services, and acquire
quality supplies, general services, and equipment in an overall economic
manner, and also to construct public works at the lowest reasonable cost. The
purpose of this chapter is to emulate best practices in the purchasing
procedures.
(§ 1, Ord. 1638-NS, eff. January 12, 2018)
Sec. 3-10.102. Definitions.
   (a)   Bidder's List. "Bidder's List" shall mean a list of responsible
prospective vendors capable of providing the items being bid upon.
   (b)   Cooperative Bid. "Cooperative Bid" is when several government agencies
join together to create one bid document combining all agencies product volume
for consideration of the bidder in determining the unit cost.
   (c)   Emergency. As determined by the City Council, including, but not
limited to, states of emergency defined in Section 8558 of the Government Code,
when repair or replacements are necessary to permit the continued conduct of
the operation of services of the City, or to avoid danger to life or property,
repair or replace any public facility without adopting plans, specification, or
working details or give notice for bids to let a contract or Public Works
Construction Contract.
   (d)   Equipment. "Equipment" shall mean furnishings, machinery, vehicles,
rolling stock, and other personal property used in the City's business.
   (e)   General Services. "General Services" are services which do not require
any unique skill, special background, training, and obtaining such services at
the lowest cost should be the single most important factor in selection, as
opposed to personal performance. Examples of general services include uniform
cleaning and maintenance services.
   (f)   Maintenance Work. "Maintenance Work" shall mean:
      (1)   Routine, recurring, and usual work for the cleaning, preservation,
or protection of any publicly owned or publicly operated facility for its
intended purposes.
      (2)   Minor repainting.
      (3)   Resurfacing of streets and highways at less than one inch.
      (4)   Landscape maintenance, including mowing, watering, trimming,
pruning, planting, replacement of plants, and servicing of irrigation and
sprinkler systems.
      (5)   Work performed to keep, operate, and maintain publicly owned water,
power, or waste disposal systems including, but not limited to, dams,
reservoirs, power plants, and electrical transmission lines of two hundred
thirty thousand (230,000) volts and higher.
   (g)   Multiple Awarded Bid. When a bid is awarded to more than one vendor
for the same or similar products. A multiple awarded bid schedule is usually
set up and provides information of product type/brand and vendor who is
providing the product.
   (h)   Piggyback. Use of another public agency's existing contract to
purchase the same product(s) as outlined in the awarding bid document.
   (i)   Professional, Management, or Special Services. “Professional,”
“Management”, or “Special Services” shall mean any work performed by an
attorney, doctor, architect, engineer, land surveyor, construction manager,
appraiser, expert, accounting firm, consultant or those services such as
computer services, golf course operating services, concession services, parking
garage operation services, and transportation/transit operator services.
Factors for determining whether professional, management, or special services
are needed include but, are not limited to, services which require special
performance criteria, specific experience and training, professional judgment,
licensing, qualified expertise in a specific area of work, or other unique
factors other than simply obtaining the service at the lowest cost to the City.
Professional, Management, and Special Services are not subject to the informal,
formal or competitive bidding requirements of this chapter and may be procured
through negotiated contract or Requests for Qualification and/or Proposal
process, per Article 4. Sec. 3-10.401.
   (j)   Public Works. "Public Works" shall mean a type of public construction
project subject to the regulation of the State Public Contract Code and State
Labor Code and as defined in California Labor Code Division 2, Chapter 1,
Article 1, Section 1720 and as further amended. Examples of a Public Works
Project include:
      (1)   The erection, construction of, alteration, major painting, repair,
or demolition of public buildings, streets, walkways, water and sewer
facilities, drainage facilities, or other public facilities, whether owned,
leased, or operated by the City.
      (2)   Furnishing supplies or materials for any of the above works or
projects.
      (3)   A public work does not include maintenance work as defined in this
article.
   (k)   Public Project. "Public Project" shall have the meaning as set forth
in the California Public Contract Code Division 2, Part 3, Chapter 1, Article
4, Section 20161 and Division 2 Part 3, Chapter 2, Article 1, Section 22002, or
as hereinafter amended.
   (l)   Purchase. "Purchase" shall include the renting, leasing, purchasing,
licensing, or a trade of equipment or supplies.
   (m)   Purchasing Agent. The "Purchasing Agent", for the purposes of this
chapter, shall be the Finance Director or his/her designee and is responsible
for managing the decentralized purchasing program.
   (n)   Purchasing Officer. The "Purchasing Officer," for the purposes of this
chapter, shall be the City Manager or his/her designated representative.
   (o)   Special Equipment/Supplies. "Special Equipment/Supplies" shall mean
unique supplies, machinery, computers, or other equipment which are not
generally and regularly ordered in bulk by the City and which must perform
complex tasks, or integrate efficiently with existing equipment or supplies.
   (p)   Supplies. "Supplies" shall mean office supplies, janitorial supplies,
materials, goods, tools, or other commodities used in the general conduct of
the City's business, excepting supplies or materials for a public work which is
regulated under the California Public Contract Code Sections 20160, et seq.
   (q)   Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Procedures. "Uniform Construction
Cost Accounting Procedures" shall mean those procedures and rules established
by the State Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission pursuant to
Section 22010, et seq. of the California Public Contract Code or as amended.
   (r)   Urgency. Urgency shall exist when the service, repair, or replacements
are immediately necessary to permit the continued performance of the operations
or services of the City, or to avoid the immediate danger to life, health, or
property.
(§ 1, Ord. 1638-NS, eff. January 12, 2018)
Sec. 3-10.103. Purchasing Agent: Powers and duties.
   The duties of the Purchasing Agent may be combined with those duties of any
other officer or position in the City. The Purchasing Agent shall have the
authority to:
   (a)   Purchase or contract for needed City supplies, general services,
equipment, and special equipment/supplies which are not included within a
construction contract or proposed specifications for a construction contract of
a public work being administered by any other City department;
   (b)   Investigate, keep knowledgeable about, negotiate, and recommend on the
execution of contracts or the purchasing of supplies, general services, and
equipment pursuant to the procedures of this chapter, and such administrative
rules and regulations as prescribed by the City Manager;
   (c)   Keep informed of current developments concerning purchasing, prices,
market conditions, and new products;
   (d)   Prescribe and maintain such forms as necessary for the proper
operation of this purchasing system;
   (e)   Supervise the inspection of all supplies, general services, and
equipment purchased under this chapter to assure conformance with City
specifications;
   (f)   Supervise the transfer of surplus and unused supplies and equipment
for sale or disposal of such;
   (g)   Maintain up-to-date bidder's list, vendor's catalogs, files, and such
other records as needed to perform these duties;
   (h)   Ensure that purchasing specifications are written to encourage full
competition;
   (i)   Perform such other tasks as may be necessary for the proper conduct of
purchasing of supplies, services, construction services, and equipment.
(§ 1, Ord. 1638-NS, eff. January 12, 2018)
Sec. 3-10.104. City Council authorizes City Manager to implement administrative
regulations.
   City Council authorizes City Manager to establish and maintain written
administrative regulations and standards consistent with Thousand Oaks
Municipal Code, Title 3, Chapter 10, which incorporate and implement the City's
purchasing and contracting procedures, including an implementation of the
purpose, goals and requirements of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1638-NS, eff. January 12, 2018)
Sec. 3-10.105. Purchase orders.
   (a)   Except for departmental purchases as authorized in Sec.
3-10.201(a), purchases under Five Thousand and no/100th ($5,000.00) Dollars and
exemptions established in the Purchasing Administrative Regulations Manual,
purchases of supplies, services, and special equipment/supplies, shall be made
only by purchase orders issued by the Purchasing Agent.
   (b)   The purpose of a Purchase Order is to ensure compliance with this
Purchasing Ordinance. The Purchasing Administrative Regulations Manual allows
for exemptions from Purchase Order requirements because the procurement does
not fall within this chapter. Examples of such exemptions include: acquiring
land or books, payments that are not for the actual purchase of services, goods
or supplies, or payments of debt services.
(§ 1, Ord. 1638-NS, eff. January 12, 2018)
Sec. 3-10.106. Encumbrance of funds.
   Except in cases of urgency as described in Sections
3-10.205,
3-10.308, and
3-10.401(e), the Purchasing Agent shall not issue any Purchase Order, for
purchase of supplies, services or equipment unless there exists an unencumbered
appropriation in the fund account against which such purchase is to be charged
or City Council has authorized said purchase.
(§ 1, Ord. 1638-NS, eff. January 12, 2018)
Sec. 3-10.107. Solicitation exceptions.
   (a)   The competitive bid and RFP processes are not applicable to certain
purchases. The following are exempt from bid processes of Chapter 10 Article 2
and Article 4 herein.
      (1)   Department purchases, as defined in Section 3-10.201(a);
      (2)   Travel/expense advances;
      (3)   Subscriptions;
      (4)   Trade circulars or books;
      (5)   Insurance premiums;
      (6)   Insurance claims;
      (7)   Reimbursement of expenses;
      (8)   Petty cash reimbursement;
      (9)   Medical payments;
      (10)   Newspaper advertisements and notices;
      (11)   Dues to approved organizations;
      (12)   Payments to other government units;
      (13)   Utility service payments, utility connection and/or installation
charges;
      (14)   Attorney services;
      (15)   Postage, courier/delivery messenger services;
      (16)   Land;
      (17)   Buildings;
      (18)   Debt services;
      (19)   Grants;
      (20)   Claim settlements.
(§ 1, Ord. 1638-NS, eff. January 12, 2018)
Sec. 3-10.108. Contracts.
   (a)   All written contracts shall be approved by City Attorney as to form.
Contracts shall be prepared for professional, management, general or special
services, and construction for Five Thousand and no/100th ($5,000.00) Dollars
and over. Contracts for an amount of Twenty-five Thousand and no/100th
($25,000.00) Dollars or less shall be approved/awarded by the Department Head.
Contracts for an amount over Twenty-five Thousand and no/100th ($25,000.00)
Dollars but not more than Seventy-five Thousand and no/100th ($75,000.00)
Dollars shall be approved/awarded by the City Manager, following any required
selection process outlined in Articles 3 and 4 of this chapter. Contracts with
a dollar amount exceeding Seventy-five Thousand and no/100th ($75,000.00)
Dollars shall be approved/awarded by City Council following a selection process
outlined in Articles 3 and 4.
   (b)   The Department Head and City Manager are authorized to issue Contract
Amendments as follows:
      (1)   If the contract was originally executed for an amount of Twenty-
five Thousand and no/100th ($25,000.00) Dollars or less, the Department Head
shall have the authority to issue Contract Amendments, provided the sum of all
amendments, plus original contract amount, shall not exceed Twenty-five
Thousand and no/100th ($25,000.00) Dollars. If the amended contract will exceed
Twenty-five Thousand and no/100th ($25,000.00) Dollars, City Manager shall
approve the contract amendment.
      (2)   If the contract was originally executed for an amount of Seventy-
five Thousand and no/100th ($75,000.00) Dollars or less, the City Manager shall
have the authority to issue Contract Amendments, provided that the sum of all
amendments, plus original contract amount, shall not exceed Seventy-five
Thousand and no/100th ($75,000.00) Dollars. If the amended contract will exceed
Seventy-five Thousand and no/100th ($75,000.00) Dollars, City Council shall
approve the contract amendment.
      (3)   For a contract originally executed for an amount in excess of
Seventy-five Thousand and no/100th ($75,000.00) Dollars and originally approved
by City Council, the City Manager shall have authority to issue contract
amendments, provided that the sum of all contract amendments for any single
contract shall not exceed the limit approved by City Council. If the amended
contract will exceed the limit previously approved by City Council, the
contract amendment must be approved by City Council.
   (c)   Master Professional Services Contracts. For those Professional
Services as defined in Government Code Section 4526 (and as otherwise amended),
master multi-year contracts with several consultants with a general scope of
work may be set up for a total not-to-exceed dollar amount as approved by City
Council.
      (1)   A formal Request for Qualification process shall be used in
accordance with Municipal Code Sec.
3-10.401(d) and awarded based on qualifications.
      (2)   Task Orders shall be issued pursuant to the Master Contract with a
specific scope of work and the Department Head shall have authority to execute
such Task Orders for individual projects for Twenty-five Thousand and no/100th
($25,000.00) Dollars or less. The City Manager shall have the authority to
execute such Task Orders over Twenty-five Thousand and no/100th ($25,000)
Dollars, but not more than Seventy-five Thousand ($75,000) Dollars.
      (3)   Any Task Order in an amount exceeding Seventy-five Thousand and no/
100th ($75,000.00) Dollars will require City Council's approval as pursuant to
the terms of the Master Contract.
      (4)   Task Orders shall not be issued for an amount exceeding One Hundred
Twenty-five Thousand and no/100th ($125,000.00) Dollars. An individual Request
for Qualification process and a new contract awarded by City Council is
required.
   (d)   Master General Services Contract.
      (1)   A Bid or a Request for Proposal/ Qualification process may be used
to procure General Services and may be awarded based on qualifications plus
reasonableness of cost.
   (e)   Public Works Contracts shall be established for work in an amount of
Five Thousand and no/100th ($5,000.00) Dollars and over. City Manager may award
and execute contracts for individual projects in an amount of One Hundred
Seventy-five Thousand and no/100th ($175,000.00) Dollars or less or as is
reflected under Section 22020 of the Public Contract Code. Individual projects
in an amount exceeding One Hundred Seventy-five Thousand and no/100th
($175,000.00) Dollars shall be approved by City Council.
   (f)   Change Orders. A Change Order shall be used to modify Public Works
contract documents regarding contract price, schedule of payments, completion
date, plans and specifications, expanding scope of work due to change in
conditions, and for unit price overruns and under runs, as specified in the
Contract. Work description and justification should relate to the original
project and should be necessary to achieve original scope of project. After a
determination that costs is merited by developments in a specific project, the
City Manager is authorized to issue Change Orders up to the contract
contingency amount approved by the City Council for the individual contract as
follows:
      (1)   Contracts in the amount over Forty-five Thousand and no/100th
($45,000.00) Dollars to an amount of One Hundred Seventy-five Thousand and no/
100th ($175,000.00) Dollars or less or as is reflected under Section 22020 of
the Public Contract Code:
         (i)   City Manager may approve Change Orders until the contract
reaches One Hundred Seventy-five Thousand and no/100th ($175,000.00) Dollars or
as is reflected under Section 22020 of the Public Contract Code.
         (ii)   Once the original contract plus all accumulated Change Orders
is in an amount that is equal to One Hundred Seventy-five and no/100th
($175,000.00) Dollars or as is reflected under Section 22020 of the Public
Contract Code, subsequent Change Orders must be approved by City Council prior
to commencing the work.
      (2)   Contracts in an amount exceeding One Hundred Seventy five Thousand
and no/100th ($175,000.00) Dollars or as is reflected under Section 22020 of
the Public Contract Code.
         (i)   City Manager may approve accumulative Project Change Orders up
to the contingency established and approved by City Council for each individual
contract.
   (g)   Master Maintenance Service Contracts.
      (1)   Request for Qualification process shall be used to establish Master
Contracts. The purpose which is to award discrete small projects which in no
event exceed Forty-five Thousand and no/100th ($45,000.00) Dollars or as is
reflected under Section 22020 of the Public Contract Code per task order.
      (2)   Master Single or Multi-year Contracts may be set up with several
vendors, and will include a general scope of work and will establish an annual
not-to-exceed dollar amount as approved by City Council.
      (3)   Task Orders shall be issued pursuant to the Master Contract with a
specific scope of work and the Department Head shall have authority to execute
such Task Orders for individual projects for an amount of Twenty-five Thousand
and no/100th ($25,000.00) Dollars or less. The City Manager shall have the
authority to execute such Task Orders over Twenty-five Thousand and no/100th
($25,000) Dollars, but not more than Forty-five Thousand ($45,000) Dollars or
as is reflected under Section 22020 of the Public Contract Code.
(§ 1, Ord. 1638-NS, eff. January 12, 2018)
Article 2. Supplies, General Services and Equipment
Sec. 3-10.201. Bidding procedures.
   Except as authorized in Sections
3-10.202,
3-10.203, or in the case of urgencies as described in Section
3-10.205, the purchase of supplies, equipment and special equipment/supplies,
not included in the construction contract or bid specification for a public
works project, shall be made as follows:
   (a)   Department, Purchases. A department may purchase specified and limited
supplies, and equipment, special equipment/supplies independently of the
Purchasing Agent of a value less than Five Thousand and no/100th ($5,000.00)
Dollars, provided such department keeps a record of such purchases and
exercises reasonable prudence in seeking price quotes when purchasing such
items. All such purchases shall be made with funds in an unencumbered
appropriation.
   (b)   Direct Purchase Order. The purchase of supplies, equipment, or special
equipment/supplies with the estimated value of Five Thousand and no/100th
($5,000.00) Dollars but not more than Seventy-five Thousand and no/100th
($75,000.00) Dollars shall be made by a written bidding procedure as follows:
      (1)   The responsible department shall prepare a written product
specification describing the minimum requirements of the purchase.
      (2)   The department shall obtain at least three written responses to the
informal request for bid. This requirement may be waived for good cause in
writing by the Department Head and Purchasing Agent in consultation with one
another.
      (3)   Written responses may be made by mail, fax, or e-mail directly to
the department representative requesting the item. Further negotiation with a
vendor to negotiate a lower price based on the bid responses received from
other vendors is prohibited. A written record and tabulation shall be made at
that time the bid response is received and opened. All written responses must
be retained by the department for three years.
      (4)   Bid evaluation procedures. All bids shall be analyzed by the
department for compliance with bid specifications, and the department shall
prepare an analysis of the bid process.
         (i)   Award will go to the lowest responsive/responsible bidder.
         (ii)   Quality, quantity, and service being equal, a local preference
of five (5%) percent shall be given to local vendors located within the City of
Thousand Oaks.
         (iii)   If the Department Head determines that all the bids received
are unacceptably high, or specifications were unclear, the department may
reject any bids received and the item may be rebid.
      (5)   No bids received. In the event no bids are received, the Department
Head requesting the purchase shall have the option of any of the following:
         (i)   Abandoning the purchase;
         (ii)   Rebidding the purchase; or
         (iii)   Requesting Purchasing Officer approval to obtain the item,
supply, service, or equipment on a direct negotiated contract.
      (6)   The department shall prepare a written recommendation to the
Purchasing Officer for award or rejection of bids.
      (7)   Award. The Purchasing Officer shall reject all bids or award the
purchase contract to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder whose bid or
proposal fulfills the purpose intended according to criteria designated in the
bid and the contract award amount is within the unencumbered appropriation for
that item. Purchasing Officer may waive any minor bid irregularities and shall
award informal bids up to Seventy-five Thousand and no/100th ($75,000.00)
Dollars.
   (c)   Formal Bid Procedures. For supplies, equipment, or special equipment/
supplies with an estimated value in an amount exceeding Seventy-five Thousand
and no/100th ($75,000.00) Dollars purchases shall be made in accordance with
the following formal written procedures:
      (1)   Published Notices. A notice inviting bids shall be published at
least fourteen (14) calendar days before the date of the opening of bids. The
notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation
printed and published in the City, and in appropriate trade publications, if
any, circulated within the general area and posted on the City's Purchasing
website. Such other notice as the Purchasing Agent deems appropriate shall be
made.
         (i)   Notices inviting bids. Notices inviting bids shall include a
general description of the goods, articles, services, or equipment to be
purchased or required, state where bid blanks and specifications may be
secured, describe any performance or bid security required, and the time and
place for the opening of bids;
         (ii)   Bidder's List. The Purchasing Agent shall maintain a list of
responsible bidders for various categories of supplies or equipment. A notice
of the solicitation for a bid shall be sent to all responsible prospective
contractors or suppliers whose names are on the bidder's list for the category
or equipment, supplies or general services subject to the bid request or posted
on the City's Purchasing website and distributed through mass e-mail
notifications; and
         (iii)   Bulletin Board. The bid invitation shall be posted on a public
bulletin board in City Hall.
      (2)   Bidder's Security/Failure to Sign Contract. If the City requires a
bidder's bond or other form of security, the bidder's security shall be
prescribed in the notice inviting bids in an amount equal to ten (10%) percent
of the amount bid. Bidder's security shall be either a cash deposit with the
City, a cashier's or certified check payable to the City, or a bidder's bond.
Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to the return of bid security within
sixty (60) days of the date of the award. However, the lowest responsive and
responsible bidder shall forfeit all or part of his/her bid security, as may be
determined by the City Council, upon the bidder's refusal or failure to execute
the contract within ten (10) days after the date of the award of the contract.
On the refusal or failure of the lowest responsive and responsible bidder to
execute the contract, the City Council may award the contract to the next
lowest responsive and responsible bidder.
      (3)   Bid Opening Procedure. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the City
Clerk Department and shall be identified as to bidder, project, and "Bid" on
the envelope. Bids shall be opened by City staff in public at the time and
place stated in the notice inviting bids. A written record and tabulation shall
be made at the time of all bids received.
      (4)   Bid Evaluation Procedures. Quality and service being equal, a local
preference of five (5%) percent but not more than Five Thousand and no/100th
($5,000.00) Dollars shall be given to local vendors located within the City of
Thousand Oaks. All bids shall be analyzed by the Purchasing Agent and the
department for compliance with bid specifications. The department shall prepare
a recommendation for award or rejection to the City Council.
      (5)   Rejection of Bids. If the City Council determines that bids are
excessively high or that specifications were unclear, or if no bids are
received, the City Council may reject all bids presented and use whatever
method it deems appropriate, such as rebid, abandon acquisition, or negotiate a
contract to complete the purchase.
      (6)   Award of Contracts. Contracts shall be awarded by the City Council
to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder whose bid fulfills the purpose
intended according to the criteria designated in the solicitation, and provided
the award amount is within the unencumbered appropriation for that item. The
City Council may waive any minor bid irregularities.
      (7)   Tie Bids. If two (2) or more bids received are for the same total
amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, and if the public
interest will not permit the delay of readvertising for bids, the City Council
may accept either bid or accept the lowest bid made by negotiation with the
tied bidders.
      (8)   Performance Bonds. The City may require a performance bond in such
amount as it shall find reasonably necessary to protect the public interest. If
the City requires a performance bond, the form and amount of the bond shall be
described in the notice inviting bids.
(§ 1, Ord. 1638-NS, eff. January 12, 2018)
Sec. 3-10.202. Special equipment/supplies; sole source purchases.
   (a)   Special Equipment/Supplies. In purchasing any special equipment or
supplies needed to be compatible with existing equipment, or to perform complex
or unique functions, the Purchasing Agent and Department Head in consultation
with one another may:
      (1)   Limit bidding to a specific product type, or a brand name product;
or
      (2)   Utilize a request for proposal approach where warranties, service
and/or maintenance obligations, and product performance will be evaluated in
addition to the price of the product. The award of the contract should be to
the proposer staff deems is in the best public interest.
   (b)   Sole Source Purchases. Unique commodities or services that can be
obtained from only one vendor, or one distributor authorized to sell in this
area, with singular characteristics or performance capabilities or which have
specific compatibility components with existing City products are exempt from
the competitive bidding requirements in Sec.
3-10.201 and are deemed sole source purchases. Sole source purchases may
include proprietary items sold direct from the manufacturer.
      (1)   All sole source purchases shall be supported by written
documentation indicating the facts and nature supporting the determination of a
sole source, signed by the Department Head and forwarded to the Purchasing
Agent. The Purchasing Officer shall approve sole source acquisitions in an
amount of Seventy-five Thousand and no/100th ($75,000.00) Dollars or less.
      (2)   Approval of any sole source acquisition shall be obtained from City
Council for an award of a contract for an amount exceeding Seventy-five
Thousand and no/100th ($75,000.00) Dollars.
(§ 1, Ord. 1638-NS, eff. January 12, 2018)
Sec. 3-10.203. Cooperative, piggyback, and multiple awarded bid purchasing with
other agencies.
   Approval and award of cooperative, "piggy-back" or multiple awarded
purchases shall be obtained from the Purchasing Officer for an amount of
Seventy-five Thousand and no/100th ($75,000.00) Dollars or less and by the City
Council for purchases in an amount exceeding Seventy-five Thousand and no/100th
($75,000.00) Dollars.
   (a)   Cooperative Purchasing. The bidding requirements of Sec. 3-10.201
shall not apply to the purchasing of any equipment or supplies which the
Purchasing Agent determines to be in the best interest of the City to obtain
through a cooperative competitive bidding procedure being prepared by and
processed through another local, state, or federal governmental agency.
   (b)   Piggyback. If the Purchasing Agent determines it to be in the best
interest of the City, the Purchasing Agent is authorized to "piggyback" onto or
join into an existing written purchase contract obtained through a competitive
bidding process prepared by and awarded by another local, state or federal
government agency.
   (c)   Multiple Awarded Bids. Multiple awarded bids are generally conducted
by larger government agencies. A competitive bidding process is conducted for a
specified product. Several vendors whose product meets the specification are
awarded the contract. Maximum item price and contract terms are established. If
the Purchasing Agent determines it to be in the City's best interest, the
Purchasing Agent is authorized to use federal, state, or other governmental
agency multiple awarded contracts. Staff must obtain quotes from at least three
vendors on the awarded contract list and award the bid to the lowest responsive
and responsible bidder.
(§ 1, Ord. 1638-NS, eff. January 12, 2018)
Sec. 3-10.204. Recycled supply products specification.
   If in procuring supplies, a recycled product can achieve the necessary City
performance standard, and if such recycled product is readily available,
specifications should, if economically feasible, require products made with
recycled materials be bid. If the Department Head determines that (1) a
recycled product lacks performance capabilities or needed quality levels, or
(2) a sufficient amount of said recycled or reusable product is not currently
available in the market, then a reduced percentage can be required, or the
supply specification can be limited to non-recycled or virgin materials. When
recycled products are required, reasonable efforts shall be made to label the
products as containing recycled materials. As used in this section, recycled
products does not mean used products, but is limited to new products made with
materials which have been recycled.
(§ 1, Ord. 1638-NS, eff. January 12, 2018)
Sec. 3-10.205. Urgencies.
   The bidding procedures of Sec.
3-10.201 or solicitation procedures in Sec.
3-10.401 may be dispensed with in the case of urgency. An urgency shall exist
when the service, repair, or replacements are immediately necessary to permit
the continued performance of essential operations or services of the City, or
result in excessive costs if not immediately remedied, or to avoid the
immediate danger to life, health, or property. The City Council delegates
authority to the City Manager to declare a public urgency. If the purchase is
Seventy-five Thousand and no/100th ($75,000.00) Dollars and over, the City
Manager shall give notice of the purchase process to the City Council.
(§ 1, Ord. 1638-NS, eff. January 12, 2018)
Sec. 3-10.206. Local preference.
   To promote economic development and maintain a healthy economic base in the
City of Thousand Oaks, as well as encourage businesses to move into the City's
jurisdiction, the City supports employment and local business opportunities
which in turn promote the City's economic growth. As such, the City has
determined it is in its best interest to provide a preference to local
businesses.
   (a)   Local Preference in Purchasing. In the bidding of, or contracting for
procurement of supplies, materials, and equipment as provided in these
sections, the Purchasing Officer may give a preference to responsive,
responsible, local businesses located in the City of Thousand Oaks in an amount
not-to-exceed Five (5%) Percent of the local business' total net bid price, or
Five Thousand and no/100th ($5,000.00) Dollars, whichever is lower. The
granting of this local preference shall be approved or not based on a
determination by the Purchasing Officer/Agent that quantity and quality of the
local product is equal to that of the next lowest bidder. In order for a local
business to be eligible to claim the preference, the business must provide a
copy of its current business tax certificate issued by the City. This local
preference is not applicable to: (1) bids for public projects as defined by
Public Contracts Code Sections 20161 and 22002, (2) bids funded by grants which
prohibit its use, and (3) contracts for professional, management, general, and
special services.
(§ 1, Ord. 1638-NS, eff. January 12, 2018)
Sec. 3-10.207. Staging of purchases prohibited.
   Purchases and Public Works contracts shall not be knowingly staged or
separated into smaller units or segments solely for the purpose of evading the
competitive formal or informal bidding requirements of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1638-NS, eff. January 12, 2018)
Sec. 3-10.208. Inspection and tests.
   The Purchasing Agent or department requesting the item shall inspect all
deliveries of supplies and equipment to assure conformance with the contract or
order specifications. The Purchasing Agent, at his/her discretion, may require
chemical and physical tests of samples or supplies and equipment as he/she
deems necessary to determine the quality in conformance with those
specifications.
(§ 1, Ord. 1638-NS, eff. January 12, 2018)
Sec. 3-10.209. General services.
   (a)   General services as defined in Article 1, Sec.
3-10.102(e) shall be procured either through the bid process outlined in
Article 2, Section
3-10.201 with the emphasis on awarding to the "lowest responsive responsible
bidder" or through the Request for Proposal process outlined in Article 4, Sec.
3-10.401 with emphasis on factors other than price.
   (b)   Factors to Consider. If it is determined by the department in
consultation with the Purchasing Agent that all vendors providing a service
classification can equally provide the service satisfactorily, a bid process
would be appropriate. However, if factors other than price need to be
considered in awarding the contract, the Request for Proposal (RFP) process may
be used. Examples of areas other than price that may be important in awarding
the contract include: experience level, competence, resources/equipment,
staffing levels, services available/time factors, and other qualifications
determined by each City department responsible for recommending the service
contract that may be important to consider.
   (c)   Master General Services Single or Multi-year Contracts may be awarded
to multiple service providers following a formal Request for Proposal/
Qualification process using the procedures set forth in Sec.
3-10.401. Award of master contracts and negotiating task orders should follow
the procedure set out in Sec.
3-10.108.
(§ 1, Ord. 1638-NS, eff. January 12, 2018)
Article 3. Public Work Projects
Sec. 3-10.301. Uniform construction cost accounting procedures.
   The City Council has elected to become subject to the Uniform Construction
Cost Accounting Procedures as established by the California Uniform
Construction Cost Accounting Commission. All dollar amounts contained in this
Article 3 shall be increased automatically as authorized pursuant to the
adjustments made by the California Uniform Cost Accounting Commission under
Section 22020 of the Public Contract Code.
(§ 1, Ord. 1638-NS, eff. January 12, 2018)
Sec. 3-10.302. Bidding procedures for various project amounts.
   (a)   A public project of Forty-five Thousand and no/100ths ($45,000.00)
Dollars or less may be performed by City employees by force account, by
negotiated contract, or by Purchase Order.
   (b)   A public project of an estimated amount exceeding Forty-five Thousand
and no/100ths ($45,000.00) Dollars but not more than One Hundred Seventy-five
Thousand and no/100ths ($175,000.00) Dollars may be let to contract by informal
bid procedures as set forth in this article.
   (c)   A public project in an amount exceeding One Hundred Seventy-five
Thousand and no/100ths ($175,000.00) Dollars shall, except as otherwise
provided in this article, be let to contract by formal bidding procedures.
   The described project cost limits of (a) through (c) in this section shall
be increased automatically as authorized pursuant to the adjustments made by
the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission under Section
22020 of the Public Contract Code.
(§ 1, Ord. 1638-NS, eff. January 12, 2018)
Sec. 3-10.303. Approval and adoption of plans.
   The City Council shall approve the design and adopt plans, specifications,
and working details, as well as authorize the bid request for all Public Works
projects for an amount consistent with those contained in Sec.
3-10.302(c). The City Engineer is delegated discretionary authority to approve
the design and adopt plans, specifications, and working details for all Public
Works projects qualifying under subsection (a) and (b) of Sec.
3-10.302.
(§ 1, Ord. 1638-NS, eff. January 12, 2018)
Sec. 3-10.304. Negotiate contract or purchase order procedures.
   For those projects qualifying under subsection (a) of Sec.
3-10.302, the project manager shall obtain a cost estimate from the project
engineer or architect prior to issuing a Purchase Order or negotiating a
contract with a responsible contractor. For any City force account work, the
project manager shall first comply with the guidelines established by the
California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission in determining the
cost of the public project.
   The City Manager shall have the authority to award and to execute any
contract for the public project qualifying under subsection (a) and (b) of Sec.
3-10.302.
(§ 1, Ord. 1638-NS, eff. January 12, 2018)
Sec. 3-10.305. Informal bidding procedures.
   For those projects which qualify under subsection (b) of Sec.
3-10.302 for informal bidding, the following procedures shall be used:
   (a)   Bidder List. The City shall maintain a list of qualified contractors,
identified according to categories of work. Minimum criteria for development
and maintenance of the contractors' list shall be consistent with the
California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting rules.
   (b)   Notice. Unless the product or service is proprietary, all contractors
on the City's list for the category of work being bid shall be mailed a notice
inviting informal bids, or an announcement/ advertisement shall be placed in
all construction trade journals specified in this section, or both such mailing
and advertising. The trade journals shall be those identified by the California
Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission as appropriate for this area.
In addition, notice shall be posted on the City's Purchasing website.
   (c)   Bidder’s Security/Failure to Sign Contract. Bidder's security shall be
prescribed in the notice inviting bids in an amount equal to ten (10%) percent
of the amount bid. Bidder's security shall be either a cash deposit with the
City, a cashier's or certified check payable to the City, or a bidder's bond.
Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to the return of bid security within
sixty (60) days of the date of the award. However, the lowest responsive and
responsible bidder shall forfeit all or part of his/her bid security, as may be
determined by the City Council, upon the bidder's refusal or failure to execute
the contract within ten (10) days after the date of the award of the contract.
On the refusal or failure of the lowest responsive and responsible bidder to
execute the contract, the City Council may award the contract to the next
lowest responsive and responsible bidder.
   (d)   Minimum Time Period. All mailing of notices to contractors and
announcements/ advertisements published in the construction trade journals
pursuant to subdivision (b) shall be completed not less than ten (10) calendar
days before bids are due.
   (e)   Notice Contents. The notice inviting informal bids shall describe the
project in general terms, how to obtain more detailed information about the
project, and state the time and place for the submission of bids.
   (f)   Performance/Labor/Materials Bonds. A labor and materials bond, plus a
performance bond shall be required, from a surety company licensed to do
business in California and acceptable to the City, in amounts equivalent to the
total contract amount.
   (g)   Bid Opening Procedure. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the City
Clerk Department and shall be identified as to bidder, project, and “Bid” on
the envelope. Bids shall be opened by the City Clerk's staff in public at the
time and place stated in the notice inviting bids. At that time, a written
record and tabulation shall be made of all bids received, and shall be open for
public inspection during regular business hours for a period of one year after
the, bid opening. The project manager shall make an analysis of the bids for
compliance with bid specifications, and thereafter, make a recommendation for
award or rejection.
   (h)   Award. The City Manager shall award the contract or reject the bids.
The Purchasing Officer may waive minor bid irregularities.
   (i)   Change Orders. A Change Order shall be used to modify the contract
documents regarding contract price, schedule of payments, completion date,
plans and specifications, and for unit price overruns and under runs, as
specified in the Contract. Work description and justification must relate to
the original project and must be work necessary to achieve original scope of
project. After a determination that costs are merited by developments in a
specific project, the City Manager is authorized to issue Contract Amendments
or Change Orders up to the contract contingency approved by the City Council as
awarded for the individual contract as follows:
   (1)   City Manager may approve Project Change Orders until the contract
reaches One Hundred Seventy-five and no/100th ($175,000.00) Dollars or as is
reflected under Section 22020 of the Public Contract Code.
   (2)   Once the original contract plus all accumulated Change Orders are in
an amount that is equal to One Hundred Seventy-five and no/100th ($175,000.00)
Dollars or as is reflected under Section 22020 of the Public Contract Code, the
contract and subsequent Change Orders must be approved by City Council prior to
commencing with the work.
   (j)   Bids in Excess of Statutory Amount. If all bids received are in excess
of One Hundred Seventy-five Thousand and no/100ths ($175,000.00) Dollars or as
is reflected under Section 22020 of the Public Contract Code, the City Council
may, by passage of a resolution by a four-fifths (4/5) vote, award the contract
up to One Hundred Eighty-seven Thousand Five Hundred and no/100ths
($187,500.00) Dollars or less or as is reflected under Section 22020 of the
Public Contract Code to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder if it
determines the cost estimate of the City was reasonable.
(§ 1, Ord. 1638-NS, eff. January 12, 2018)
Sec. 3-10.306. Formal Bidding Procedures.
   For those projects requiring formal bidding under Sec.
3-10.302(c), the following procedures shall be used:
   (a)   Publication. A notice shall be published, at least once, fourteen (14)
calendar days before the date of opening the bids in a newspaper of general
circulation printed and published in the jurisdiction of the City. The notice
inviting formal bids shall also be mailed to all construction trade journals
specified by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission as
appropriate for the area. The notice shall be mailed at least thirty (30)
calendar days before the date of opening the bids. The notice inviting formal
bids shall state the time and place for the receiving and opening of sealed
bids and distinctly describe the project. In addition to notice required by
this section, the City may give such other notice as it deems proper.
   (b)   Bidder's Security/Failure to Sign Contract. Bidder's security shall be
prescribed in the notice inviting bids in an amount equal to ten (10%) percent
of the amount bid. Bidder's security shall be either a cash deposit with the
City, a cashier's or certified check payable to the City, or a bidder's bond.
Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to the return of bid security within
sixty (60) days of the date of the award. However, the lowest responsive and
responsible bidder shall forfeit all or part of his/her bid security, as may be
determined by the City Council, upon the bidder's refusal or failure to execute
the contract within ten (10) days after the date of the award of the contract.
On the refusal or failure of the lowest responsive and responsible bidder to
execute the contract, the City Council may award the contract to the next
lowest responsive and responsible bidder. All bids must be signed by person
authorized to bind company to bid terms.
   (c)   Bid opening Procedure. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the City
Clerk's Office and shall be identified as to bidder, project, and "Bid" on the
envelope. Bids shall be opened by the City Clerk's staff in public at the time
and place stated in the notice inviting bids. A written record and tabulation
shall be made at that time of all bids received, and shall be open for public
inspection during regular business hours for a period of one year after the bid
opening. The project manager shall make an analysis of the bids for compliance
with bid specifications and, thereafter, make a recommendation for award or
rejection.
   (d)   Award of Contracts/Minor Irregularities. Contracts shall be awarded by
the City Council to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder whose bid
fulfills the purpose intended, according to criteria designated in the
solicitation, and provided the award amount is within the unencumbered
appropriation for that item. The City Council may waive minor bid
irregularities.
   (e)   Change Orders. A "Change Order" shall be used to modify the contract
documents regarding contract price, schedule of payments, completion date,
plans and specifications, and for unit price overruns and under runs, as
specified in the Contract. Work description and justification must relate to
the original project and must be work necessary to achieve original scope of
project. After a determination that costs are merited by developments in a
specific project, the City Manager is authorized to issue Contract Amendments
or Change Orders up to the contract contingency approved by the City Council as
awarded for the individual contract as follows:
      (1)   City Manager may approve accumulative Project Change Orders up to
the contingency established and approved by City Council for each individual
contract.
   (f)   Tie Bids. If two or more bids received are for the same total amount
or unit price, quality and service being equal, and if the public interest will
not permit the delay or readvertising for bids, the City Council may accept
either bid.
   (g)   Performance/Labor/materials Bonds. A labor and materials bond, plus a
performance bond shall be required, from an acceptable surety, in such amounts
and in such a form as the City finds reasonably necessary to protect the public
interest.
   (h)   No Bids. If no bids are received, the project may be performed by City
employees by force account, or by informal bidding procedures without further
complying with this article.
(§ 1, Ord. 1638-NS, eff. January 12, 2018)
Sec. 3-10.307. Rejection of bids.
   (a)   In its discretion, the City Council may reject any bids presented. If
after the first invitation for bids all bids are rejected, the City shall state
the reasons for the rejection, and after reevaluating its cost estimates of the
project, the City shall have the option of either of the following:
      (1)   Abandoning the project or readvertising for bids in the manner
described by this article.
      (2)   By passage of a resolution by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the City
Council declaring that the project can be performed more economically by City
employees, may have the project done by force account without further complying
with this article.
(§ 1, Ord. 1638-NS, eff. January 12, 2018)
Sec. 3-10.308. Emergencies; procedure.
   In cases of great emergency as determined by the City Council, including,
but not limited to, states of emergency defined in Section 8558 of the
Government Code, when repair or replacements are necessary to permit the
continued conduct of the operation of services of the City, or to avoid danger
to life or property, the City Council, by majority vote, may proceed at once to
replace or repair any public facility without adopting plans, specification, or
working details, or give notice for bids to let a contracts. The work may be
done by City forces, by contract, or by a combination of the two (2). The City
Council delegates to the City Manager, the authority to declare a public
emergency subject to confirmation by the City Council by a four-fifths (4/5)
vote, at its next meeting.
(§ 1, Ord. 1638-NS, eff. January 12, 2018)
Sec. 3-10.309. Staging of public works.
   Public Works contracts shall not be knowingly staged or separated into
smaller units or segments solely for the purpose of evading the competitive
bidding requirements of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1638-NS, eff. January 12, 2018)
Sec. 3-10.310. Bid protests.
   Any interested party may file a protest regarding the procurement decisions
authorized under this chapter.
   (a)   Notice of Decision. After a decision regarding a procurement having a
value over Forty-five Thousand and no/100th ($45,000.00) Dollars or as is
reflected under Section 22020 of the Public Contract Code has been made, the
Department Head or designee shall notify all persons who submitted a response
to a City solicitation of intended award. If a bidder is rejected because the
bid is found non-responsive or because the bidder is deemed not-responsible,
the City will give written notice to said bidder of evidence reflecting such
decision.
   (b)   Time to File Protest. All protests must be filed in writing and
received by the Department Head within five (5) business days of the date on
the notice of intended award.
   (c)   Form of Protest. All protests shall be in writing, state the grounds
for the protest, state the facts relevant to the protest, and all evidentiary
support to rebut adverse evidence that it or another bidder was either non-
responsive or not responsible. All protests have to be filed in accordance with
the instructions contained in the solicitation which is the subject of the
protest.
   (d)   City Manager Review. The City Manager or designee shall review the
protest and issue a written decision on the protest. The City Manager or
designee may base the decision on the written protest alone or may informally
gather evidence from the person(s) filing the protest or any other person
having relevant information. For procurements having a value of less than the
statutory limits contained in Public Contract Code Section 22020, currently set
at One Hundred Seventy-five Thousand and no/100th ($175,000.00) Dollars, the
City Manager's or designee's decision shall be final.
   (e)   Hearing on Protest. If a bid was rejected on the grounds that the
bidder was not a "responsible" bidder, the protesting party must submit
materials set forth in subdivision (c) above for consideration. A hearing will
be set within a reasonable time to provide a decision before final approval of
the selected low bid. For procurements having a value of less than the
statutory limits contained in Public Contract Code Section 22020, currently set
at One Hundred Seventy-five Thousand and no/100th ($175,000.00) Dollars, the
City Manager's or designee's decision shall be final.
   (f)   Appeal of City Manager's Decision to City Council. For procurements
having a value exceeding the statutory limits contained in Public Contract Code
Section 22020, currently set at One Hundred Seventy-five Thousand and no/100th
($175,000.00) Dollars but subject to periodic changes by the state legislature,
an appeal of the City Manager's decision may be filed with the City Council.
All such appeals must be in writing, and shall be filed with the City Clerk
within five (5) business days from the date of the City Manager's decision.
   (g)   Failure to Timely Appeal. An interested party who fails to file a
protest within the times set forth in this section waives any right to protest
the issue further. No appeal to either the City Manager or City Council of any
decision to award a bid under Chapter 10 may occur once the contract has been
awarded.
(§ 1, Ord. 1638-NS, eff. January 12, 2018)
Article 4. Professional, Management, General or Special Services
Sec. 3-10.401. Award of professional, management, general or special services
contracts based upon competence.
   Factors to Consider. In contracting for professional services listed in
Government Code Section 4526, selection shall be based on demonstrated
competence and on professional qualifications necessary for the satisfactory
performance of the services and solicited through a Request for Qualification
process.
   In contracting for professional services (other than those professions
listed in Government Code Section 4526), management, general or special
services contracts should only be awarded to firms or persons who have
demonstrated “adequate competence” meaning: an adequate level of experience,
competence, training, credentials, character, integrity, reputation, financial
responsibility, resources, equipment, staffing, and other professional
qualifications necessary for more than a satisfactory performance of the
services required in the time period needed and price. The cost of the service
may be considered, however, the lowest cost may not be the sole factor in
deciding which firm or who shall be awarded the contract. It may be in the
City's best interest to award the contract to a higher priced contractor based
on the scope of services, availability, unique skills, staffing levels, timing,
prior experience, familiarity with the City and other factors required by the
department. The information needed for determining that level of competence
other qualifications and the procedure for selecting such services shall be
determined by the City department responsible for recommending the service
contract.
   (a)   Request for Proposal/Qualifications. The acquiring of services shall
be procured through negotiated contract following a Request for Proposal/
Qualifications process. Contracting for services is decentralized and shall be
the responsibility of the Department Head requesting the service. The
Purchasing Agent may be contacted to assist in the formal Request for Proposal/
Qualification (RFP/Q) process. Consultants/contractors, who assist in drafting
specifications and/or design a project, are prohibited from bidding on the
construction project.
   (b)   Contracts, not within (a) above, for an amount less than Five Thousand
and no/100th ($5,000.00) Dollars. A Department Head may award contracts up to
Five Thousand and no/100th ($5,000.00) Dollars with qualified consultants/
firms.
   (c)   Contracts for an amount exceeding Five Thousand and no/100th
($5,000.00) Dollars but not more than Seventy-five Thousand and no/100th
($75,000.00) Dollars. The requesting department shall meet the following
requirement unless an urgency exists pursuant to Sec. 3-10.205 above:
      (1)   Selection Process. Prepare an informal written document and contact
as many companies as necessary to receive a minimum of three (3) written
responses from consultants/firms. This requirement may be waived for good cause
in writing by the Department Head and Purchasing Agent in consultation with one
another.
      (2)   Award. The Department Head shall prepare a written recommendation
to the Purchasing Officer for the firm or person to be awarded the contract.
The Purchasing Officer shall award the contract.
      (3)   Contract Document. A written contract must be established and
contracts for an amount of Twenty-five Thousand and no/100th ($25,000.00)
Dollars or less shall be approved/awarded by the Department Head. The City
Manager or designee must sign/approve any service contract in an amount
exceeding Twenty-five Thousand and no/100th ($25,000.00) Dollars but not more
than Seventy-five Thousand and no/100ths ($75,000.00) Dollars.
   (d)   Contracts for an amount exceeding Seventy-five Thousand and no/100ths
($75,000.00) Dollars and over. Departments shall utilize a Sealed Request for
Proposal process essentially meeting the following requirements unless an
urgency exists pursuant in Section
3-10.205 above:
      (1)   Request for Proposal/Qualification (RFP/Q) solicitation process. A
formal Sealed Request for Proposal/Qualification herein ("RFP/Q") document
shall be developed for solicitation of professional, management, or general and
special services contracts for an amount exceeding Seventy-five Thousand and
no/100ths ($75,000.00) Dollars.
      (2)   Advertisement. The department shall advertise in appropriate
publications and/or use the Professional Services Listings, as available, and
post on the City's purchasing website, during the solicitation process.
      (3)   Fourteen (14) Day Notice. Notice inviting RFP/Q's shall be posted
at City Hall at least fourteen (14) calendar days before the due date of
submission of the RFP/Q.
      (4)   Notice Contents. The notice shall include a description of general
type of service needed, how the RFP/Q minimum Scope of Work can be obtained,
any pre-proposal conferences anticipated, the requirement of a written sealed
proposal, state the closing date, and place and time for submission of the RFP/
Q.
      (5)   Solicitation Procedure. Sealed Request for Proposals/Qualifications
should be submitted to the department. RFP/Q's need not be opened publicly. All
proposals shall be analyzed by the department for compliance with RFP/
Q requirements, value of the total scope of services. Follow-up interviews of
the most qualified of those submitting a proposal should be held.
      (6)   Award. Professional, Management, General, and Special Services
contracts of an amount exceeding Seventy-five Thousand and no/100th
($75,000.00) Dollars shall be awarded by City Council.
      (7)   Contract Amendments. The City Manager is authorized to issue
Contract Amendments as set forth:
         (i)   If the contract was originally executed for an amount of
Seventy-five Thousand and no/100th ($75,000.00) Dollars or less, the City
Manager shall have the authority to issue Contract Amendments, provided that
the sum of all amendments, plus original contract amount, shall not exceed
Seventy-five Thousand and no/100th ($75,000.00) Dollars. If the amended
contract will exceed Seventy-five Thousand and no/100th ($75,000.00) Dollars,
the City Council shall make a finding that it is in the best interest of the
City to waive the normal selection process and approve the amendment to the
contract.
         (ii)   For a contract originally executed for an amount of Seventy-
five Thousand and no/100th ($75,000.00) Dollars and over and originally
approved by City Council, the City Manager shall have authority to issue
contract amendments, provided that the sum of all contract amendments for any
single contract shall not exceed the amount approved by City Council. If the
amended contract will exceed the amount previously approved by City Council,
the contract amendment must be approved by City Council.
      (8)   Master Professional Services Contracts. For those professional
services as defined in Government Code Section 4526, master single or multi-
year contracts with several consultants with a general scope of work may be set
up for a total not-to-exceed dollar amount as approved by City Council.
         (i)   A formal Request for Qualification process shall be used in
accordance with Municipal Code Sec.
3-10.401(d) and awarded based on qualifications plus reasonableness of cost.
         (ii)   Task Orders shall be issued pursuant to the Master Contract
with a specific scope of work and the Department Head shall have authority to
execute such Task Orders for individual projects for Twenty five Thousand and
no/100th ($25,000.00) Dollars or less. The City Manager shall have the
authority to execute such Task Orders over Twenty-five Thousand and no/100th
($25,000) Dollars, but not more than Seventy-five Thousand and no/100th
($75,000) Dollars.
         (iii)   Any Task Orders in an amount exceeding Seventy-five Thousand
and no/100th ($75,000.00) Dollars will require City Council's approval pursuant
to the terms of the Master Contract.
(§ 1, Ord. 1638-NS, eff. January 12, 2018)
Article 5. Waiving of Purchasing Procedures
Sec. 3-10.501. Waiving of purchasing procedures.
   In its discretion, the City Council may at any time, without amending this
chapter, waive the purchasing procedures or alter these proceedings to fit a
specific purchase or contract, when such waiver is not in violation of state or
federal law. A request for waiver should occur only when unforeseen
circumstances arise that justify an exception to following the provisions of
this chapter and is in the best interest of the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 1638-NS, eff. January 12, 2018)
Article 6. Federal Grant Purchasing Procedures
Sec. 3-10.601. Federal grant purchasing procedures.
   In the case of federal grant awards, the City will conform to all applicable
federal purchasing requirements per the Uniform Guidance effective by July 1,
2018. Unless otherwise stated in the grant documents, federal grant purchasing
requirements will always supersede City purchasing policy.
(§ 1, Ord. 1638-NS, eff. January 12, 2018)
CHAPTER 11. PROPERTY TAXES
Sec. 3-11.01. Transfer of assessment and tax collection duties.
   Pursuant to the authority granted by the provisions of Sections 51500
through 51521 of the Government Code of the State, the assessment and tax
collection duties performed by the City Assessor and Tax Collector are hereby
transferred to the Assessor and Tax Collector of the County.
(§ 1, Ord. 5)
Sec. 3-11.02. Transfer of other duties.
   Pursuant to the authority granted by the provisions of Section 51507 of the
Government Code of the State, the duties of the City Assessor, other than the
assessment of City property, and the duties of the Tax Collector, other than
the collection of taxes, are hereby transferred to, and shall be performed by,
the City Clerk or such officer of the County as may, by contract with the City,
be designated and authorized to perform such duties.
(§ 3, Ord. 5)
Sec. 3-11.03. Abolition of offices.
   The offices of City Assessor and Tax Collector are hereby abolished.
(§ 2, Ord. 5)
CHAPTER 12. REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAXES
Sec. 3-12.01. Title.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Real Property Transfer Tax Law of the
City of Thousand Oaks.” It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in
Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code of the State.
(§ 1, Ord. 157)
Sec. 3-12.02. Tax imposed.
   There is hereby imposed on each deed, instrument, or writing by which any
lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the City shall be granted,
assigned, transferred, or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or
purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the
consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the
value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale)
exceeds One Hundred and no/100ths ($100.00) Dollars a tax at the rate of
twenty-seven and one-half (27-1/2¢) cents for each Five Hundred and no/ 100ths
($500.00) Dollars, or fractional part thereof.
(§ 2, Ord. 157)
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see California Revenue and Taxation Code § 11911
Sec. 3-12.03. Person responsible for payment.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of Section 3-12.02 of this
chapter shall be paid by any person who makes, signs, or issues any document or
instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made,
signed, or issued.
(§ 3, Ord. 157)
Sec. 3-12.04. Exemptions: Debt security instruments.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not apply
to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt.
(California Revenue and Taxation Code § 11921) (§ 4, Ord. 157)
Sec. 3-12.05. Exemptions: Governmental agencies.
   Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or
instrumentality thereof, or any state or territory, or political subdivision
thereof, is a party, shall be exempt from any tax imposed pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title.
(California Revenue and Taxation Code § 11922) (§ 5, Ord. 157, as amended by §
6, Ord. 1250-NS, eff. January 9, 1996, and § 6, Ord. 1374-NS, eff. April 26,
2001)
Sec. 3-12.06. Exemptions: Bankruptcies, receiverships, and reorganizations.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not apply
to the making, delivering, or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan
or reorganization or adjustment:
   (a)   Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;
   (b)   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a
railroad corporation, as defined in 11 U.S.C. 101(44);
   (c)   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a
corporation, as defined in 11 U.S.C. 101(9); or
   (d)   Whereby a mere change in identity, form, or place of organization is
effected.
   The provisions of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery, or
filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five (5) years
from the date of such confirmation, approval, or change.
(California Revenue and Taxation Code § 11923) (§ 6, Ord. 157, as amended by
part 4, Ord. 1437-NS, eff. July 7, 2005)
Sec. 3-12.07. Exemptions: Securities and Exchange Commission orders.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not apply
to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the
Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subsection (a) of Section
1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, but only if:
   (a)   The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to
which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or
appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the
United States Code relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;
   (b)   Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; and
   (c)   Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order.
(California Revenue and Taxation Code § 11924) (§ 7, Ord. 157)
Sec. 3-12.08. Exemptions: Partnerships.
   (a)   In the case of any realty held by a partnership or other entity
treated as a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or
other entity treated as a partnership or otherwise if:
   (1)   Such partnership or other entity treated as a partnership is
considered a continuing partnership or other entity treated as a partnership
within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and
   (2)   Such continuing partnership or other entity treated as a partnership
continues to hold the realty concerned.
   (b)   If there is a termination of any partnership or other entity treated
as a partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code
of 1954, for the purposes of this chapter such partnership or other entity
treated as a partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument
whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of
any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership
or other entity treated as a partnership at the time of such termination.
   (c)   Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection (b) of this
section, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by
such partnership or other entity treated as a partnership at the time of such
termination.
   (d)   No levy shall be imposed pursuant to this part by reason of any
transfer between an individual or individuals and a legal entity or between
legal entities that results solely in a change in the method of holding title
to the realty and in which proportional ownership interests in the realty,
whether represented by stock, membership interest, partnership interest,
cotenancy interest, or otherwise, directly or indirectly, remain the same
immediately after the transfer.
(California Revenue and Taxation Code § 11925) (§ 8, Ord. 157, as amended by
part 5, Ord. 1437-NS, eff. July 7, 2005)
Sec. 3-12.09. Exemptions: Inter vivos gifts or death.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any deed, instrument, or
other writing which purports to grant, assign, transfer, convey, divide,
allocate, or vest lands, tenements, or realty, or any interest therein, if by
reason of such inter vivos gift or by reason of the death of any person, such
lands, tenements, realty, or interests therein are transferred outright to, or
in trust for the benefit of, any person or entity.
(California Revenue and Taxation Code § 11930) (§ 8, Ord. 1374-NS, eff. April
26, 2001)
Sec. 3-12.10. Exemptions: Foreclosure or deed in lieu thereof.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not apply
to any deed, instrument, or writing to a beneficiary or mortgagee, which is
taken from the mortgagor or trustor as a result of, or in lieu of, foreclosure;
provided, that such tax shall apply to the extent that consideration exceeds
the unpaid debt, including accrued interest and cost of foreclosure. For tax
purposes, consideration, unpaid debt amount and identification of grantee, as
beneficiary or mortgagee, shall be noted on said deed, instrument or writing,
or stated in an affidavit or declaration under penalty of perjury.
(California Revenue and Taxation Code § 11926) (§ 7, Ord. 1250-NS, eff. January
9, 1996, as renumbered and amended by § 9, Ord. 1374-NS, eff. April 26, 2001)
Sec. 3-12.11. Exemptions: Separation or dissolution of marriage.
   (a)   Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not
apply with respect to any deed, instrument, or other writing which purports to
transfer, divide, or allocate community, quasi-community or quasi-marital
property which is required by a judgment decreeing a dissolution of the
marriage or legal separation, by a judgment of nullity, or by any other
judgment or order rendered pursuant to the Family Code, or by a written
agreement between the spouses, executed in contemplation of any such judgment
or order whether or not the written agreement is incorporated as part of any of
those judgments or order.
   (b)   In order to qualify for the exemption provided in subdivision (a), the
written deed, instrument, or other writing shall include a recital, signed by
either spouse, stating that the deed, instrument, or other writing is entitled
to exemption.
(California Revenue and Taxation Code § 11927) (§ 7, Ord. 1250-NS, eff. January
9, 1996, as renumbered by § 10, Ord. 1374-NS, eff. April 26, 2001, as amended
by part 6, Ord. 1437-NS, eff. July 7, 2005)
Sec. 3-12.12. Exemptions: Reconveyance to state or agency thereof.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not apply
to any deed, instrument or writing by which realty is conveyed by the State of
California, any political subdivision thereof, or agency or instrumentality of
either thereof, pursuant to an agreement whereby the purchaser agrees to
immediately reconvey the realty to the exempt agency.
(California Revenue and Taxation Code § 11928) (§ 7, Ord. 1250-NS, eff. January
9, 1996, as renumbered by § 10, Ord. 1374-NS, eff. April 26, 2001)
Sec. 3-12.13. Exemptions: Conveyance to nonprofit corporation.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not apply
to any deed, instrument or writing by which the State of California, any
political subdivision thereof, or agency or instrumentality of either thereof,
conveys to a nonprofit corporation realty the acquisition, construction, or
improvement of which was financed or refinanced by obligations issued by the
nonprofit corporation on behalf of a governmental entity within the meaning of
Section 1.103-1(b) of Title 26 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
(California Revenue and Taxation Code § 11929) (§ 7, Ord. 1250-NS, eff. January
9, 1996, as renumbered by § 10, Ord. 1374-NS, eff. April 26, 2001, as amended
by part 7, Ord. 1437-NS, eff. July 7, 2005)
Sec. 3-12.14. Administration.
   The County Recorder shall administer the provisions of this chapter in
conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code of the State and the provisions of any County ordinance adopted
pursuant thereto.
(§ 9, Ord. 157, as renumbered by § 7, Ord. 1374-NS, eff. April 26, 2001)
Sec. 3-12.15. Claims for refunds.
   Claims for the refund of taxes imposed pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with
Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division I of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the
State.
(California Revenue and Taxation Code § 11934) (§ 10, Ord. 157, as renumbered
by § 7, Ord. 1374-NS, eff. April 26, 2001)
Sec. 3-12.16. Operative date.
   The provisions of this chapter shall become operative upon the operative
date of any ordinance adopted by the County pursuant to the provisions of Part
6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation
Code of the State, or on November 28, 1967, whichever is the later.
(§ 11, Ord. 157, as renumbered by § 7, Ord. 1374-NS, eff. April 26, 2001)
CHAPTER 13. SALES AND USE TAXES
Sec. 3-13.01. Short title.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law” of
the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 6)
Sec. 3-13.02. Rate.
   The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be nine
hundred sixty-seven one-thousandths (.967%) of one percent.
(§ 2, Ord. 6)
Sec. 3-13.03. Operative date.
   The operative date of this chapter shall be January 1, 1965.
(§ 3, Ord. 6)
Sec. 3-13.04. Purpose.
   The Council hereby declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the
following, among other, purposes and directs that the provisions hereof be
interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:
   (a)   To adopt a sales and use tax law which complies with the requirements
and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation
Code of the State;
   (b)   To adopt a sales and use tax law which incorporates provisions
identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State insofar as those
provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained
in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code;
   (c)   To adopt a sales and use tax law which imposes a tax and provides a
measure therefor which can be administered and collected by the State Board of
Equalization in a manner which adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and
requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and
administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in
administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes; and
   (d)   To adopt a sales and use tax law which can be administered in a manner
that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of
Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State, minimize the cost of
collecting City sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of
record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this
chapter.
(§ 4, Ord. 6)
Sec. 3-13.05. Contract with State.
   Prior to January 1, 1965, the City shall contract with the State Board of
Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and
operation of this sales and use tax law; provided, however, if the City shall
not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to January 1,
1965, it shall nevertheless so contract, and in such a case the operative date
shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of
such a contract rather than January 1, 1965.
(§ 5, Ord. 6)
Sec. 3-13.06. Sales tax.
   For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is
hereby imposed upon all retailers in the City at the rate of nine hundred
sixty-seven one-thousandths (.967%) of one percent of the gross receipts of the
retailer from the sale of all tangible property sold at retail in the City on
and after the operative date of this chapter.
(§ 6, Ord. 6)
Sec. 3-13.07. Place of sale.
   For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the
place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is
delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-State destination or to a
common carrier for delivery to an out-of-State destination. The gross receipts
from such sales shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to
the State sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made.
In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business, the place or places
at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and
regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization.
(§ 7, Ord. 6)
Sec. 3-13.08. Use tax.
   An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use, or other consumption in
the City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after
the operative date of this chapter for storage, use, or other consumption in
the City at the rate of nine hundred sixty-seven one-thousandths (.967%) of one
percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include
delivery charges when such charges are subject to State sales or use tax,
regardless of the place to which delivery is made.
(§ 8, Ord. 6)
Sec. 3-13.09. Adoption of State laws.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code of the State, the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the said
Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as
though fully set forth herein.
(§ 9, Ord. 6)
Sec. 3-13.10. Adoption of State laws: Limitations.
   In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code of the State, wherever the State is named or referred to as the
taxing agency, the name of the City shall be substituted therefor. The
substitution, however, shall not be made when the word “State” is used as part
of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of
Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the
Constitution of the State; the substitution shall not be made when the result
of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the City,
or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Board of
Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or
operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections
including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior
boundaries of the State where the result of the substitution would be to
provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use,
or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be
exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use, or other consumption
remains subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Part 1 of Division
2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State, or to impose this tax with
respect to certain sales, storage, use, or other consumption of tangible
personal property which would not be subject to tax by the State under the said
provisions of that Code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701,
6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6797, or 6828 of the
said Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the
word “State” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this State” in
Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203 of said Code.
(§ 10, Ord. 6)
Sec. 3-13.11. Permits not required.
   If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer pursuant to the provision
of Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State, an additional
seller’s permit shall not be required by the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 11, Ord. 6, as amended by § 1, Ord. 411-NS, operative January 1, 1974)
Sec. 3-13.12. Exclusions.
(§ 12, Ord. 6; repealed by § 8, Ord. 1250-NS, eff. January 9, 1996)
Sec. 3-13.12.5. Exclusions and exemptions.*
(§ 2, Ord. 411-NS, operative January 1, 1974, as amended by § 1, Ord. 851-NS,
eff. January 10, 1984; repealed by § 8, Ord. 1250-NS, eff. January 9, 1996)
*   Editor’s note: Section 3-13.12.5 shall be operative January 1, 1984.
Section 2 of Ord. 851-NS, on file in the office of the city clerk, shall repeal
Section 3-13.12.5 and be operative on the operative date of any act of the
legislature of the State which amends the Revenue and Taxation Code to provide
an exemption from City sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels.
Sec. 3-13.12.6. Application of provisions relating to exclusions and
exemptions.
(§ 2, Ord. 411-NS, operative January 1, 1974; repealed by § 8, Ord. 1250-NS,
eff. January 9, 1996)
Sec. 3-13.13. Amendments.
   All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State
which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with the
provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of said Revenue and Taxation Code shall
automatically become a part of this chapter.
(§ 13, Ord. 6)
Sec. 3-13.14. Enjoining collection forbidden.
   No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against the State or the
City, or against any officer of the State or the City, to prevent or enjoin the
collection under this chapter or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code of the State of any tax or any amount of tax required to be
collected.
(§ 14, Ord. 6)
CHAPTER 14. TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAXES
Sec. 3-14.01. Title.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Law” of
the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 26)
Sec. 3-14.02. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Person” shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture,
association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company,
corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or
any other group or combination acting as a unit.
   (b)   “Hotel” shall mean any type of commercial establishment, or any
portion of any type of commercial establishment, which provides for the
occupancy of transients for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes, whether by
the day, week, or month, including, but not limited to, hotels, inns, and
motels.
   (c)   “Occupancy” shall mean the use or possession, or the right to the use
or possession, of any room or rooms, or portion thereof, in any hotel for
dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes.
   (d)   “Transient” shall mean any person who exercises occupancy or is
entitled to occupancy for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or
less.
   (e)   “Rent” shall mean the monetary value of the consideration charged for
occupancy, including all receipts, cash, credit, property, and services of any
kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.
   (f)   “Operator” shall mean the person who manages the hotel, whether in the
capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any
other capacity.
   (g)   “Tax Collector” shall mean the Director of Finance of the City.
(§§ 2 through 8, Ord. 26; and § 9, Ord. 26, as amended by § 2, Ord. 171)
Sec. 3-14.03. Tax imposed.
   For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel in the incorporated area of the
City, each transient shall pay a tax in the amount of ten (10%) percent of the
rent charged by the operator. Such tax shall constitute a debt owed by the
transient to the City and shall be extinguished only by payment to the operator
or to the City.
(§ 10, Ord. 26, as amended by § 1, Ord. 171, and § 1, Emergency Ord. 678-NS,
eff. June 27, 1978; readopted July 11, 1978: Ord. 984-NS, eff. December 1,
1987)
Sec. 3-14.04. Payment by transient.
   The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the
rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the
tax shall be paid with each installment. Any unpaid tax shall be paid upon the
transient’s ceasing to occupy space in the hotel.
(§ 11, Ord. 26)
Sec. 3-14.05. Duties of operators.
   Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by the provisions of this
chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from
every transient. The amount of the tax shall be separately stated from the
amount of the rent. Each transient shall receive a receipt for payment. The
operator shall not advertise or state in any manner that the tax, or any part
thereof, will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that the tax will not
be added to the rent, or that any part of the tax will be refunded, except in
the manner provided in this chapter.
(§ 12, Ord. 26)
Sec. 3-14.06. Records.
   Every operator liable for the collection and payment to the City of any tax
imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall keep and preserve for not less
than three (3) years all records necessary to determine the amount of such tax.
The operator shall make such records available for inspection by the Director
of Finance.
(§ 13, Ord. 26, as amended by § 2, Ord. 171)
Sec. 3-14.07. Registration by operators.
   Within thirty (30) days after April 1, 1965, or within thirty (30) days
after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator shall register the
hotel with the Tax Collector. Upon such registration, the Tax Collector shall
issue to such operator a “Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate.”
(§ 14, Ord. 26)
Sec. 3-14.08. Certificates: Posting.
   The operator shall post the Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate in
a conspicuous place on the hotel’s premises.
(§ 15, Ord. 26)
Sec. 3-14.09. Certificates: Form.
   The Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate shall state the following:
   (a)   The name of the operator;
   (b)   The address of the hotel;
   (c)   The date the certificate was issued; and
   (d)   The following notice: “This Transient Occupancy Registration
Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled
the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Law by registering with
the Tax Collector for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient
Occupancy Tax and remitting such tax to the Tax Collector. This certificate
does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct
any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without
strictly complying with all the local applicable laws, including, but not
limited to, those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department, or
office of the City. This certificate shall not constitute a permit.”
(§ 16, Ord. 26)
Sec. 3-14.10. Reports by operators.
   On or before the last day of the month following the close of the calendar
quarter or at the close of any other reporting period which may be established
by the Tax Collector, each operator shall file a return with the Tax Collector
showing the total rents charged and received, the amount of the tax collected,
and such other information as may be required by the Tax Collector.
(§ 17, Ord. 26)
Sec. 3-14.11. Payment of taxes.
   At the time the return is filed, the operator shall remit the full amount of
the tax collected to the Tax Collector. The Tax Collector may establish such
other reporting periods as he deems necessary or expedient to assure collection
of the tax. Returns and payments shall be due immediately upon cessation of
business for any reason.
(§ 18, Ord. 26)
Sec. 3-14.12. Taxes held in trust.
   Every operator shall hold all taxes collected in trust for the account of
the City until payment thereof is made to the Tax Collector.
(§ 19, Ord. 26)
Sec. 3-14.13. Late penalties.
   Any operator who fails to remit the tax within the time required shall pay a
penalty in the amount of ten (10%) percent of the amount of the tax.
(§ 20, Ord. 26)
Sec. 3-14.14. Additional late penalties.
   Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance within thirty (30)
days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall
pay a penalty in the amount of ten (10%) percent of the amount of the tax in
addition to the amount of the tax and the ten (10%) percent penalty first
imposed.
(§ 21, Ord. 26)
Sec. 3-14.15. Fraud.
   For fraudulent nonpayment of any remittance, a penalty in the amount of
twenty-five (25%) percent of the amount of the tax shall be imposed in addition
to the penalties set forth in Sections 3-14.13 and 3-14.14 of this chapter.
(§ 22, Ord. 26)
Sec. 3-14.16. Interest.
   In addition to any penalties imposed, an operator who fails to remit any tax
imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of
one-half (.5%) of one percent per month on the amount of the tax, exclusive of
penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent.
(§ 23, Ord. 26)
Sec. 3-14.17. Penalties and interest merged with taxes.
   Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall merge and become a part of the tax.
(§ 24, Ord. 26)
Sec. 3-14.18. Determination of taxes by Tax Collector.
   If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect the tax or to make, within
the prescribed time, any report or remittance of the tax, or any portion
thereof, the Tax Collector shall estimate the amount of tax due and assess
against such operator the tax, interest, and penalties provided for in this
chapter. The Tax Collector shall give a notice in writing of the amount so
assessed by serving such notice personally or by depositing it in the United
States mail, postage prepaid, and addressed to the operator at his last known
place of business.
(§ 25, Ord. 26)
Sec. 3-14.19. Applications for hearings.
   Within ten (10) days after the service of a notice, the operator may apply
in writing to the Tax Collector for a hearing on the amount assessed. If the
application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time
prescribed, the tax, interest, and penalties determined by the Tax Collector
shall become final and conclusive.
(§ 26, Ord. 26)
Sec. 3-14.20. Hearings by Tax Collector.
   Upon receipt of the application for a hearing, the Tax Collector shall give
not less than five (5) days’ written notice in the manner prescribed in this
chapter to the operator to appear at the time and place set forth in the notice
and to offer evidence showing why the amount assessed should not be fixed for
such tax, interest, and penalties. After such hearing, the Tax Collector shall
determine the tax, penalty, and interest to be remitted and shall give written
notice thereof to the person in the manner prescribed in this chapter. The
amount so deter-mined shall be paid within fifteen (15) days unless an appeal
is taken as provided in this chapter.
(§ 27, Ord. 26)
Sec. 3-14.21. Notices of appeals.
   An operator may appeal the Tax Collector's decision to the Council by filing
a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within fifteen (15) days of the serving
or mailing of the determination.
(§ 28, Ord. 26)
Sec. 3-14.22. Notices of Council hearings.
   The Council shall fix a time and place for hearing an appeal. The City Clerk
shall give not less than five (5) days' written notice to the appellant of the
time and place of the hearing.
(§ 29, Ord. 26)
Sec. 3-14.23. Hearings by Council.
   At the time set for the hearing or at the date to which the hearing may be
continued by the Council, the Council shall hear and receive evidence bearing
on the appealed determination of the Tax Collector. The Council may place any
witnesses under oath.
(§ 30, Ord. 26)
Sec. 3-14.24. Hearings by Council: Decisions.
   The Council shall determine from the evidence what tax, interest, or
penalties, if any, are due to the City from the operator. Such decision shall
be final and conclusive. The City Clerk shall serve a copy of the decision upon
the operator. The amount shall be immediately payable upon the service of the
notice.
(§ 31, Ord. 26)
Sec. 3-14.25. Overpayment by operators: Filing of claims.
   Whenever the amount of the tax, interest, or penalty has been overpaid or
erroneously or unlawfully collected or received by the City, the operator so
paying may have such amount applied to subsequent taxes due or refunded as
provided in this chapter if, within three (3) years after the date of payment,
the operator files a claim in writing with the Tax Collector. Such claim by the
operator shall state under penalty of perjury the specific grounds and specific
facts upon which the claim is founded. The claims shall be on forms furnished
by the Tax Collector.
(§ 32, Ord. 26)
Sec. 3-14.26. Overpayment by operators: Credit.
   An operator may deduct from subsequent taxes the amount overpaid or
erroneously or unlawfully collected or received from a person who was not a
transient when the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to
the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the
operator.
(§ 33, Ord. 26)
Sec. 3-14.27. Overpayment by operators: Refunds.
   When an operator establishes a right to a credit as provided in this
chapter, shows to the satisfaction of the Tax Collector that he no longer is
operating a hotel in the incorporated area of the City or will cease such
operation before the credit can be applied, and files a written claim therefor,
the City shall refund to such operator the amount overpaid, paid more than
once, or erroneously or unlawfully collected or received.
(§ 34, Ord. 26)
Sec. 3-14.28. Overpayment by transients: Refunds.
   A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or
erroneously or unlawfully collected or received by the City by filing a written
claim in the manner provided in Section 3-14.25 of this chapter. The written
claim shall set forth facts showing that the transient has paid the tax
directly to the Tax Collector or that the transient has paid the tax to the
operator and has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected
the tax.
(§ 35, Ord. 26, as amended by § 2, Ord. 171)
Sec. 3-14.29. Records required for refunds.
   A refund shall not be paid pursuant to the provisions of this chapter unless
the claimant presents written records showing that he is entitled thereto.
(§ 36, Ord. 26)
Sec. 3-14.30. Debt to City.
   The tax required to be paid by any transient pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the City. Any such
tax collected by an operator, which tax has not been paid to the City, shall be
deemed a debt owed by the operator to the City.
(§ 37, Ord. 26)
Sec. 3-14.31. Actions to collect.
   Any person owing money to the City pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the City for the
recovery of such amount.
(§ 38, Ord. 26)
Sec. 3-14.32. Violations.
   (a)   Violations. Every person shall be guilty of a violation of this Code
who:
   (1)   Fails or refuses to register as required by the provisions of this
chapter;
   (2)   Fails or refuses to furnish any return required to be made, or fails
or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the Tax
Collector;
   (3)   Renders a false or fraudulent return;
   (4)   Makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or
evade the determination of any amount due;
   (5)   Collects the tax due pursuant to the provisions of this chapter from
any transient and fails to pay the same to the City; or
   (6)   Violates in any way any other provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   Penalties. The penalty for the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall be as set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code.
(§§ 39 and 40, Ord. 26, as amended by § V, Ord. 770-NS, eff. February 26, 1981)
Sec. 3-14.33. Security requirement.
   The Director of Finance, whenever he deems it necessary to insure compliance
with the provisions of this chapter, may require any person subject thereto to
place with him such security as the Director of Finance may determine. The
amount of the security shall be fixed by the Director of Finance but, except as
noted below, shall not be greater than twice the estimated average liability of
persons filing returns for monthly periods or Ten Thousand and no/100ths
($10,000.00) Dollars, whichever amount is the lesser. The limitations herein
provided shall apply regardless of the type of security placed with the
Director of Finance. The amount of the security may be increased or decreased
by the Director of Finance subject to the limitations herein provided. The
Director of Finance may sell the security at public auction if it becomes
necessary to do so in order to recover any tax or amount required to be
collected, interest, or penalty due. Notice of the sale may be served upon the
person who placed the security personally or by mail; if by mail, service shall
be addressed to the person at his address as it appears in the records of the
Director of Finance. Security in the form of a bearer bond issued by the United
States or the State, which bond has a prevailing market price, may, however, be
sold by the Director of Finance at private sale at a price not lower than the
prevailing market price thereof. Upon any sale any surplus above the amounts
due shall be returned to the person who placed the security.
   In lieu of the foregoing security requirements, any person subject to the
provisions contained herein may request the establishment by the Director of
Finance of a public funds account with any bank of the person's choice within
the Thousand Oaks area. At the times such person deposits general hotel
receipts, but no later than weekly, he shall deposit in said public funds
account hotel tax receipts collected pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter. Upon the receipt of the tax return forms provided by the City, the
Director of Finance will transfer into the general funds of the City the
amounts indicated on the tax return forms.
(§ 1, Ord. 215-NS, eff. July 15, 1971)
Sec. 3-14.34. Successors or assignees of business: Withholding tax from
purchase money: Certificates of no tax due.
   If any person liable for any amount under the provisions of this chapter
sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall
withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former
owner produces a receipt from the Director of Finance, showing that all taxes
due from the person quitting, selling, or assigning his business have been
paid, or a certificate stating that no amount is due.
(§ 2, Ord. 215-NS, eff. July 15, 1971)
Sec. 3-14.35. Successors or assignees of business: Liability for tax.
   If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold the purchase price as
required in Section 3-14.34 of this chapter, he shall be personally liable for
the payment of the amount requested to be withheld by him to the extent of the
purchase price, valued in money. Within sixty (60) days after receiving a
written request from the purchaser for a certificate, or within sixty (60) days
from the date the former owner's records were made available for audit,
whichever period expires the later, but in any event not later than ninety (90)
days after receiving the request, the Director of Finance shall either issue
the certificate or mail a notice to the purchaser at his address as it appears
in the records of the Director of Finance of the amount that must be paid as a
condition of issuing the certificate.
(§ 3, Ord. 215-NS, eff. July 15, 1971)
Sec. 3-14.36. Exemptions.
   No tax shall be imposed upon:
   (a)   Any Federal or State of California officer or employee when on
official business;
   (b)   Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by
express provision of federal law or international treaty.
   No exemption shall be granted under subsections (a) and (b) of this section
except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under
penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 991-NS, eff. March 22, 1988)
CHAPTER 15. TEMPORARY SHOWS
Sec. 3-15.01. Permits: Required.
   No person shall carry on, manage, or conduct any tent show, carnival,
musical or theatrical exhibition or entertainment, traveling show, traveling
entertainment, circus, menagerie, animal show, or temporary gathering of any
nature whatsoever when the same is held, carried on, managed, or conducted in
the open air, in any tent, or in a temporary place of business without first
obtaining a permit therefor.
(§ 2211, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 158, as amended by § XXIV, Ord. 241-NS,
eff. November 25, 1971)
Sec. 3-15.02. Permits: Fire permits prerequisite to issuance.
   No permit shall be issued for the conduct of the businesses described in
Section 3-15.01 of this chapter unless the applicant for such permit has first
obtained a permit or clearance from the Fire Chief, or his or her designee of
the Ventura County Fire Protection District to conduct such a business.
(§ 2212, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 158, as amended by § XXIV, Ord. 241-NS,
eff. November 25, 1971, and § 3, Ord. 1351-NS, eff. January 4, 2000)
Sec. 3-15.03. Permit fees: Exemptions.
   (a)   No fee shall be required for the issuance of a permit to conduct any
activity described in Section 3-15.01 of this chapter to any organization which
is conducted wholly for the benefit of charitable purposes and from which a
profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any person, either as
profit, salary, wage, or rental for the use of the property of such person.
   (b)   No fee shall be required for the issuance of a permit to conduct any
entertainment, concert, exhibition, or lecture on scientific, historical,
literary, religious, or moral subjects whenever the receipts of such
entertainment, concert, exhibition, or lecture are to be appropriated and used
by any religious organization or school or for any religious or benevolent
purposes within the City
   (c)   No fee shall be required for the issuance of a permit to conduct any
entertainment, concert, or other similar activity whenever the receipts of such
entertainment, concert, or other similar activity are to be appropriated for
the purpose or object for which such association or organization was formed and
from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any person.
(§ 2214, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 158, as amended by § XXIV, Ord. 241-NS,
eff. November 25, 1971, and § 2, Ord. 1392, eff. June 7, 2002)
Sec. 3-15.04. Permit fees.
   Permit fees: for carnivals, itinerant shows, or rodeos, other tent shows,
musical or theatrical exhibitions, entertainments, or other temporary
gatherings for the primary entertainment of children under the age of twelve
(12) years, and any other temporary gathering whatsoever, shall be as specified
in the City's Master Fee Resolution.
(§ XXIII, Ord. 241-NS, eff. November 25, 1971, as amended by part 2, Ord. 1434-
NS, eff. July 1, 2005)
CHAPTER 16. FEES IN CONNECTION WITH THE CONSTRUCTION OF DWELLING UNITS
Sec. 3-16.01. Fees in connection with the construction of new dwelling units.
   Every person constructing any new dwelling unit in the City shall pay to the
City the following fees: the sum of One Hundred and no/100ths ($100.00) Dollars
for each dwelling unit containing not more than one bedroom, including
convertible dens, and the sum of Fifty and no/100ths ($50.00) Dollars for each
additional bedroom, including convertible dens, contained therein; provided,
however, in no event shall the total fees pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter for any new dwelling unit exceed the sum of Two Hundred and no/100ths
($200.00) Dollars.
(§ 1, Ord. 338-NS, eff. December 28, 1972)
Sec. 3-16.02. Fees payable upon applications for building permits.
   Such fees shall be due and payable in the Finance Department of the City
upon an application to the City for a building permit for the construction of
any such dwelling unit, except, in the case of a trailer park, such fees shall
be due and payable upon approval by the City of the trailer park development
permit. In the event the building permit or trailer park development permit is
not approved or is not used for such construction, there shall be a refund of
such fees.
(§ 1, Ord. 338-NS, eff. December 28, 1972, as amended by § 1, Ord. 343-NS, eff.
January 11, 1973)
Sec. 3-16.03. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Person” shall mean and include every person, firm, or corporation
constructing a dwelling unit itself or through the services of any employee,
agent, or independent contractor.
   (b)   “Dwelling unit” shall mean and include each single-family dwelling and
each separate habitation unit of an apartment or duplex or multiple dwelling
structure designated as a separate habitation for one or more persons, although
a part of the same building or structure, and each space in a trailer park.
Each trailer space fee shall be One Hundred and no/ 100ths ($100.00) Dollars.
(§ 1, Ord. 338-NS, eff. December 28, 1972, as amended by § 2, Ord. 343-NS, eff.
January 11, 1973)
Sec. 3-16.04. Exemptions.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to apply to any
dwelling unit or trailer space which shall be used exclusively for housing
elderly persons, handicapped persons, or persons whose gross income is in such
a category that those persons are designated under current Federal standards,
as found in the Federal Housing Acts of 1937, 1949, 1950, 1954, 1956, 1959,
1961, 1964, 1965, 1968, 1969, and 1970, to be eligible for low or moderate-
income housing subsidies.
   Any person claiming to construct housing which is entitled to an exemption
pursuant to the provisions of this section shall file a sworn statement with
the Director of Finance stating the facts upon which an exemption is granted,
and, in the absence of such statement substantiating the claim, such persons
shall be liable for the payment of the taxes imposed by the provisions of this
chapter.
   The collector shall, upon proper showing contained in the sworn statement,
issue a tax receipt to such person claiming an exemption pursuant to the
provisions of this section without payment to the City of the fees required by
the provisions of this chapter.
   The Director of Finance, after giving notice and a reasonable opportunity
for a hearing to the person holding a tax receipt containing an exemption
pursuant to the provisions of this section, may revoke such tax receipt granted
pursuant to the provisions of this section upon evidence and proof that the
holder of the tax receipt is not entitled to the exemption as provided for in
this section.
(§ 1, Ord. 338-NS, eff. December 28, 1972, as amended by § 3, Ord. 343-NS, eff.
January 11, 1973)
Sec. 3-16.05. Fees solely for revenue.
   To implement the foregoing declaration, the Council hereby creates, pursuant
to the provisions of Sections 53730.5 through 53737 of the Government Code of
the State, a Special Capital Outlay Fund for the acquisition, improvement, and
development of open space, public parks, parkways, and median islands, to be
kept and held by the Director of Finance in a Special Capital Outlay Fund as
provided for in Title 5, Division 2, Article 4, of the Government Code, of the
State, the funds of which are to be budgeted and expended by the Council only
for the purposes set forth in this section.
(§ 1, Ord. 338-NS, eff. December 28, 1972, as amended by part 8, Ord. 1437-NS,
eff. July 7, 2005)
Sec. 3-16.06. Severability.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the
decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The Council hereby
declares that it would have adopted the provisions of this chapter and each
section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion thereof, irrespective
of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, clauses, phrases, or
portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional.
(§ 1, Ord. 338-NS, eff. December 28, 1972)
CHAPTER 17. SWAP MEETS
Sec. 3-17.01. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Swap meet” shall mean any event which meets all of the following
requirements:
   (1)   The place or location at which the event is held has been advertised
by any means whatsoever as a place or location to which members of the public,
during a specified period of time, may bring identifiable, tangible personal
property and exhibit the same for sale or exchange; and
   (2)   A fee is charged, payable to the operator or organizer of the event,
either in the form of a charge for general admission to the place or location
where the event is held, or a charge for the privilege of exhibiting
identifiable, tangible personal property at such event. The charge for
exhibiting identifiable, tangible personal property shall be a fixed amount.
   (b)   “Swap meet exhibitor” shall mean any person exhibiting, displaying,
selling, exchanging, or offering for sale or exchange any personal property at
a swap meet not specifically prohibited by the provisions of this chapter.
   (c)   “Swap meet operator” shall mean any person conducting or operating the
business of a swap meet on any premises in the City, excluding however,
exhibitors.
(§ 1, Ord. 341-NS, eff. November 30, 1972)
Sec. 3-17.02. Business tax certificates required: Applications: Conditions.
   (a)   No person or entity shall establish, organize, or conduct a swap meet
in the City without first obtaining from the Director of Finance a business tax
certificate and from the Council a permit to do so.
   (b)   Applications for such permits shall be in writing upon such forms as
may be prescribed by the Director of Finance and shall be accompanied by the
business tax certificate fee provided for in Section 3-1.32 of Chapter 1 of
this title.
   (c)   After the filing of the application for the permit, the facts therein
stated shall be investigated and presented to the Council. The Council, after
considering such application and such investigations and reports thereon, may,
on the basis of such facts and a finding in regard to the public health,
safety, and welfare, grant or deny such application for a permit. If the
Council determines that such permit shall be granted, the Council shall grant
the permit upon the condition that all of the terms and provisions of this
chapter are complied with, that the business tax certificate fee has been paid,
and upon such other conditions as the Council may fix and impose to protect the
public health, safety, and welfare. Any permit, including its accompanying
business tax certificate, granted by the Council as provided in this chapter
shall be subject to suspension and/or revocation by the same procedure and
standards set forth in Section 3-1.18.1 of Chapter 1 of this title.
(§ 1, Ord. 341-NS, eff. November 30, 1972)
Sec. 3-17.03. Permit fees: Swap meet exhibitors: Collection and payment to
City.
   For the privilege of participating in a swap meet within the meaning of this
chapter, each swap meet exhibitor shall pay a tax in the amount of One and no/
100ths ($1.00) Dollar per swap meet stall per day. Such tax shall constitute a
debt owed by the swap meet exhibitor to the City and shall be extinguished only
by payment to the swap meet operator or to the City. The swap meet exhibitor
shall pay the tax to the swap meet operator at the time and on the day the swap
meet exhibitor participates in the swap meet. Any unpaid tax shall be paid upon
the termination of the swap meet exhibitor's participation in the specific swap
meet. Each swap meet operator shall collect the tax imposed by the provisions
of this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as any other fees are
collected from every swap meet exhibitor. The amount of the tax shall be
separately stated from any other moneys collected by the swap meet operator.
The operator shall not advertise or state in any manner that the tax, or any
part thereof, will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that the tax will
not be added to any other charges, or that any part of the tax will be
refunded, except in the manner provided in this chapter.
   Every swap meet operator liable for the collection and payment to the City
of any tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall keep and preserve,
for not less than three (3) years, all records necessary to determine the
amount of such tax. The operator shall make such records available for
inspection on demand by the License Collector so long as such request is made
during business hours.
   On or before the next day of the month following the close of the calendar
month, or at the close of any other reporting period which may be established
by the License Collector, each operator shall file a return with the License
Collector showing the total fees charged and received, the amount of the tax
collected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and such other
information as may be required by the License Collector. At the time the return
is filed the operator shall remit the full amount of the tax collected to the
License Collector. The License Collector may establish such other reporting
periods as he deems necessary or expedient to assure the collection of the tax.
Returns and payments shall be due immediately upon cessation of business for
any reason.
   Every operator shall hold all taxes collected pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter in trust for the account of the City until payment thereof is made
to the License Collector. Any operator who fails to remit the tax within the
time required shall pay a penalty to the City in the amount of ten (10%)
percent of the amount of the tax. In addition to any penalties imposed, an
operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter
shall pay interest at the rate of one-half (1/2) of one percent per month on
the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the
remittance first became delinquent. If any operator shall fail or refuse to
collect the tax or to make within the prescribed time any report or remittance
of the tax, or any portion thereof, the License Collector shall estimate the
amount of tax due and assess against such operator the tax, interest, and
penalties provided for in this chapter. The License Collector shall give a
notice in writing of the amount so assessed by serving such notice personally
or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to
the swap meet operator at his last-known place of business. The appeal
provisions of this Code shall apply to any swap meet operator who feels
aggrieved by any action of the License Inspector or License Collector pursuant
to the provisions of this Code. The License Collector shall promulgate a set of
regulations required for the refunding of overpayments by swap meet operators.
(§ 1, Ord. 341-NS, eff. November 30, 1972)
Sec. 3-17.04. Restrictions on issuance of business tax certificates:
Conditions, among others, that may be imposed.
   No permit or business tax certificate shall be issued unless and until:
   (a)   The applicant produces satisfactory evidence to the Finance Department
of the City that a State Board of Equalization resale number has been obtained
so as to assure the City that all sales occurring at such swap meet will be
subject to sales tax and the collection thereof assured;
   (b)   The applicant shall produce satisfactory evidence that adequate off-
street vehicle parking to accommodate the vehicles of all persons in attendance
at the swap meet has been provided as required by the Public Works Department
and the Community Development Department;
   (c)   The days and hours each day when the swap meet may be conducted have
been fixed and determined by the Council;
   (d)   Adequate permanent rest room facilities approved by the Building
Official are provided; and
   (e)   An adequate number of police or security officers, all at the expense
of the swap meet operator, are on duty at all times while such swap meet is in
operation to keep the peace and to investigate and check on merchandise which
is being display and is for sale, barter, or exchange. The number of such
police or security officers and the hours of duty shall be determined by the
Chief of Police.
(§ 1, Ord. 341-NS, eff. November 30, 1972)
Sec. 3-17.05. Additional regulations.
   The operator of a swap meet shall:
   (a)   Provide for a daily cleanup of the premises and maintain such premises
in a good, clean and sanitary condition at all times;
   (b)   The premises shall be vacated by all exhibitors, and all of their
merchandise and personal property shall be removed at the close of each day’s
business; and
   (c)   The sale of edible or perishable merchandise and personal property
shall not be made or had without the necessary permits from the Health
Department and in full compliance with all laws relating thereto.
(§ 1, Ord. 341-NS, eff. November 30, 1972)
Sec. 3-17.06. Prohibited sales, trades, exchanges, or bartering.
   No person, firm, or corporation at any swap meet, whether the operator, or
an exhibitor, or any other person or entity, shall sell, exchange, or display,
or offer for sale or exchange or barter, at any swap meet any of the following
items of personal property:
   (a)   Any animal, bird, or fowl unless the business tax certificate provided
for in this chapter so specifies;
   (b)   Any handgun, rifle, shotgun, or other type of firearm by whatever
name, or any deadly weapon; and
   (c)   Any flammable liquid, including, but not limited to, gasoline,
kerosene, acetone, thinner, and solvent; ammunition blasting agent, liquid
petroleum gas, or other combustible gas; or any type of firework, explosive,
acid, caustic or oxidizing agent.
(§ 1, Ord. 341-NS, eff. November 30, 1972)
Sec. 3-17.07. Information required to be submitted by exhibitors to operators.
   (a)   Every person who desires to exhibit identifiable, tangible personal
property at a swap meet shall, before he is permitted to exhibit such property,
furnish to the operator or organizer, or his duly authorized agent, a written
notice containing all of the following information:
   (1)   The name and current address and telephone number of the person who
desires to exhibit identifiable, tangible personal property at a swap meet;
   (2)   An accurate description, including any identifying manufacturer’s or
license number, of every item of identifiable personal property which such
person will exhibit at the swap meet; and
   (3)   The name and current address of the owner of every item of
identifiable, tangible, personal property which such person will exhibit at the
swap meet.
   (b)   Every person who sells or exchanges any identifiable, tangible
personal property at a swap meet shall furnish to the owner or operator of the
swap meet, or a person designated in advance by such owner or operator to
receive such information, a written notice containing all of the following
information with respect to each such sale or exchange:
   (1)   An accurate description, including any identifying manufacturer’s or
license number, of the identifiable, tangible personal property; and
   (2)   The name and current address of the person owning the identifiable,
tangible personal property; and
   (3)   The name and current address of the person selling or exchanging the
identifiable, tangible personal property.
(§ 1, Ord. 341-NS, eff. November 30, 1972)
Sec. 3-17.08. Transmitting information to the Chief of Police.
   Within twenty-four (24) hours after the end of each day's business at the
swap meet, the owner or operator of the swap meet shall transmit in writing the
information received pursuant to the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of
Section 3-17.07 of this chapter to the Chief of Police on such forms as may be
approved by or prescribed by the Chief of Police.
(§ 1, Ord. 341-NS, eff. November 30, 1972)
Sec. 3-17.09. Violations: Penalties.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, including the
filing or causing to be filed of an application for a permit or business tax
certificate or information report required pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter containing false or fraudulent misstatements, or in perpetrating any
other misstatements, deception, or fraud in connection with any application,
sale or exchange, or information report to be made in connection therewith,
shall be guilty of a violation of this Code pursuant to Section 1-2.01 of
Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code. Each person shall be deemed guilty of a
separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of any
provision of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by such person
and shall be punishable therefor as provided in this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 341-NS, eff. November 30, 1972, as amended by § VI, Ord. 770-NS,
eff. February 26, 1981)
CHAPTER 18. GENERAL CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT TAXES
Sec. 3-18.01. Title.
   This tax shall be known as the “General Capital Improvement Tax of the City
of Thousand Oaks.”
(§ 1, Emergency Ord. 679-NS, eff. June 27, 1978; readopted July 11, 1978)
Sec. 3-18.02. Purpose.
   The Council finds that the continued development and construction of
residential dwelling units in the City has created a need for the planning,
acquisition, construction, improvement, and expansion of general capital-
related facilities to serve the City’s increasing population and that there
exists a need to find sources of revenues with which to finance in part these
required additional public facilities. The Council hereby declares that the
taxes required to be paid pursuant to this chapter are assessed pursuant to the
taxing power of the City and are assessed solely for the purpose of producing
revenue.
(§ 1, Emergency Ord. 679-NS, eff. June 27, 1978; readopted July 11, 1978)
Sec. 3-18.03. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Person” shall mean and include every person, firm, or corporation
constructing a dwelling unit itself or through the services of any employee,
agent, or independent contractor.
   (b)   “Dwelling unit” shall mean and include each single-family dwelling and
each separate habitation unit of an apartment or duplex or multiple dwelling
structure designated as a separate habitation for one or more persons, although
a part of the same building or structure, and each space in a trailer or mobile
home park.
(§ 1, Emergency Ord. 679-NS, eff. June 27, 1978; readopted July 11, 1978)
Sec. 3-18.04. Imposition of taxes: Amount.
   Every person constructing a new dwelling unit in the City shall be taxed and
shall pay to the City the following fees: the sum of One Hundred and no/100ths
($100.00) Dollars for each separate habitation unit of an apartment, duplex, or
triplex and for each trailer or mobile home space; the sum of One Hundred
Twenty-Five and no/100ths ($125.00) Dollars for each separate habitation unit
of a condominium or community apartment project; and the sum of One Hundred
Fifty and no/100ths ($150.00) Dollars for each single-family detached dwelling
unit.
(§ 1, Emergency Ord. 679-NS, eff. June 27, 1978; readopted July 11, 1978)
Sec. 3-18.05. Fees payable upon applications for building permits.
   The fees imposed by this chapter shall be due and payable in the Finance
Department of the City upon an application to the City for a building permit
for the construction of any such dwelling unit, except, in the case of a
trailer or mobile home park, such fees shall be due and payable upon approval
by the City of the trailer park development permit. In the event the building
permit or the trailer park development permit is not approved or is not used
for such construction, there shall be a refund of such fees.
(§ 1, Emergency Ord. 679-NS, eff. June 27, 1978; readopted July 11, 1978)
Sec. 3-18.06. General Capital Improvement Fund.
   There is hereby established a General Capital Improvement Fund. All the sums
collected pursuant to this chapter shall be credited to the General Capital
Improvement Fund and, together with any accumulations thereon, shall be used
solely for the planning, acquisition, improvement, or expansion of capital
improvements of public facilities within the City.
(§ 1, Emergency Ord. 679-NS, eff. June 27, 1978; readopted July 11, 1978)
CHAPTER 19. MUNICIPAL SOLAR UTILITY
Sec. 3-19.01. Findings.
   The City Council of the City of Thousand Oaks hereby makes the following
findings:
   (a)   The residents of the City of Thousand Oaks face the certainty of
continued escalating prices for home energy supplies and continued dependence
upon imported sources of energy.
   (b)   Solar energy has been found to be an inexhaustible, reliable and
nonpolluting energy resource that can contribute to the public health, safety
and welfare of the citizens of Thousand Oaks by lessening dependence upon
nonrenewable and imported sources of energy.
   (c)   The high initial cost of purchasing and installing a solar energy
device is the primary economic barrier to expanded solar energy use. Leasing of
solar energy devices has proven to be an effective means to reduce this
economic barrier and may be an attractive economic alternative to ownership for
many consumers.
   (d)   Section 17052.5 of the State Revenue and Taxation Code restricts
eligibility for the fifty-five (55%) percent California Solar Tax Credit for
leased systems to lessors granted a permit from a municipal solar utility
program established by ordinance prior to January 1, 1983.
   (e)   The establishment of a municipal solar utility program can increase
public awareness of solar energy alternatives and lead to a greater degree of
consumer protection and consumer confidence in leasing solar energy systems,
thus substantially increasing the use of solar energy within the City of
Thousand Oaks.
(§ 1, Ord. 825-NS, eff. December 21, 1982)
Sec. 3-19.02. Intent.
   It is the intent of this chapter to establish a municipal solar utility
within the City of Thousand Oaks for the purpose of facilitating the direct
leasing of solar energy equipment and to establish regulatory authority for any
solar leasing operation that may be conducted under the program.
(§ 1, Ord. 825-NS, eff. December 21, 1982)
Sec. 3-19.03. Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed to them by this section:
   (a)   “Leasing company” shall mean any person advertising, marketing,
placing and arranging, pursuant to a lease arrangement, for installation and
servicing of solar energy devices for a fee.
   (b)   “Municipal solar utility (MSU)” shall mean any program conducted by a
local government or its authorized agent to promote the utilization of
renewable energy and energy conservation technologies through educational,
consumer protection or financial assistance programs.
   (c)   “Solar lease arrangement” shall mean a contract between a lessee and
an investor for the leasing of solar energy devices, owned by the investor and
leased and possessed by the lessee, which devices are affixed to or located at
and servicing the real property owned or occupied by the lessee.
   (d)   “Solar energy device” shall include equipment and materials that are
intended to be located on or affixed to real property that uses solar energy
directly to:
   (1)   Heat or cool a building or structure;
   (2)   Provide domestic hot water or hot water for recreational or
therapeutic purposes;
   (3)   Provide process heat or mechanical energy;
   (4)   Generate electricity.
(§ 1, Ord. 825-NS, eff. December 21, 1982)
Sec. 3-19.04. Regulation of solar leasing operations.
   (a)   No person shall operate as a certified solar leasing company under the
Municipal Solar Utility Program of the City of Thousand Oaks as established
herein without having obtained a valid solar leasing permit from the City. Such
a permit shall authorize the conduct of solar leasing operations under the
Municipal Solar Utility Program for a period of up to three years and may be
renewable.
   (b)   After this effective date of the ordinance establishing this chapter
and within seventy-five (75) days after receiving the first written request
from a leasing company for a solar leasing permit, the City Council shall, by
resolution, establish all requirements for obtaining certification under the
Municipal Solar Utility Program. Such requirements shall include those which
protect consumers against any inexperienced or financially unstable solar
leasing companies, substandard equipment or installation practices or unfair
lease arrangements.
   (c)   Reasonable fees shall be determined to cover the costs of
administering this chapter and may be established by resolution of the City
Council.
(§ 1, Ord. 825-NS, eff. December 21, 1982)
CHAPTER 20. MISCELLANEOUS FEES: COST RECOVERY
Sec. 3-20.01. Purpose.
   In order to assure the City’s continued sound fiscal condition and
management, full cost recovery, through the collection of service fees for City
services rendered, should be encouraged wherever reasonable. This chapter shall
set forth and authorize the charging and collection of miscellaneous fees for
City services, when that authorization is not found elsewhere in this code.
(§ 1, Ord. 1093-NS, eff. March 14, 1991)
Sec. 3-20.02. Miscellaneous service fees.
   The City shall charge and collect a fee in an amount established by
councilmanic resolution for the City providing any services, including but not
limited to the following:
   (a)   City Clerk’s mailing to any requesting party copies of City Council/
Redevelopment Agency agendas or minutes.
   (b)   City Clerk research work requiring the review of minutes, tapes,
reports, legislative history, contracts, or municipal code.
   (c)   Microfilm searching of City records and creation of hard copies.
   (d)   Providing certified copies of City documents.
   (e)   Providing audiotape copies of City Council/Redevelopment Agency
meetings.
   (f)   Copies of the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code.
   (g)   Block party application processing and permit.
   (h)   Check return charge for insufficient funds.
   (i)   Cameron Center and Janss Pool rental charge.
   (j)   Copy of policy report concerning traffic accident.
   (k)   Processing and review of special events application.
   (l)   Recording any easement, abandonment, resolution, or other title
documents as requested by nongovernmental entity party.
   (m)   Processing request for census microfilm from vendors.
   (n)   All library charges, such as responding to request for materials from
an off-site location, replacement of a lost book, copies made by City staff,
microfilm copies, library card, replacement of library card, copy machine, and
materials not returned on time.
(§ 1, Ord. 1093-NS, eff. March 14, 1991)
CHAPTER 21. CANNABIS BUSINESS TAX
Sec. 3-21.01. Title.
   This chapter shall be known as the Cannabis Business Tax Ordinance.
(§ 1, Ord. 1657-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 3-21.02. Authority and purpose.
   (a)   The purpose of this chapter is to adopt a tax, for revenue purposes,
pursuant to Sections 37101 and 37100.5 of the California Government Code, upon
cannabis businesses that engage in business in the City. The Cannabis Business
Tax is levied based upon business gross receipts and square footage of plant
canopy. It is not a sales and use tax, a tax upon income, or a tax upon real
property.
   (b)   The Cannabis Business Tax is a general tax enacted solely for general
governmental purposes of the City and not for specific purposes. All of the
proceeds from the tax imposed by this chapter shall be placed in the City's
general fund and be available for any legal municipal purpose.
(§ 1, Ord. 1657-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 3-21.03. Intent.
   The intent of this chapter is to levy a tax on all cannabis businesses that
operate in the City, regardless of whether such business would have been legal
at the time this chapter was adopted. Nothing in this chapter shall be
interpreted to authorize or permit any business activity that would not
otherwise be legal or permissible under laws applicable to the activity at the
time the activity is undertaken.
(§ 1, Ord. 1657-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 3-21.04. Definitions.
   The following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below when
used in this chapter:
   (a)   "Business" shall include all activities engaged in or caused to be
engaged in within the City, including any commercial or industrial enterprise,
trade, profession, occupation, vocation, calling, or livelihood, whether or not
carried on for gain or profit, but shall not include the services rendered by
an employee to his or her employer.
   (b)   "Calendar quarter" means a period of three (3) consecutive months
starting on one of January 1, April 1, July 1 or October 1.
   (c)   "Calendar year" shall mean January 1 through December 31.
   (d)   "Cannabis" means all parts of the plant cannabis sativa linnaeus,
cannabis indica, or cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds
thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the
plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the
separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. "Cannabis"
also means marijuana as defined by Section 11018 of the California Health and
Safety Code and is not limited to medical cannabis.
   (e)   "Cannabis product" means raw cannabis that has undergone a process
whereby the raw agricultural product has been transformed into a concentrate,
an edible product, or a topical product. "Cannabis product" also means
marijuana products as defined by Section 11018.1 of the California Health and
Safety Code and is not limited to medical cannabis products.
   (f)   "Canopy" means all areas occupied by any portion of a cannabis plant
whether contiguous or noncontiguous on any one site. When plants occupy
multiple horizontal planes (as when plants are placed on shelving above other
plants) each plane shall be counted as a separate canopy area.
   (g)   "Cannabis business" means any business activity involving cannabis,
including but not limited to cultivating, transporting, distributing,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, processing, preparing, storing,
packaging, delivering, testing, dispensing, retailing and wholesaling of
cannabis, of cannabis products or of ancillary products and accessories,
whether or not carried on for gain or profit.
   (h)   "Cannabis Business Tax" or "business tax," means the tax due pursuant
to this chapter for engaging in cannabis business in the City.
   (i)   "Commercial cannabis cultivation" means cultivation in the course of
conducting a cannabis business.
   (j)   "City permit" means a permit issued by the City to a person to
authorize that person to operate or engage in a cannabis business.
   (k)   "Cultivation" means any activity involving the planting, growing,
harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis and includes, but
is not limited to, the operation of a nursery.
   (l)   "Employee" means each and every person engaged in the operation or
conduct of any business, whether as owner, member of the owner's family,
partner, associate, agent, manager or solicitor, and each and every other
person employed or working in such business for a wage, salary, commission,
barter or any other form of compensation.
   (m)   "Engaged in business as a cannabis business" means the commencing,
conducting, operating, managing or carrying on of a cannabis business, whether
done as owner, or by means of an officer, agent, manager, employee, or
otherwise, whether operating from a fixed location in the City or coming into
the City from an outside location to engage in such activities. A person shall
be deemed engaged in business within the City if:
      (1)   Such person or person's employee maintains a fixed place of
business within the City for the benefit or partial benefit of such person;
      (2)   Such person or person's employee owns or leases real property
within the City for business purposes;
      (3)   Such person or person's employee regularly maintains a stock of
tangible personal property in the City for sale in the ordinary course of
business;
      (4)   Such person or person's employee regularly conducts solicitation of
business within the City; or
      (5)   Such person or person's employee performs work or renders services
in the City.
      The foregoing specified activities shall not be a limitation on the
meaning of "engaged in business."
   (n)   "Evidence of doing business" means evidence such as, without
limitation, use of signs, circulars, cards or any other advertising media,
including the use of internet or telephone solicitation, or representation to a
government agency or to the public that such person is engaged in a cannabis
business in the City.
   (o)   "Gross Receipts," except as otherwise specifically provided, means,
whether designated a sales price, royalty, rent, commission, dividend, or other
designation, the total amount (including all receipts, cash, credits and
property of any kind or nature) received or payable for sales of goods, wares
or merchandise, or for the performance of any act or service of any nature for
which a charge is made or credit allowed (whether such service, act or
employment is done as part of or in connection with the sale of goods, wares,
merchandise or not), without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of
the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or service costs, interest
paid or payable, losses or any other expense whatsoever. However, the following
shall be excluded from “gross receipts”:
      (1)   Cash discounts where allowed and taken on sales;
      (2)   Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase
price and collected from the consumer or purchaser;
      (3)   Such part of the sale price of any property returned by purchasers
to the seller as refunded by the seller by way of cash or credit allowances or
return of refundable deposits previously included in gross receipts;
      (4)   Receipts derived from the occasional sale of used, obsolete or
surplus trade fixtures, machinery or other equipment used by the taxpayer in
the regular course of the taxpayer's business;
      (5)   Cash value of sales, trades or transactions between departments or
units of the same business;
      (6)   Whenever there are included within the gross receipts amounts which
reflect sales for which credit is extended and such amount proved uncollectible
in a subsequent year, those amounts may be excluded from the gross receipts in
the year they prove to be uncollectible; provided, however, if the whole or
portion of such amounts excluded as uncollectible are subsequently collected
they shall be included in the amount of gross receipts for the period when they
are recovered;
      (7)   Receipts of refundable deposits, except that such deposits when
forfeited and taken into income of the business shall not be excluded when in
excess of one ($1) dollar;
      (8)   Amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an
agent or trustee and to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom
collected. These agents or trustees must provide the Finance Department with
the names and the addresses of the others and the amounts paid to them. This
exclusion shall not apply to any fees, percentages, or other payments retained
by the agent or trustees.
      (9)   Retail sales of t-shirts, sweaters, hats, stickers, key chains,
bags, books, posters or other personal tangible property which the Tax
Administrator has excluded in writing by issuing an administrative ruling per
Section
3-21.14 shall not be subject to the Cannabis Business Tax under this chapter.
However, any retail sales not subject to this chapter as a result of the
administrative ruling shall be subject to the appropriate business tax under
Chapter 3-1, or any other chapter or title as determined by the Tax
Administrator.
   (p)   "Lighting" means a source of light that is primarily used for
promoting the biological process of plant growth. “Lighting” does not include
sources of light that primarily exist for the safety or convenience of staff or
visitors to the facility, such as emergency lighting, walkway lighting, or
light admitted via small skylights, windows or ventilation openings.
   (q)   "Nursery" means a facility or part of a facility that is used only for
producing clones, immature plants, seeds, and other agricultural products used
specifically for the planting, propagation, and cultivation of cannabis.
   (r)   "Person" means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture,
association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business
trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit,
whether organized as a nonprofit or for-profit entity, and includes the plural
as well as the singular number.
   (s)   "Sale" means and includes any sale, exchange, or barter.
   (t)   "State" means the State of California.
   (u)   "State license," "license," or "registration" means a state license
issued pursuant to California Business & Professions Code Sections 19300, et
seq. or other applicable state law.
   (v)   "Tax Administrator" means the Finance Director of the City of Thousand
Oaks, or his or her designee.
   (w)   "Testing Laboratory" means a cannabis business that (i) offers or
performs tests of cannabis or cannabis products, (ii) offers no service other
than such tests, (iii) sells no products, excepting only testing supplies and
materials, (iv) is accredited by an accrediting body that is independent from
all other persons involved in the cannabis industry in the state and (v) is
registered with the State Department of Public Health.
(§ 1, Ord. 1657-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 3-21.05. Tax imposed.
   (a)   Beginning January 1, 2019, there is imposed upon each person who is
engaged in business as a cannabis business a Cannabis Business Tax, regardless
if the business has been issued a permit to operate lawfully in the City or is
operating unlawfully.
   (b)   The initial rate of the Cannabis Business Tax shall be as follows:
      (1)   For every person who is engaged in commercial cannabis cultivation
in the City:
         (i)   Seven and no/100th ($7.00) Dollars annually per square foot of
canopy space in a facility that uses exclusively artificial lighting.
         (ii)   Four and no/100th ($4.00) Dollars annually per square foot of
canopy space in a facility that uses a combination of natural and supplemental
artificial lighting.
         (iii)   Two and no/100th ($2.00) Dollars annually per square foot of
canopy space in a facility that uses no artificial lighting.
         (iv)   One and no/100th ($1.00) Dollar annually per square foot of
canopy space for any nursery.
         For purposes of this Subdivision (b), the square feet of canopy space
for a business shall be rebuttably presumed to be the maximum square footage of
canopy allowed by the business's City permit for commercial cannabis
cultivation, or, in the absence of a City permit, the square footage shall be
the maximum square footage of canopy for commercial cannabis cultivation
allowed by the state license type. Should a City permit be issued to a business
which cultivates only for certain months of the year, the City shall prorate
the tax as to sufficiently reflect the period in which cultivation is occurring
at the business. In no case shall canopy square footage which is authorized by
the City commercial cannabis permit but not utilized for cultivation be
deducted for the purpose of determining the tax for cultivation, unless the Tax
Administrator is informed in writing and authorizes such reduction for the
purpose of relief from the tax prior to the period for which the space will not
be used, that such space will not be used.
      (2)   For every person who engages in the operation of a testing
laboratory: one (1%) percent of gross receipts.
      (3)   For every person who engages in the retail sales of cannabis as a
retailer (dispensary) or non-store front retailer (delivery) or microbusiness
(retail sales): four (4%) percent of gross receipts.
      (4)   For every person who engages in a cannabis distribution business:
two (2%) percent of gross receipts.
      (5)   For every person who engages in a cannabis manufacturing,
processing, or microbusiness (non-retail), or any other type of cannabis
business not described in Subsections (b)(1), (2), (3) or (4): two and one-half
(2.5%) percent of gross receipts.
   (c)   The City Council may, by resolution or ordinance, adjust the rate of
the Cannabis Business Tax. However, in no event may the City Council set any
adjusted rate that exceeds the maximum rate calculated pursuant to Subdivision
(d) of this Section for the date on which the adjusted rate will commence.
   (d)   The maximum rate shall be calculated as follows:
      (1)   For every person who is engaged in commercial cannabis cultivation
in the City:
         (i)   Through December 31, 2021, the maximum rate shall be:
            (aa)   Ten and no/100th ($10.00) Dollars annually per square foot
of canopy space in a facility that uses exclusively artificial lighting.
            (ab)   Seven and no/100th ($7.00) Dollars annually per square foot
of canopy space in a facility that uses a combination of natural and
supplemental artificial lighting.
            (ac)   Four and no/100th ($4.00) Dollars annually per square foot
of canopy space in a facility that uses no artificial lighting.
            (ad)   Two and no/100th ($2.00) Dollars annually per square foot of
canopy space for any nursery.
         (ii)   On January 1, 2022 and on each January 1 thereafter, the
maximum annual tax rate per square foot of each type of canopy space shall
increase by the percentage change between January of the calendar year prior to
such increase and January of the calendar year of the increase in the Consumer
Price Index ("CPI") for all urban consumers using the Los Angeles-Long Beach-
Anaheim, CA index as published by the United States Government Bureau of Labor
Statistics. However, no CPI adjustment resulting in a decrease of any tax
imposed by this subsection shall be made.
      (2)   For every person who engages in the operation of a testing
laboratory, the maximum tax rate shall not exceed two and one-half (2.5%)
percent of gross receipts.
      (3)   For every person who engages in the retail sales of cannabis as a
retailer (dispensary) or non-store front retailer (delivery business), or
microbusiness (retail sales activity) the maximum tax rate shall not exceed six
(6%) percent of gross receipts.
      (4)   For every person who engages in a cannabis distribution business,
the maximum tax rate shall not exceed three (3%) percent of gross receipts.
      (5)   For every person who engages in a cannabis manufacturing,
processing, or microbusiness (non-retail activity) or any other type of
cannabis business not described in Sections (d)(1), (2), (3) or (4), the
maximum tax rate shall not exceed four (4%) percent of gross receipts.
(§ 1, Ord. 1657-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 3-21.06. Reporting and remittance of tax.
   (a)   The Cannabis Business Tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid, in
arrears, on a quarterly basis. For commercial cannabis cultivation, the tax due
for each calendar quarter shall be based on the square footage of the
business's canopy space during the quarter and the rate shall be twenty-five
(25%) percent of the applicable annual rate. For all other cannabis businesses
activities, the tax due for each calendar quarter shall be based on the gross
receipts for the quarter.
   (b)   Each person owing the Cannabis Business Tax for a calendar quarter
shall, no later than the last day of the month following the close of the
calendar quarter, file with the Tax Administrator a statement of the tax owed
for that calendar quarter and the basis for calculating that tax. The Tax
Administrator may require that the statement be submitted on a form prescribed
by the Tax Administrator. The tax for each calendar quarter shall be due and
payable on that same date as the statement for the calendar quarter is due.
   (c)   Upon cessation of a cannabis business, tax statements and payments
shall be immediately due for all calendar quarters up to the calendar quarter
during which cessation occurred.
   (d)   The Tax Administrator may, at his or her discretion, establish shorter
report and payment periods for any taxpayer as the Tax Administrator deems
necessary to ensure collection of the tax. The Tax Administrator may also
require that a deposit, to be applied against the taxes for a calendar quarter,
be made by a taxpayer at the beginning of that calendar quarter. In no event
shall the deposit required by the Tax Administrator exceed the tax amount he or
she projects will be owed by the taxpayer for the calendar quarter. The Tax
Administrator may require that a taxpayer make payments via a cashier's check,
money order, wire transfer, or similar instrument.
   (e)   For purposes of this section, the square feet of canopy space for a
business shall be rebuttably presumed to be no less than the maximum square
footage of canopy allowed by the business's City permit for commercial cannabis
cultivation, or, in the absence of a City permit, the square footage shall be
the maximum square footage of canopy for commercial cannabis cultivation
allowed by the state license type. In no case shall canopy square footage which
is authorized by the permit or license, but not utilized for cultivation, be
excluded from taxation unless the Tax Administrator is informed in writing,
prior to the period for which the space will not be used, that such space will
not be used.
(§ 1, Ord. 1657-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 3-21.07. Payments and communications: Timely remittance.
   Whenever any payment, statement, report, request or other communication is
due, it must be received by the Tax Administrator on or before the final due
date. A postmark will not be accepted as timely remittance. If the due date
would fall on a Saturday, Sunday or a holiday, the due date shall be the next
regular business day on which the City is open to the public.
(§ 1, Ord. 1657-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 3-21.08. Payment: When taxes deemed delinquent.
   Unless otherwise specifically provided under other provisions of this
chapter, the taxes required to be paid pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed
delinquent if not received by the Tax Administrator on or before the due date
as specified in Sections
3-21.06 and
3-21.07.
(§ 1, Ord. 1657-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 3-21.09. Notice not required by the City.
   The City may, as a courtesy, send a tax notice to the business. However, the
Tax Administrator is not required to send a delinquency or other notice or bill
to any person subject to the provisions of this chapter. Failure to send such
notice or bill shall not affect the validity of any tax or penalty due under
the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1657-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 3-21.10. Penalties and interest.
   (a)   Any person who fails or refuses to pay any Cannabis Business Tax
required to be paid pursuant to this chapter on or before the due date shall
pay penalties and interest as follows:
      (1)   A penalty equal to ten (10%) percent of the amount of the tax, in
addition to the amount of the tax, plus interest on the unpaid tax calculated
from the due date of the tax at the rate of one (1%) percent per month.
      (2)   If the tax remains unpaid for a period exceeding one (1) calendar
month beyond the due date, an additional penalty equal to twenty-five (25%)
percent of the amount of the tax, plus interest at the rate of one (1%) percent
per month on the unpaid tax and on the unpaid penalties.
      (3)   Interest shall be applied at the rate of one (1%) percent per month
on the first day of the month for the full month and will continue to accrue
monthly on the tax and penalty until the balance is paid in full.
   (b)   Whenever a check or electronic payment is submitted in payment of a
Cannabis Business Tax and the payment is subsequently returned unpaid by the
bank for any reason, the taxpayer will be liable for the tax amount due plus
any fees, penalties and interest as provided for in this section, and any other
amount allowed under state law.
(§ 1, Ord. 1657-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 3-21.11. Refunds and credits.
   (a)   No refund shall be made of any tax collected pursuant to this chapter,
except as provided in Section
3-21.12.
   (b)   No refund of any tax collected pursuant to this chapter shall be made
because of the discontinuation, dissolution, or other termination of a
business.
(§ 1, Ord. 1657-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 3-21.12. Refunds and procedures.
   (a)   Whenever the amount of any Cannabis Business Tax, penalty or interest
has been overpaid, paid more than once, or has been erroneously collected or
received by the City under this chapter, it may be refunded to the claimant who
paid the tax provided that a written claim for refund is filed with the Tax
Administrator within one (1) year of the date the tax was originally due and
payable.
   (b)   The Tax Administrator, his or her designee, or any other City officer
charged with the administration of this chapter shall have the right to examine
and audit all the books and business records of the claimant in order to
determine the eligibility of the claimant to the claimed refund. No claim for
refund shall be allowed if the claimant refuses to allow such examination of
claimant's books and business records after request by the Tax Administrator to
do so.
   (c)   In the event that the Cannabis Business Tax was erroneously paid, and
the error is attributable to the City, the City shall refund the amount of tax
erroneously paid up to one (1) year from when the error was identified.
(§ 1, Ord. 1657-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 3-21.13. Personal cultivation not taxed.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to personal cannabis
cultivation as defined in the "Medicinal and Adult Use Cannabis Regulation and
Safety Act." This chapter shall not apply to personal use of cannabis that is
specifically exempted from state licensing requirements, that meets the
definition of personal use or equivalent terminology under state law, and for
which the individual receives no compensation whatsoever related to that
personal use.
(§ 1, Ord. 1657-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 3-21.14. Administration of the tax.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of the Tax Administrator to collect the taxes,
penalties, fees, and perform the duties required by this chapter.
   (b)   For purposes of administration and enforcement of this chapter
generally, the Tax Administrator may from time to time promulgate such
administrative interpretations, rules, and procedures consistent with the
purpose, intent, and express terms of this chapter as he or she deems necessary
to implement or clarify such provisions or aid in enforcement.
   (c)   The Tax Administrator may take such administrative actions as needed
to administer the tax, including but not limited to:
      (1)   Provide to all cannabis business taxpayers forms for the reporting
of the tax;
      (2)   Provide information to any taxpayer concerning the provisions of
this chapter;
      (3)   Receive and record all taxes remitted to the City as provided in
this chapter;
      (4)   Maintain records of taxpayer reports and taxes collected pursuant
to this chapter;
      (5)   Assess penalties and interest to taxpayers pursuant to this
chapter; and
      (6)   Determine amounts owed and enforce collection pursuant to this
chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1657-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 3-21.15. Appeal procedure.
   Any taxpayer aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Administrator with respect
to the amount of tax, interest, penalties and fees, if any, due under this
chapter may appeal to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal with the
City Clerk within thirty (30) days of the serving or mailing of the
determination of tax due. The City Clerk, or his or her designee, shall fix a
time and place for hearing such appeal, and the City Clerk, or his or her
designee, shall give notice in writing to such operator at the last known place
of address. The finding of the City Council shall be final and conclusive and
shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed by this chapter for
service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately
due and payable upon the service of the notice.
(§ 1, Ord. 1657-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 3-21.16. Enforcement: Action to collect.
   Any taxes, penalties and/or fees required to be paid under the provisions of
this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed to the City. Any person owing money to
the City under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable in an action
brought in the name of the City for the recovery of such debt. The provisions
of this section shall not be deemed a limitation upon the right of the City to
bring any other action including criminal, civil and equitable actions, based
upon the failure to pay the tax, penalties and/or fees imposed by this chapter
or the failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1657-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 3-21.17. Apportionment.
   If a business subject to the tax is operating both within and outside the
City, it is the intent of the City to apply the Cannabis Business Tax so that
the measure of the tax fairly reflects the proportion of the taxed activity
actually carried on in the City. To the extent federal or state law requires
that any tax due from any taxpayer be apportioned, the taxpayer may indicate
said apportionment on his or her tax return. The Tax Administrator may
promulgate administrative procedures for apportionment as he or she finds
useful or necessary.
(§ 1, Ord. 1657-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 3-21.18. Constitutionality and legality.
   This tax is intended to be applied in a manner consistent with the United
States and California Constitutions and state law. None of the tax provided for
by this chapter shall be applied in a manner that causes an undue burden upon
interstate commerce, a violation of the equal protection or due process clauses
of the Constitutions of the United States or the State of California or a
violation of any other provision of the California Constitution or state law.
If a person believes that the tax, as applied to him or her, is impermissible
under applicable law, he or she may request that the Tax Administrator release
him or her from the obligation to pay the impermissible portion of the tax.
(§ 1, Ord. 1657-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 3-21.19. Audit and examination of premises and records.
   (a)   For the purpose of ascertaining the amount of Cannabis Business Tax
owed or verifying any representations made by any taxpayer to the City in
support of his or her tax calculation, the Tax Administrator shall have the
power to inspect any location where commercial cannabis cultivation occurs and
to audit and examine all books and records (including, but not limited to
bookkeeping records, state and federal income tax returns, and other records
relating to the gross receipts of the business) of persons engaged in cannabis
businesses. In conducting such investigation, the Tax Administrator shall have
the power to inspect any equipment, such as computers or point of sale
machines, that may contain such records.
   (b)   It shall be the duty of every person liable for the collection and
payment to the City of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve,
for a period of at least three (3) years, all records as may be necessary to
determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the
collection of and payment to the City, which records the Tax Administrator or
his/her designee shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times.
(§ 1, Ord. 1657-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 3-21.20. Other licenses, permits, taxes, fees or charges.
   (a)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to repeal, amend, be
in lieu of, replace or in any way affect any requirements for any permit or
license required by, under, or by virtue of any provision of any other chapter
of this code, or any other ordinance or resolution of the City, nor be deemed
to repeal, amend, be in lieu of, replace or in any way affect any tax, fee or
other charge imposed, assessed or required by, under, or by virtue of any other
chapter of this code, or any other ordinance or resolution of the City. Any
references made or contained in any other chapter of this code to any licenses,
license taxes, fees, or charges, or to any schedule of license fees, shall be
deemed to refer to the licenses, license taxes, fees or charges, or schedule of
license fees, provided for in other chapters of this code.
   (b)   Notwithstanding subdivision (a) of this section a cannabis business
shall not be required to pay the license fee required by Chapter 3-1 of Title 3
of this code so long as all of business's activities within the City that would
require payment of a license fee are activities subject to the Cannabis
Business Tax.
   (c)   The Tax Administrator may revoke or refuse to renew the license
required by Chapter 3-1 of this code for any business that is delinquent in the
payment of any tax due pursuant to this chapter or that fails to make a deposit
required by the Tax Administrator pursuant to Section
3-21.06(d).
(§ 1, Ord. 1657-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 3-21.21. Payment of tax does not authorize unlawful business.
   (a)   The payment of a Cannabis Business Tax required by this chapter, and
its acceptance by the City, shall not entitle any person to carry on any
cannabis business unless the person has complied with all of the requirements
of this code and all other applicable state laws.
   (b)   No tax paid under the provisions of this chapter shall be construed as
authorizing the conduct or continuance of any illegal or unlawful business, or
any business in violation of any local or state law.
(§ 1, Ord. 1657-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 3-21.22. Deficiency determinations.
   If the Tax Administrator is not satisfied that any statement filed as
required under the provisions of this chapter is correct, or that the amount of
tax is correctly computed, he or she may compute and determine the amount to be
paid and make a deficiency determination upon the basis of the facts contained
in the statement, or upon the basis of any information in his or her possession
or that may come into his or her possession within three (3) years of the date
the tax was originally due and payable. One (1) or more deficiency
determinations of the amount of tax due for a period or periods may be made.
When a person discontinues engaging in a business, a deficiency determination
may be made at any time within three (3) years thereafter as to any liability
arising from engaging in such business whether or not a deficiency
determination is issued prior to the date the tax would otherwise be due.
Whenever a deficiency determination is made, a notice shall be given to the
person concerned in the same manner as notices of assessment are given under
Section
3-21.24.
(§ 1, Ord. 1657-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 3-21.23. Failure to report, nonpayment, or fraud.
   (a)   Under any of the following circumstances, the Tax Administrator may
make and give notice of an assessment of the amount of tax owed by a person
under this chapter at any time:
      (1)   If the person has not filed a complete statement required under the
provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   If the person has not paid the tax due under the provisions of this
chapter;
      (3)   If the person has not, after demand by the Tax Administrator, filed
a corrected statement, or furnished to the Tax Administrator adequate
substantiation of the information contained in a statement already filed, or
paid any additional amount of tax due under the provisions of this chapter; or
      (4)   If the Tax Administrator determines that the nonpayment of any
business tax due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five
(25%) percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to
penalties and interest otherwise stated in this chapter and any other penalties
allowed by law.
   (b)   The notice of assessment shall separately set forth the amount of any
tax known by the Tax Administrator to be due or estimated by the Tax
Administrator, after consideration of all information within the Tax
Administrator's knowledge concerning the business and activities of the person
assessed, to be due under each applicable section of this chapter, and shall
include the amount of any penalties or interest accrued on each amount to the
date of the notice of assessment.
(§ 1, Ord. 1657-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 3-21.24. Tax assessment: Notice requirements.
   The notice of assessment shall be served upon the person either by personal
delivery, or by a deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage
prepaid thereon, addressed to the person at the address of the location of the
business or to such other address as he or she shall register with the Tax
Administrator for the purpose of receiving notices provided under this chapter;
or, should the person have no address registered with the Tax Administrator for
such purpose, then to such person's last known address. For the purposes of
this section, a service by mail is complete at the time of deposit in the
United States mail.
(§ 1, Ord. 1657-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 3-21.25. Tax assessment: Hearing, application and determination.
   Within thirty (30) days after the date of service, the person may apply in
writing to the Tax Administrator for a hearing on the assessment. If
application for a hearing before the City is not made within the time herein
prescribed, the tax assessed by the Tax Administrator shall become final and
conclusive. Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of any such application for
hearing, the Tax Administrator shall cause the matter to be set for hearing
before him or her no later than sixty (60) days after the receipt of the
application, unless a later date is agreed to by the Tax Administrator and the
person requesting the hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be given by the Tax
Administrator to the person requesting such hearing not later than five (5)
days prior to such hearing. At such hearing said applicant may appear and offer
evidence why the assessment as made by the Tax Administrator should not be
confirmed and fixed as the tax due. After such hearing the Tax Administrator
shall determine and reassess the proper tax to be charged and shall give
written notice to the person in the manner prescribed in Section
3-21.24 for giving notice of assessment.
(§ 1, Ord. 1657-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 3-21.26. Relief from taxes: Disaster relief.
   (a)   If a business is unable to comply with any tax requirement due to a
disaster, the business may notify the Tax Administrator of this inability to
comply and request relief from the tax requirement.
   (b)   The Tax Administrator, in its sole discretion, may provide relief from
the Cannabis Business Tax requirement for businesses whose operations have been
impacted by a disaster of such tax liability does not exceed Five Thousand and
no/100th ($5,000.00) Dollars. If such tax liability is Five Thousand One and
no/100th ($5,001.00) Dollars or more than such relief shall only be approved by
the City Council.
   (c)   Temporary relief from the cannabis tax may be relieved for a
reasonable amount of time as determined by the Tax Administrator in order to
allow the cannabis business time to recover from the disaster.
   (d)   The Tax Administrator may require that certain conditions be followed
in order for a cannabis business to receive temporary relief from the Cannabis
Business Tax requirement.
   (e)   A cannabis business shall not be subject to an enforcement action for
a violation of a cannabis business requirement in which the licensee has
received temporary relief from the Tax Administrator.
   (f)   For purposes of this section, "disaster" means fire, flood, storm,
tidal wave, earthquake, or similar public calamity, whether or not resulting
from natural causes.
      (1)   The cannabis business must notify the Tax Administrator in writing
a request for temporary relief from imposition of the tax requirement pursuant
to Subsection (a) of this section of such disaster clearly indicates why relief
is requested from, the time period for which the relief is requested, and the
reasons relief is needed for the specified amount of time.
      (2)   The cannabis business agrees to grant the Tax Collector or his/her
designee access to the location where the cannabis business has been impacted
due to a disaster.
(§ 1, Ord. 1657-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 3-21.27. Conviction for violation: Taxes not waived.   
   The conviction and punishment of any person for failure to pay the required
tax shall not excuse or exempt such person from any civil action for the tax
debt unpaid at the time of such conviction. No civil action shall prevent a
criminal prosecution for any violation of the provisions of this chapter or of
any state law requiring the payment of all taxes.
(§ 1, Ord. 1657-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 3-21.28. Violation deemed a misdemeanor.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor.
(§ 1, Ord. 1657-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 3-21.29. Remedies cumulative.
   All remedies and penalties prescribed by this chapter or which are available
under any other provision of the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code and any other
provision of law or equity are cumulative. The use of one (1) or more remedies
by the City shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of
enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1657-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 3-21.30. Amendment or repeal.
   This chapter may be repealed or amended by the City Council without a vote
of the people to the extent allowed by law. However, as required by Article
XIII C of the California Constitution, voter approval is required for any
amendment that would increase the rate of any tax levied pursuant to this
chapter. The people of the City of Thousand Oaks affirm that the following
actions shall not constitute an increase of the rate of a tax:
   (a)   The restoration of the rate of the tax to a rate that is no higher
than that set by this chapter, if the City Council has acted to reduce the rate
of the tax;
   (b)   An action that interprets or clarifies the methodology of the tax, or
any definition applicable to the tax, so long as interpretation or
clarification (even if contrary to some prior interpretation or clarification)
is not inconsistent with the language of this chapter; or
   (c)   The collection of the tax imposed by this chapter even if the City
had, for some period of time, failed to collect the tax.
(§ 1, Ord. 1657-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
TITLE 4. PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1. SKATEBOARDS, BICYCLES AND ROLLER SKATES
      
4-1.01–Application
      
4-1.02–Definitions
      
4-1.03–Regulation of skateboarding, bicycling and roller skating on private
property
      
4-1.04–Regulation of public property in commercial zones or shopping districts
      
4-1.05–Violations
CHAPTER 2. TAXICABS
      
4-2.01–Intent and purpose
      
4-2.02–Definitions
      
4-2.03–Taxicab permits required; Fees
      
4-2.04–Application for taxicab driver permit
      
4-2.05–Application for taxicab company permit
      
4-2.06–Controlled substance and alcohol testing program
      
4-2.07–Grant or denial of taxicab application
      
4-2.08–Notice to applicant
      
4-2.09–Conditions of taxicab company permit
      
4-2.10–Conditions of taxicab driver permit
      
4-2.11–Annual permit renewal
      
4-2.12–Revocation, suspension or modification of a taxicab permit
      
4-2.13–Appeals
CHAPTER 3. TRAFFIC
Article 1. Definitions
      
4-3.101–Scope
      
4-3.102–Vehicle Code definitions
      
4-3.103–Alley
      
4-3.104–Commercial vehicle loading zone
      
4-3.105–Crosswalk
      
4-3.106–Highway
      
4-3.107–Intersection
      
4-3.108–Operator
      
4-3.109–Passenger loading zone
      
4-3.110–Park
      
4-3.111–Pedestrian
      
4-3.111.5–Residential district
      
4-3.112–Roadway
      
4-3.113–Safety zone
      
4-3.114–Sidewalk
      
4-3.115–Vehicle
      
4-3.116–Bicycle
      
4-3.117–Bicycle lane
      
4-3.118–Bicycle path
      
4-3.119–Bicycle route
      
4-3.120–Cyclist
      
4-3.121–Police officer
      
4-3.122–Vehicle Code
      
4-3.123–Bicycle dealer
      
4-3.124–Truck
      
4-3.125–Official traffic control device
Article 2. Official Traffic Control Devices
      
4-3.201–Conformity to uniform standards
      
4-3.202–Council authority
      
4-3.203–City Engineer authority
      
4-3.204–Official traffic control devices required for enforcement
      
4-3.205–Damaging markings and new pavement
      
4-3.206–Warning signs
      
4-3.207–Decorations and temporary banners
Article 3. General Provisions
      
4-3.301–Operation of electric carts
      
4-3.302–State authority
      
4-3.303–Obedience to official traffic control devices
      
4-3.304–Motor vehicle operation in bicycle lanes
      
4-3.305–Scope
      
4-3.306–Transporting hydrocyanic acid
      
4-3.307–Transporting trash
      
4-3.308–Damaging streets
      
4-3.309–Emergency vehicles
      
4-3.310–Motorcycles: Operation on private or vacant property
      
4-3.311–Traffic laws applicable to bicyclists
      
4-3.312–Obedience to traffic control devices
      
4-3.313–Rights-of-way
      
4-3.314–Riding on roadways and bicycle lanes
      
4-3.315–Carrying articles
      
4-3.316–Park bicycles
Article 4. Parking
      
4-3.401–Living in vehicle
      
4-3.402–Loading zones
      
4-3.403–Passenger loading zones
      
4-3.404–Bus zones
      
4-3.405–Parallel parking
      
4-3.406–Angle parking
      
4-3.407–Prohibited parking or stopping
      
4-3.408–Prohibited or restricted parking
      
4-3.409–Parking on hills
      
4-3.410–Improper storage on City streets
      
4-3.411–Removal of vehicles
      
4-3.412–Trains blocking crossing (Repealed)
      
4-3.413–(Repealed)
      
4-3.414–Commercial vehicles in residential districts
      
4-3.415–Commercial vending vehicles near schools
      
4-3.416–Time limited parking zones
      
4-3.417–Disabled persons parking zones
      
4-3.418–Permit parking
      
4-3.419–Parking of vehicles for sale
      
4-3.420–Prohibition of overnight parking on posted public streets
      
4-3.421–Prohibitions and restrictions on overnight parking permits
      
4-3.422–Revocation of permit
      
4-3.423–Civil penalty
      
4-3.424–Oversized vehicles: parking prohibited: parking permits
Article 5. Speed Limits
      
4-3.501–Established
      
4-3.502–Violations
      
4-3.503–(Not used)
      
4-3.504–(Not used)
      
4-3.505–(Not used)
      
4-3.506–Agoura Road
      
4-3.506.2–Aranmoor Ave
      
4-3.506.5–Auto Mall Drive/Duesenberg Drive
      
4-3.507–(Not Used)
      
4-3.508–Avenida de las Flores
      
4-3.509–(Not used)
      
4-3.510–Avenida de las Plantas
      
4-3.511–(Not used)
      
4-3.512–Avenida de los Arboles
      
4-3.513–Blue Mesa Street
      
4-3.514–Borchard Road
      
4-3.514.5–Bowfield Street
      
4-3.515–Bridgegate Street
      
4-3.515.1–Cabrillo Avenue
      
4-3.515.3–Calle del Prado
      
4-3.515.5–Camino Dos Rios
      
4-3.515.8–Campus Drive
      
4-3.515.9–Cascade Avenue
      
4-3.516–Conejo School Road
      
4-3.516.2–Clearwater Street
      
4-3.516.5–DeHavilland Drive
      
4-3.517–Duesenberg Drive
      
4-3.518–Erbes Road
      
4-3.519–(Not used)
      
4-3.520–Gainsborough Road
      
4-3.520.7–Greenmeadow Drive
      
4-3.521–Green Meadow Drive
      
4-3.521.3–Haaland Drive
      
4-3.521.5–Haigh Road
      
4-3.522–Hampshire Road
      
4-3.523–(Not used)
      
4-3.524–Hillcrest Drive
      
4-3.525–Hodencamp Road
      
4-3.525.1–Holloway Street
      
4-3.526–Janss Road
      
4-3.526.6–Kanan Road
      
4-3.527–Keats Avenue
      
4-3.528–Kelly Road
      
4-3.529–(Not used)
      
4-3.530–Kimber Drive
      
4-3.531–(Not used)
      
4-3.532–La Granada Drive
      
4-3.532.3–La Venta Drive
      
4-3.532.4–Lang Ranch Parkway
      
4-3.532.5–Lesser Drive
      
4-3.532.9–Lindero Canyon Road
      
4-3.533–Lakeview Canyon Road
      
4-3.533.1–Los Padres Drive
      
4-3.533.5–Lawrence Drive
      
4-3.534–Lynn Road
      
4-3.535–(Not used)
      
4-3.536–McCloud Avenue
      
4-3.537–Michael Drive
      
4-3.538–Montgomery Road
      
4-3.539–(Not used)
      
4-3.540–Moorpark Road
      
4-3.541–Mountclef Boulevard
      
4-3.542–Newbury Road
      
4-3.543–Northwood Parkway
      
4-3.544–Old Conejo Road
      
4-3.545–(Not used)
      
4-3.546–Olsen Road
      
4-3.546.1–Paige Lane
      
4-3.546.2–Parkview Drive
      
4-3.546.3–Potrero Road
      
4-3.547–Pederson Road
      
4-3.547.1–Ramona Drive
      
4-3.547.3–Rancho Conejo Boulevard
      
4-3.547.4–Rancho Dos Vientos Drive
      
4-3.547.5–Rancho Road
      
4-3.547.8–Regal Oak Court
      
4-3.548–Reino Road
      
4-3.548.1–Route 23 Northbound and Southbound
      
4-3.548.3–Rockfield Street
      
4-3.548.5–Rolling Oaks Drive
      
4-3.549–Skyline Drive
      
4-3.550–St. Charles Drive
      
4-3.551–Stonesgate Avenue
      
4-3.552–Sunset Hills Boulevard
      
4-3.552.5–Teller Road
      
4-3.553–Tuolumne Avenue
      
4-3.554–Thousand Oaks Boulevard
      
4-3.555–Townsgate Road
      
4-3.556–Triunfo Canyon Road
      
4-3.556.5–Upper Ranch Road
      
4-3.557–Ventu Park Road
      
4-3.557.1–Via De La Mesa
      
4-3.557.2–Via las Brisas
      
4-3.557.5–Via Merida
      
4-3.557.6–Via Ricardo
      
4-3.557.7–Via Rio
      
4-3.557.8–Village Glen
      
4-3.558–Wendy Drive
      
4-3.559–Valley Spring Drive
      
4-3.559.5–Watergate Road
      
4-3.560–Westlake Boulevard
      
4-3.561–Wildwood Avenue
      
4-3.562–Wilbur Road
      
4-3.563–Willow Lane
      
4-3.564–Windsor Drive
      
4-3.565–(Not used)
      
4-3.566–Young Avenue
      
4-3.567–(Not used)
      
4-3.568–Private property
Article 6. Through Streets (Repealed)
Article 7. Truck Routes
      
4-3.701–Authority to place signs
      
4-3.702–Truck prohibition
      
4-3.703–Reserved
      
4-3.704–Repairing vehicles on highways
Article 8. Regulation of Vehicles on Public and Private Property
      
4-3.801–Use of vehicles regulated
      
4-3.802–Exemptions for official vehicles
      
4-3.803–Exceptions for designated areas
      
4-3.804–Operation of vehicles propelled by internal combustion engines,
required equipment for such vehicles, and emission of noise within 300 feet of
residential areas prohibited
      
4-3.805–Vehicle defined
      
4-3.806–Violations: Penalties
Article 9. Vehicle Removal
      
4-3.901–Vehicle removal. Administrative fee
Article 10. Regulation of Bicycles
      
4-3.1001–State authority
      
4-3.1002–Obedience to official traffic control devices
      
4-3.1003–Rights-of-way
      
4-3.1004–Operation of bicycles on roadways and bicycle routes
      
4-3.1005–Parking bicycles
      
4-3.1006–Riding on bicycles
      
4-3.1007–Bicycle equipment
      
4-3.1008–Reports of bicycle accidents
Article 11. Regulation of Pedestrians (Repealed)
Article 12. Licensing of Bicycles
      
4-3.1201–Licensing required
      
4-3.1202–Licensing permitted
      
4-3.1203–Licensing agency
      
4-3.1204–Sales by dealers
      
4-3.1205–License plates
      
4-3.1206–Registration forms
      
4-3.1207–Licensing and registration forms
      
4-3.1208–Distribution of copies of registration forms
      
4-3.1209–Registration and license fees
      
4-3.1210–Reduced fees and portion of registration period
      
4-3.1211–Expiration and registration period
      
4-3.1212–Disposition of fees
      
4-3.1213–Dealers' records
      
4-3.1214–Renewal of expired licenses
      
4-3.1215–Transfers of ownership
      
4-3.1216–Notification of change of address
      
4-3.1217–Tampering with registration certificates, bicycle licenses, and serial
numbers
      
4-3.1218–Bicycles in violation of laws
      
4-3.1219–Police authorized to number bicycle frames
      
4-3.1220–Rental agencies
      
4-3.1221–Violations
      
4-3.1222–Fines
Article 13. Charges and Costs of Emergency Response
      
4-3.1300–Recovery of emergency costs for driving under the influence
CHAPTER 4. EMERGENCY AND DISASTER PLAN AND ORGANIZATION
      
4-4.01–Purpose
      
4-4.02–Definitions
      
4-4.03–Emergency and Disaster Council: Membership
      
4-4.04–Emergency and Disaster Council: Powers and duties
      
4-4.05–Director of Emergency Services: Powers and duties
      
4-4.06–Director of Emergency Services: Emergency powers and duties
      
4-4.07–Emergency and Disaster Organization
      
4-4.08–Divisions, services and staff of the Emergency and Disaster Organization
      
4-4.09–Punishment of violations
      
4-4.10–Severability
CHAPTER 5. PARADE REGULATIONS AND PERMITS
      
4-5.01–Parade defined
      
4-5.02–Parade permits required
      
4-5.03–Interference with parades
      
4-5.04–Applications for permits
      
4-5.05–Applications: Investigations: Recommendations
      
4-5.06–Hearings
      
4-5.07–Granting of permits: Conditions
      
4-5.08–Issuance of permits
      
4-5.09–Denial of permits
      
4-5.10–Reconsideration
      
4-5.11–Contents of permits
      
4-5.12–Requests for alternative permits
      
4-5.13–Alternative permits
      
4-5.14–Late applications: Consideration by City Manager
      
4-5.15–Officials to be notified
      
4-5.16–Parades prohibited
      
4-5.17–Revocation of permits
      
4-5.18–Permit fees
      
4-5.19–Violations
      
4-5.20–Severability
CHAPTER 6. FIRE CONTROL AND PREVENTION
      
4-6.01–Uniform Fire Code
      
4-6.02–Enforcement
      
4-6.03–Rules and regulations
      
4-6.04–Authority of fire personnel to exercise powers of police officers
      
4-6.05–Compliance and penalties
      
4-6.06–Amendments to Uniform Fire Code
CHAPTER 7. FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
4-7.01–Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and methods
      
4-7.02–Definitions
      
4-7.03–General provisions
      
4-7.04–Administration
      
4-7.05–Provisions for flood hazard reduction
      
4-7.06–Variance procedures
      
4-7.07–Alluvial fan advisory
      
4-7.08–(Repealed)
      
4-7.09–(Repealed)
      
4-7.10–(Repealed)
      
4-7.11–(Repealed)
      
4-7.12–(Repealed)
CHAPTER 8. FILM PERMITS
      
4-8.01–Purpose
      
4-8.02–Definitions
      
4-8.03–Permit required
      
4-8.04–Permit requirements and conditions
      
4-8.05–Application processing: Permit fees; Permit issuance
      
4-8.06–Violations
CHAPTER 1. SKATEBOARDS, BICYCLES AND ROLLER SKATES
Sec. 4-1.01. Application.
   This chapter applies to the use and operation of skateboards, bicycles and
roller skates on all streets, alleys, sidewalks, pedestrian ways and rights-of-
ways, whether public or private, within the areas of the City described in this
chapter.
(Ord. 1029-NS, eff. June 20, 1989)
Sec. 4-1.02. Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context,
certain words and phrases are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Pedestrian walkway” means any sidewalk or area within a shopping
center, shopping district or business district which is paved, but closed to
vehicular traffic and which is designated or intended for pedestrian travel.
   (b)   “Shopping center” means a group of commercial establishments, planned,
developed, owned, and managed as a common unit, with parking provided on the
private property site.
   (c)   “Shopping district” means a collection of individual stores or other
commercial establishments standing on separate lots or parcels along public
street frontage or clustered in a contiguous area, with or without off-street
parking.
(Ord. 1029-NS, eff. June 20, 1989)
Sec. 4-1.03. Regulation of skateboarding, bicycling and roller skating on
private property.
   Upon a written request from the owner of a shopping center, the City Council
may prohibit or establish rules regulating the operation of skateboards,
bicycles and roller skates upon any pedestrian walkway within the requesting
party's shopping center. After receiving such request, the City Council shall
hold a public hearing at which time it will consider the adopting of a
resolution designating the affected private property, and the prohibitions and/
or rules for use of skateboards, bicycles and roller skates. In adopting the
resolution, the Council shall find that the operation of skateboards, bicycles
and/or roller skates causes safety problems or interferes with the use of the
walkways by pedestrians.
(Ord. 1029-NS, eff. June 20, 1989)
Sec. 4-1.04. Regulation of public property in commercial zones or shopping
districts.
   After considering the matter at a public hearing, the City Council may, by
resolution, prohibit or regulate the use or operation of skateboards, bicycles
and roller skates in commercially zoned areas or shopping districts, upon any
public street, alley, sidewalk, pedestrian way or other public property or
right-of-way described in the resolution. The resolution shall contain the
Council's findings that the operation of skateboards, bicycles or roller skates
causes safety problems or interferes with the use of the described property by
pedestrians and/or motorized vehicles.
(Ord. 1029-NS, eff. June 20, 1989)
Sec. 4-1.05. Violations.
   If a pedestrian walkway or the public property designated in a City Council
resolution, adopted pursuant to this chapter, is posted with signs prohibiting
or regulating the use of skateboards, bicycles and roller skates, it shall be
unlawful for any person to operate or use any skateboard, bicycle or roller
skate on any such street, sidewalk, pedestrian walkway, or shopping district,
except in a manner consistent with the prohibition and/or rules set forth on
such signs. The sign shall be posted in a conspicuous location, made of a
durable material, and posted in a permanent manner. A violation of this section
shall be an infraction.
(Ord. 1029-NS, eff. June 20, 1989)
CHAPTER 2. TAXICABS
Editor’s Note:
   Chapter 2 was reorganized by Ord. 1588- NS, effective October 11, 2013.
Subsequently, Chapter 2 was reorganized again by Ord. 1653-NS, effective
January 1, 2019. The original Chapter 2, comprised of Sections 4-2.01 through
4-2.21, was based on Ords. 158, 1250-NS, 1363-NS, and 1437-NS.
Sec. 4-2.01. Intent and purpose.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the City's police powers for the purpose
of regulating taxicabs and other vehicles for hire with the objective of
modernizing the regulation of taxicab transportation services. The requirements
set forth in this chapter are intended to protect the public's health, safety,
and welfare by ensuring that taxicabs and other vehicles for hire charge
reasonable rates, are adequately insured, provide a safe vehicle for transport
of the general public, and employ persons that do not pose a threat to
passengers, pedestrians, or other drivers.
(Part 2, Ord. 1653-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 4-2.02. Definitions.
   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in
this chapter. Words and phrases not defined by this chapter have the meaning
set forth elsewhere in this code, the California Business and Professions Code,
or the California Government Code.
   (a)   "Certificate of Inspection" shall mean a City provided form signed by
an authorized agent of an automotive repair establishment that is certified by
the National Institute for Automotive Service Excellence or a facility
registered with the Bureau of Automotive Repair, dated no more than thirty (30)
days before the date the application is submitted to the Finance Director and
which shall indicate whether a certain vehicle has met the criteria set forth
on the form. Items to be inspected may include condition of exterior, interior
and mechanical functions.
   (b)   "Chief of Police" shall mean the Chief of Police of the City or his/
her designee.
   (c)   "City" shall mean the City of Thousand Oaks.
   (d)   "City Manager" shall mean the City Manager of the City or his/her
designee.
   (e)   "Controlled Substance and Alcohol Certificate" shall mean a City
provided form signed by the employing Taxicab Company that shall attest that
each Taxicab Driver has tested negative for each of the controlled substances
specified in Part 40 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, before
employment and as a condition of permit renewal; in the case of self-employed
independent drivers, it shall mean test results directly reported to the Chief
of Police.
   (f)   "County" shall mean County of Ventura.
   (g)   "Drive a Taxicab" shall mean to drive a taxicab that picks up
passengers within the City but does not include driving a taxicab that only
discharges passengers picked up outside the City or that travels through the
City without picking up or discharging passengers, provided the taxicab
company's principal place of business is not within the City.
   (h)   "Finance Director" shall mean the Finance Director of the City or his/
her designee.
   (i)   "Prearranged Trip" shall mean a trip using an online enabled
application, dispatch, or internet website.
   (j)   "Risk Manager" shall mean the Risk Manager of the City or his/her
designee.
   (k)   "Substantially Located" shall mean a taxicab company meets either of
the following:
      (1)   Has its primary business address within the City. A new taxicab
company or taxicab driver shall use this method of determination only for its
first year of operation and may use either test for subsequent years; or
      (2)   The total number of prearranged and non-prearranged trips that
originate in the City account for the largest share of the taxicab company's
total number of trips within the County over the past calendar year as
determined annually.
   (l)   "Taxicab Business" shall mean the business of providing taxicab
transportation services.
   (m)   "Taxicab Driver" shall mean a person who drives a taxicab, whether as
an employee, an independent contractor, or a self-employed person.
   (n)   "Taxicab Company" shall mean a person or entity that employs a taxicab
driver to drive a taxicab, whether as an independent contractor or as an
employee. A taxicab company shall include a taxicab driver if a taxicab company
consists of only one (1) driver.
   (o)   "Trip Data Documentation" shall mean documentation as determined by
the Finance Director that substantiates that the total number of prearranged
and non-prearranged trips that originate within the City account for the
largest share of the taxicab company's total number of trips in the County over
the previous calendar year.
(Part 2, Ord. 1653-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 4-2.03. Taxicab permits required; Fees.
   (a)   A taxicab company that is substantially located in the City shall
obtain a valid taxicab company permit issued by the City pursuant to this
chapter.
   (b)   A taxicab driver that is substantially located in the City shall
obtain a valid taxicab driver permit issued by the City pursuant to this
chapter.
   (c)   A taxicab company required to obtain a permit pursuant to Division (a)
of this section who is also a taxicab driver substantially located in the City,
shall obtain both a valid taxicab company permit and taxicab driver permit
pursuant to this chapter.
   (d)   A taxicab company that is not substantially located in the City shall
possess a permit from the County or at least one (1) city within the County.
   (e)   A taxicab driver that is not substantially located in the City shall
possess a permit from the County or at least one city (1) within the County.
   (f)   A taxicab company who is also a taxicab driver that is not
substantially located in the City shall possess applicable permits from the
County or at least one (1) city within the County.
   (g)   Fees for such permits shall be established by resolution of the City
Council.
   (h)   It shall be unlawful to drive a taxicab that is determined as
substantially located in the City without a valid, City-issued permit. The City
may impose a penalty for violation pursuant to Section
1-2.201.
   (i)   A taxicab company shall notify the City no less than six (6) months
prior to changing its substantial location from another jurisdiction to the
City.
(Part 2, Ord. 1653-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 4-2.04. Application for taxicab driver permit.
   (a)   The applicant for a taxicab driver permit shall submit to the Finance
Director the completed application form together with fees for the permit and
such licenses, certificates, documents, and such other material as the Finance
Director deems necessary. This shall include an application and fees for a
business tax certificate if applicable.
   (b)   The application form for a taxicab driver permit shall require the
following:
      (1)   A letter from a prospective employer offering employment to the
applicant as a taxicab driver substantially located in the City, whether as an
independent contractor or as an employee; a letter from an employer stating
that the applicant is employed as a taxicab driver substantially located in the
City, whether as an independent contractor or as an employee; or a written
statement from the applicant that he/she seeks to be a self-employed taxicab
driver substantially located in the City, not employed by another person,
whether as an independent contractor or as an employee;
      (2)   Proof of compliance with the requirements of the City's mandatory
controlled substance and alcohol certification program;
      (3)   Proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age;
      (4)   The full true name and any other names used by the applicant;
      (5)   The present address and telephone number of the applicant;
      (6)   Driver's license number and social security number;
      (7)   Each residence and business address of the applicant for the five
(5) years immediately preceding the date of the application, and the inclusive
dates for such address;
      (8)   Applicant's height, weight, and color of eyes and hair;
      (9)   One (1) photograph of the applicant at least two (2") inches by two
(2") inches taken within four (4) months preceding the date of the application;
      (10)   The business license or permit history of the applicant, including
whether such applicant has ever had any license or permit issued by any agency
or board, city, county or state revoked or suspended, or has had any
professional or vocational license or permit revoked or suspended, and the
reason(s) for the revocation(s);
      (11)   All criminal arrests and statement of the dates, places, and
disposition of any convictions from said arrests; and
      (12)   Completed, City provided live scan request form signed by live
scan operator.
(Part 2, Ord. 1653-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 4-2.05. Application for taxicab company permit.
   (a)   The applicant for a taxicab company permit shall submit to the Finance
Director a completed application form together with fees for the permit and
such licenses, certificates, documents and other such material as the Finance
Director deems necessary including an application form and fees for a business
tax certificate if applicable.
   (b)   The application form for a taxicab company permit shall require the
following:
      (1)   The full true name and any other names used by the applicant;
      (2)   The present address and telephone number of the applicant;
      (3)   Driver's license number and social security number;
      (4)   Each residence and business address of the applicant for the five
(5) years immediately preceding the date of the application, and the inclusive
dates for such address;
      (5)   One (1) photograph of the applicant at least two (2") inches by two
(2") inches taken within four (4) months preceding the date of the application;
      (6)   The business license or permit history of the applicant, including
whether such applicant has ever had any license or permit issued by any agency
or board, city, county or state revoked or suspended, or has had any
professional or vocational license or permit revoked or suspended, and the
reason(s) for the revocation(s);
      (7)   All criminal arrests and statement of the dates, places, and
disposition of any convictions from said arrests;
      (8)   Completed, City provided live scan request form signed by live scan
operator;
      (9)   The name and address of the taxicab business;
      (10)   The name of each owner of the taxicab business, including the
owners, partners or officers of a firm, partnership, corporation or other
entity;
      (11)   Trip data documentation. For a new taxicab company, a primary
business address in the City shall satisfy the trip data documentation
requirement. A taxicab company shall begin collection of trip data during its
first year of operation;
      (12)   The make, type, vehicle identification number and license number
of each taxicab owned or leased by the taxicab business;
      (13)   A certificate of inspection for each taxicab owned or leased by
the taxicab business;
      (14)   A valid Department of Motor Vehicles registration for each vehicle
showing that each vehicle is registered as a commercial vehicle;
      (15)   The distinctive color scheme, name, monogram or insignia by which
each taxicab will be marked;
      (16)   Registration of rates of fare to be charged;
      (17)   The name of each taxicab driver employed by the taxicab company,
whether as an independent contractor or as an employee;
      (18)   A controlled substance and alcohol certificate for each taxicab
driver. In the case of a self-employed, independent driver, the test results
shall be reported directly to the Chief of Police;
      (19)   The address from which the taxicabs will be operated;
      (20)   Proof of insurance as required by Section
4-2.09(h) of this code.
(Part 2, Ord. 1653-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 4-2.06. Controlled substance and alcohol testing program.
   (a)   Every applicant for a taxicab driver permit shall first take, and pass
with negative results, a controlled substance and alcohol test in accordance
with Government Code Section 53075.5(b)(3) (as it may be amended from time to
time). The results from a controlled substance and alcohol test for an
applicant who is a self-employed independent driver shall be reported directly
to the Chief of Police and shall be made part of the application. The Chief of
Police shall notify the taxicab company of record of any positive results. In
all other cases, the results shall be reported directly to the employing
taxicab company, who shall be required to immediately notify the Chief of
Police of positive results. As used in this section, a negative test for
alcohol means an alcohol screening test showing a breath alcohol concentration
of less than 0.02 percent.
   (b)   Testing procedures shall be substantially as in Part 40 (commencing
with Section 40.1) of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, except that
the driver shall show a valid California driver's licenses at the time and
place of testing, and except as provided otherwise in Government Code Section
53075.5(b)(3).
   (c)   The controlled substance and alcohol test shall be taken no more than
thirty (30) days before the date the application is filed for a new permit. As
long as any taxicab driver permit is used or in effect, such tests shall be
retaken on a periodic basis of at least once a year.
   (d)   A test in one (1) jurisdiction shall be accepted as meeting the same
requirement in any other jurisdiction in accordance with Government Code
Section 53075.5(b)(3).
   (e)   Self-employed independent drivers shall be responsible for compliance
with, and shall pay all costs of, this program with regard to themselves.
Employing taxicab companies shall be responsible for compliance with, and shall
pay all costs of this program with respect to their employees and potential
employees, except that a taxicab company may require employees who test
positive to pay the costs of rehabilitation and of return-to-duty and follow-up
testing.
   (f)   Upon the request of a taxicab driver applying for a permit, the City
shall give the taxicab driver a list of proximate consortia certified pursuant
to Part 382 (commencing with Section 382.101) of Title 49 of the Code of
Federal Regulations.
   (g)   Confidential. The test results are confidential and shall not be
released without the consent of the tested driver, except as authorized or
required by law.
    (h)   Limited use of results. No evidence derived from a positive test
result pursuant to this section shall be admissible in a criminal prosecution
concerning unlawful possession, sale, or distribution of controlled substances.
(Part 2, Ord. 1653-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 4-2.07. Grant or denial of taxicab application.
   (a)   The Finance Director shall refer to the Chief of Police a completed
application for a taxicab driver permit or a taxicab company permit.
   (b)   After receipt of a report from the Department of Justice and Federal
Bureau of Investigation, the Chief of Police shall direct the Finance Director
to grant or deny the application for a taxicab driver permit or taxicab company
permit. The Chief of Police shall direct the Finance Director to deny the
application on any of the following grounds:
      (1)   The applicant is under the age of eighteen (18) years;
      (2)   The applicant does not hold a valid, current California driver's
license;
      (3)   The applicant did not submit one (1) or more of the items required
by the application form;
      (4)   The applicant for a taxicab driver permit tested positive for
controlled substances and/or alcohol, in violation of the City's controlled
substance and alcohol testing certification program;
      (5)   Within seven (7) years prior to the date the application was filed,
the applicant for a taxicab driver permit was convicted of driving under the
influence of alcohol or drugs or of reckless driving; and/or
      (6)   The applicant for a taxicab driver permit or taxicab company permit
was convicted of any of the following crimes, or of an attempt or conspiracy to
commit any of the following crimes, as defined in the California Penal Code,
and such conviction indicates that the applicant may pose a danger to the
public if granted a permit: murder, mayhem, kidnapping, robbery, assault with
intent to commit a felony, assault, battery, rape, arson, burglary, possession
of burglarious instruments or deadly weapons, or any crime for which the
applicant is required to register as a sex offender pursuant to California
Penal Code, Section 290.
(Part 2, Ord. 1653-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 4-2.08. Notice to applicant.
   (a)   The Finance Director shall give written notice to the applicant for a
taxicab driver permit or a taxicab company permit that the application is
granted or denied.
   (b)   A taxicab driver permit shall include the name of the permittee, a
photograph of the permittee, the name of the employer, a statement that the
permit is subject to the conditions imposed by Section
4-2.10 and the requirement that the permittee return the permit to the Finance
Director upon termination of the permittee's employment.
   (c)   A taxicab company permit shall include the name of the permittee and a
statement that the permit is subject to the conditions imposed by Section
4-2.09.
   (d)   If the application is denied, the Finance Director shall include in
such notice a statement of the grounds on which the application is denied.
(Part 2, Ord. 1653-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 4-2.09. Conditions of taxicab company permit.
   Every person or entity issued a taxicab company permit shall:
   (a)   Display on the exterior of each taxicab the name or trademark of the
person under whose authority the taxicab is being operated or the name of the
lessor or lessee thereof;
   (b)   Display on the left hand, bottom corner of the rear window, the City-
issued decal for the current calendar year;
   (c)   Display on both exterior sides, exterior front, and exterior rear of
each vehicle the company assigned taxicab number;
   (d)   Display on both exterior sides and exterior rear of each taxicab the
dispatch phone number of the taxicab company;
   (e)   Permanently affix to each vehicle a top light to easily identify the
vehicle as a taxicab;
   (f)   Display in the interior of each taxicab the sign required by
California Vehicle Code, Section 27908;
   (g)   Adhere to the conditions set forth below in regard to registration of
taxicab service fares, fees and rates:
      (1)   The taxicab company may set fares or charge a flat rate. The
taxicab company may use any type of device or technology approved by the
Division of Measurement Standards to calculate fares, including the use of
Global Positioning System metering, provided that the device or technology
complies with Section 12500.5 of the Business and Professions Code and with all
regulations established pursuant to Section 12107 of the Business and
Professions Code. If fares are calculated by meter, the meter must be sealed,
visible to passengers at all times, and currently registered and inspected by a
County of Ventura Weights and Measures official;
      (2)   The taxicab company shall disclose fares, fees, or rates to the
customer. A taxicab company may satisfy this requirement by disclosing fares,
fees, or rates on its internet web site, mobile telephone application, or
telephone orders upon request by the customer;
      (3)   The taxicab company shall notify the passenger of the applicable
rate prior to the passenger accepting the ride for walkup rides and street
hails. The rate may be provided on the exterior of the vehicle, within an
application of a mobile telephone, device, or other internet-connected device,
or be clearly visible in either print or electronic form inside the taxicab;
      (4)   A taxicab company shall not prejudice, disadvantage, or require
different rates or provide different service to a person because of race,
national origin, religion, color, ancestry, physical disability, medical
condition, occupation, marital status or change in marital status, sex, or any
characteristic listed or defined in Section 11135 of the Government Code;
      (5)   Collect from taxicab passengers only the amounts disclosed to the
customer, plus any tip that the passenger offers;
      (6)   A maximum rate may be established by resolution of the City
Council; and
      (7)   Notify the Finance Director of any changes in rates or fares prior
to such change taking effect.
   (h)   Obtain for each taxicab and keep in force during the term of the
permit, public liability and bodily injury insurance, issued by a California
admitted insurance carrier or an insurance carrier with an A.M. Best rating of
A-VII or better. The insurance policy shall be endorsed to state that coverage
may not be suspended, voided, canceled or reduced in coverage or limits without
fifteen (15) days' prior written notice to the Finance Director. The insurance
policy shall insure the taxicab company and shall name the City as an
additional insured of such taxicab against loss by reason of injury or damage
that may result to persons or property from the negligent operation or
defective construction of such taxicab, or from violation of this chapter or of
any other law of the state or the United States. The insurance policy shall be
in the sum of not less than Three Hundred Thousand and no/100th ($300,000.00)
Dollars combined single limit for personal injury and property damage for each
taxicab in any one (1) accident. The Risk Manager may authorize the Finance
Director to accept insurance that does not meet the foregoing criteria or
require insurance that exceeds the foregoing criteria if the Risk Manager
determines that such insurance will provide adequate protection, based on, but
not limited to, factors such as whether the applicant belongs to a risk
retention group satisfactory to the Risk Manager; whether the applicant's
operating risks are less than or more than standard risks; and whether the
required insurance is reasonably available to a qualified applicant.
   (i)   Obtain and keep in force during the term of the permit, worker's
compensation insurance, covering all employees of the permittee;
   (j)   Possess a valid city business tax certificate;
   (k)   Maintain each taxicab in safe operating condition, good repair, clean
and sanitary condition, and in compliance with the Vehicle Code;
   (l)   The taxicab company shall participate in the pull-notice program
pursuant to Section 1808.1 of the Vehicle Code to regularly check the driving
records of all taxicab drivers;
   (m)   The taxicab company shall maintain a safety education and training
program in effect for all taxicab drivers, whether employees or independent
contractors;
   (n)   The taxicab company shall maintain a disabled access education and
training program to instruct its taxicab drivers on compliance with the Federal
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 and amendments thereto, and state
disability rights laws, including making clear that it is illegal to decline to
serve a person with a disability or who has a service animal;
   (o)   The taxicab company shall obtain a report no less than every twelve
(12) months from the Department of Motor Vehicles for each employed taxicab
driver. The employer shall verify that each employee's driver's license has not
been suspended or revoked, the employee's traffic violation point count, and
whether the employee has been convicted of a violation of California Vehicle
Code Sections 23152 or 23153;
   (p)   A prospective employer of a taxicab driver shall obtain a report
showing the taxicab driver's current public record as recorded by the
Department of Motor Vehicles. For purposes of this subdivision, a report is
current if it was issued less than thirty (30) days prior to the date the
employer employs the taxicab driver;
   (q)   Notify the Finance Director immediately when any vehicle not described
in the application for the permit is placed in service as a taxicab and submit
the information about the vehicle and the certificate of inspection required by
the application form;
   (r)   Notify the Finance Director immediately on termination of a taxicab
driver's employment. Driver's permit shall become void upon termination of
employment;
   (s)   Maintain reasonable financial responsibility to conduct taxicab
transportation services;
   (t)   Require that each taxicab driver have a valid California driver's
license and a valid City taxicab driver permit; and
   (u)   Comply with any other reasonable conditions imposed by the Finance
Director or Chief of Police.
(Part 2, Ord. 1653-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 4-2.10. Conditions of taxicab driver permit.
   Every person to whom a taxicab driver permit is issued shall:
   (a)   Display the driver's photo permit in the taxicab in a place
conspicuous from the passenger area;
   (b)   Take the most direct route possible which will carry the passenger
safely and expeditiously to his/her destination;
   (c)   Grant the person engaging the taxicab exclusive right to the full and
complete use of the passenger compartment;
   (d)   Not allow any person to use or duplicate their permit. If a permit is
found to be used by another individual, it shall be considered of a violation
of this code, unless previously reported as lost or stolen as indicated Section
4-2.10(e);
   (e)   Immediately report a lost or stolen permit to the Finance Department;
   (f)   If the taxicab driver is self-employed, comply with all the conditions
of a taxicab company permit set forth in Section
4-2.09;
   (g)   Return the permit to the Finance Director immediately on termination
of employment or self-employment. A taxicab driver permit shall become void
upon termination of employment or self-employment; and
   (h)   Comply with any other reasonable condition imposed by the Finance
Director or the Chief of Police.
(Part 2, Ord. 1653-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 4-2.11. Annual permit renewal.
   (a)   Taxicab driver and taxicab company permits shall continue in effect
for the remainder of the calendar year in which they are issued, unless revoked
or modified as provided in Section
4-2.12, provided, however, that taxicab driver permits shall automatically
become void on termination of employment or self-employment as a taxicab
driver. A taxicab driver or taxicab company permit issued in the last quarter
of a calendar year shall continue in effect for the remainder of the calendar
year in which it is issued, and for the next calendar year, subject to the
foregoing provisions regarding revocation, modification and automatically
becoming void.
   (b)   Permittees shall submit to the Finance Director applications to renew
taxicab driver and taxicab company permits for following calendar years,
together with fees for the renewal and any changes in the information provided
in the initial application or a previous renewal application. In addition, an
applicant for renewal of a taxicab company permit shall submit a new
photograph, evidence that required insurance will be in effect for the new
calendar year, a new certificate of inspection for each taxicab, and new trip
data documentation. In addition, an applicant for renewal of a taxicab driver
permit shall submit proof of a negative test for controlled substances and
alcohol as required by the City's controlled substance and alcohol
certification program, a new photograph, and provide a document issued by the
Department of Motor Vehicles, dated no more than ten (10) days before the
application is submitted, showing that the applicant holds a valid, current
California driver's license.
   (c)   The Finance Director shall refer to the Chief of Police completed
applications for renewal of taxicab driver and taxicab company permits. The
Chief of Police and the Finance Director shall process and grant or deny the
applications for renewal as provided in Section
4-2.07. Conditions on renewed permits shall be as provided in Sections
4-2.09 and
4-2.10.
   (d)   Applications for renewal of taxicab driver and taxicab company permits
shall be submitted by December 1 of each year to allow sufficient time for
processing before the current permit expires on December 31.
(Part 2, Ord. 1653-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 4-2.12. Revocation, suspension or modification of a taxicab permit.
   (a)   A taxicab company or taxicab driver permit may be revoked or suspended
or additional conditions imposed thereon for failure of the permittee to comply
with applicable laws, regulations and conditions, based on matters occurring
after the permit is issued or on matters not considered at the time of issuance
of the permit that would have authorized denial of the permit or the imposition
of conditions on the permit.
   (b)   The Chief of Police may file with the Finance Director a written
request for revocation, suspension or modification of a taxicab company or
taxicab driver permit, stating facts showing that the permittee has not
complied with applicable laws, regulations or permit conditions, has had a
subsequent arrest, or poses a clanger to public safety, and recommending that
the permit be revoked or suspended or in what respect the permit should be
conditioned.
   (c)   On receiving the request, the Finance Director shall mail to the
permittee a notice that the permit is recommended for revocation, suspension or
conditioning in a specific manner and stating the reasons for that
recommendation. The notice shall inform the permittee that the recommendation
will be adopted, and the permittee will be deemed to concur with the
recommendation if the permittee does not make a written request for a hearing
in the manner provided in Section
4-2.13.
   (d)   The procedures for appealing, rendering a decision and seeking
judicial review of the decision shall be as provided in Section
4-2.13 of this code.
(Part 2, Ord. 1653-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 4-2.13. Appeals.
   (a)   Any person denied approval or renewal of a taxicab driver or taxicab
company permit under this chapter, or a taxicab driver or taxicab company whose
permit has been suspended, revoked or conditioned, may appeal. Such appeal must
be in writing and must be filed with the City Manager or designee not more than
fourteen (14) days following the mailing of the notice of denial, suspension,
revocation, or conditioning sent to the applicant to the address listed by the
applicant pursuant to this chapter. The written appeal must contain all reasons
and documentary support why the denial, revocation, suspension, or conditioning
should be overturned. Any successful appeal will result in approval or
reinstatement of an approval and refund of any fines collected by the City.
      (1)   The City Manager shall not accept an appeal, and no hearing shall
be held, unless the appellant has paid a filing fee, in an amount set by
resolution of the City Council, to defray the cost of such appeal. Any appeal
without the timely payment of fees shall be considered to be untimely.
      (2)   The scope of the appeal hearing pursuant to this section shall be
limited to those issues raised by the appellant in the written appeal, as
submitted pursuant to this section.
   (b)   City Manager action.
      (1)   Upon receipt of a timely filed appeal, the City Manager or designee
shall set the matter for hearing which shall be held not fewer than ten (10)
calendar days nor more than thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the
appeal request. The hearing may be continued from time to time upon the mutual
consent of the parties.
      (2)   The appellant shall be provided with notice of the time and place
of the appeal hearing, as well as a copy of all relevant materials at least
seven (7) calendar days prior to the hearing.
      (3)   At the time of such hearing, the City Manager shall review the
records and files relating to the decision.
      (4)   In conducting the hearing, technical rules relating to evidence and
witnesses shall not apply. Any relevant evidence may be admitted if it is
material and if it is evidence customarily relied upon by responsible persons
in the conduct of their affairs regardless of the existence of any common law
or statutory rule which might make admission of such evidence improper over
objection in civil actions. Hearsay evidence may be admissible if it is the
sort upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of
serious affairs. The rules of privilege shall be applicable to the extent they
are permitted in civil actions. Irrelevant, collateral, and repetitious
testimony shall be excluded.
      (5)   In the case of denial of an initial permit application the
appellant shall have the burden of proving that he or she meets the
requirements for issuing the permit in the first instance; in the case of the
conditioning, revocation or denial of a permit renewal, the City shall have the
burden in proving that grounds exist for revoking or failing to renew a permit.
      (6)   Based upon the evidence presented at the hearing, the City Manager
shall determine whether the decision should be affirmed, modified or reversed.
      (7)   The City Manager's decision shall be communicated in writing to the
appellant within seven (7) calendar days after the close of the hearing and
submission of the matter to the City Manager for decision. The City Manager's
decision shall state whether the decision is affirmed, modified or reversed and
shall state the reasons therefor.
      (8)   The decision of the City Manager shall include notice that the
decision is final and conclusive, that judicial review may be sought therefrom
pursuant to California Civil Procedure Code Section 1094.5, and that any action
filed in the Superior Court shall be filed within ninety (90) days following
the City Manager's notice pursuant to California Civil Procedure Code Section
1094.6.
(Part 2, Ord. 1653-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
CHAPTER 3. TRAFFIC
Article 1. Definitions
Sec. 4-3.101. Scope.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined in this
article.
(§ 7111, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 4-3.102. Vehicle Code definitions.
   Whenever any words or phrases used in this chapter are not defined in this
article but are defined in the Vehicle Code of the State, such definitions are
incorporated in this article and shall be deemed to apply to such words and
phrases as used in this chapter as though set forth in this article in full.
(§ 7111, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 4-3.103. Alley.
   “Alley” shall mean any highway, as defined in Section 4-3.106 of this
article, having a width of twenty-five (25) feet or less and not provided with
sidewalks.
(§ 7111.14, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 4-3.104. Commercial vehicle loading zone.
   “Commercial vehicle loading zone” shall mean that space adjacent to a curb
reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading and unloading of
passengers and materials, marked and designated as provided in this chapter.
(§ 7111.17, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 4-3.105. Crosswalk.
   “Crosswalk” shall mean that portion of the roadway included within the
prolongation of the curb and property lines of an intersecting street.
“Crosswalk” shall include any cross strip of highway, not to exceed twenty (20)
feet in width, which is not a crosswalk by reason of intersecting highways but
which shall be designated as a crosswalk by ordinance.
(§ 7111.15, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 4-3.106. Highway.
   “Highway” shall mean every way or place of whatever nature publicly
maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular or
pedestrian travel. “Highway” shall include a street.
(§ 7111.11, T.O.O.C., as amended by § I, Ord. 722-NS, eff. August 23, 1979)
Sec. 4-3.107. Intersection.
   “Intersection” shall mean the area embraced within the prolongation of the
lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two (2) highways which join one
another at approximately right angles, or the area within which vehicles
traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in
contact.
(§ 7111.24, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 4-3.108. Operator.
   “Operator” shall mean any person who is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
(§ 7111.22, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 4-3.109. Passenger loading zone.
   “Passenger loading zone” shall mean that space adjacent to a curb reserved
for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading and unloading of
passengers, marked and designated as provided in this chapter.
(§ 7111.18, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 4-3.110. Park.
   “Park” shall mean to stand a vehicle or allow a vehicle to stand for a
period of time longer that actually or reasonably necessary for the loading or
unloading of passengers or materials.
(§ 7111.23, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 4-3.111. Pedestrian.
   “Pedestrian” shall mean any person afoot, or any cyclist having dismounted a
bicycle and then proceeding to move the bicycle afoot, or any person who is
using a means of conveyance propelled by human power other than a bicycle.
(§ 7111.21, T.O.O.C.; repealed by § I, Ord. 550-NS, eff. November 13, 1975;
reenacted by § II, said Ord. 550-NS)
Sec. 4-3.111.5. Residential district.
   “Residential district” shall include all land within those residential land
use zones or sub-zones designated with an “R” as established under Article 3,
Chapter 4, Title 9, and depicted on the official zoning map and all land within
an open space zone adjacent to a residential zone. Whenever a portion of a
public street or right-of-way is within a residential zone, then the entire
width of the public right-of-way abutting the residential zone shall be
considered within the residential district.
(§ 1, Ord. 1241-NS, eff. September 19, 1995, as amended by § 11, Ord. 1374-NS,
eff. April 26, 2001)
Sec. 4-3.112. Roadway.
   “Roadway” shall mean that portion of a street between the regularly
established curb lines, or, when no curbs exist, that portion improved,
designated, and ordinarily used for vehicular travel and parking.
(§ 7111.12, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 4-3.113. Safety zone.
   “Safety zone” shall mean that portion of a roadway reserved for the
exclusive use of pedestrians, marked and designated as provided in this
chapter.
(§ 7111.16, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 4-3.114. Sidewalk.
   “Sidewalk” shall mean that portion of a street between the curb lines or
traversable roadway and the adjacent property lines.
(§ 7111.13, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 4-3.115. Vehicle.
   “Vehicle” shall mean every device or animal by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a street or highway, excepting devices
moved by human power or used exclusively upon rails.
(§ 7111.19, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 4-3.116. Bicycle.
   “Bicycle” shall mean a device upon which any person may ride, propelled by
human power though a belt, chain, or gears, and having either two (2) or three
(3) wheels in a tandem or tricycle arrangement.
(§ I, Ord. 484-NS, eff. July 9, 1974)
Sec. 4-3.117. Bicycle lane.
   “Bicycle lane” shall mean any lane within the roadway designated by signs
and/or markings for the operation of bicycles.
(§ I, Ord. 484-NS, eff. July 9, 1974; repealed by § I, Ord. 550-NS, eff.
November 13, 1975; reenacted by § II, said Ord. 550-NS)
Sec. 4-3.118. Bicycle path.
   “Bicycle path” shall mean any specifically designated area for bicycle
travel physically separated from the roadway.
(§ II, Ord. 550-NS, eff. November 13, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.119. Bicycle route.
   “Bicycle route” shall mean any route recommended for bicycle travel. A
bicycle route may include a bicycle path, bicycle lane, and/or a public street
for accommodating bicycle riders.
(§ II, Ord. 550-NS, eff. November 13, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.120. Cyclist.
   “Cyclist” shall mean any bicycle operator.
(§ II, Ord. 550-NS, eff. November 13, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.121. Police officer.
   “Police officer” shall mean any officer of the Police Department of the City
or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for
violations of traffic regulations.
(§ II, Ord. 550-NS, eff. November 13, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.122. Vehicle Code.
   “Vehicle Code” shall mean the Vehicle Code of the State.
(§ II, Ord. 550-NS, eff. November 13, 1975).
Sec. 4-3.123. Bicycle dealer.
   “Bicycle dealer” shall mean any person, firm, partnership, or corporation
which is engaged wholly or partly in the business of selling bicycles, or
buying or taking in trade bicycles for the purposes of resale, or selling or
offering for sale or otherwise dealing with bicycles, whether or not such
bicycles are owned by such person or entity. “Bicycle dealer” shall also
include the agents or employees of such person or entity.
(§ II, Ord. 550-NS, eff. November 13, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.124. Truck.
   “Truck” shall mean any motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily
for the transportation of property or persons. “Truck” shall include a
semitrailer, trailer, truck tractor, or commercial vehicle as defined by the
Vehicle Code of the State. “Truck” shall not include a pickup.
(§ II, Ord. 711-NS, eff. May 10, 1979)
Sec. 4-3.125. Official traffic control device.
   “Official traffic control device” shall mean any sign, signal, marking, or
device, not inconsistent with the Vehicle Code of the State or this Code, place
or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction for
the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
(§ II, Ord. 722-NS, eff. August 23, 1979)
Article 2. Official Traffic Control Devices*
*   Article 2 entitled “Signs, Markings, and Signals,” consisting of Sections
4-3.201 through 4-3.209, recodified from Sections 7121, 7121.1. 7121.2, 7122,
7123, 7124, 7125, 7152, 7153.1, and 7153.2, T.O.O.C., as amended by Ordinance
No. 489-NS, effective August 22, 1974, repealed by Section I, Ordinance No.
539-NS, effective August 21, 1975.
Sec. 4-3.201. Conformity to uniform standards.
   Only those official traffic control devices that conform to the uniform
standards and specifications promulgated by the Department of Transportation of
the State shall be placed upon a public street or highway.
(§ II, Ord. 539-NS, eff. August 21, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.202. Council authority.
   (a)   The Council shall designate, by resolution, the intersections that
shall be controlled by official traffic control signals.
   (b)   The Council shall designate, by resolution, the intersections that
shall be controlled by stop signs.
   (c)   The Council shall establish, by resolution, the City streets that
shall be designated as through streets.
   (d)   The Council shall establish, by ordinance, the speed limits on City
streets in accordance with the provisions of the Vehicle Code of the State.
   (e)   The Council shall determine, by ordinance, the City streets that shall
be designated as truck routes.
(§ II, Ord. 539-NS, eff. August 21, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.203. City Engineer authority.
   (a)   The City Engineer shall design, place and maintain, or cause to be
placed and maintained, all official traffic control devices authorized by the
Council.
   (b)   The City Engineer shall design, place and maintain, or cause to be
placed and maintained, all other official traffic control devices where, in the
opinion of the City Engineer, such official traffic control devices are
necessary to protect the public safety.
(§ II, Ord. 539-NS, eff. August 21, 1975; § 1, Ord. 1637-NS, eff. January 12,
2018)
Sec. 4-3.204. Official traffic control devices required for enforcement.
   No provision of this chapter for which official traffic control devices are
required may be enforced against any alleged violator thereof if, at the time
and place of such alleged violation, any official traffic control device
required by the provisions of this chapter or the Vehicle Code of the State is
not in place and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant
person.
(§ II, Ord. 539-NS, eff. August 21, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.205. Damaging markings and new pavement.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or drive any animal or any
vehicle over or across any newly made pavement, or any pavement under
construction, or any freshly-painted markings upon any street when a barrier or
sign is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or
markings, or when a sign is in place stating that the street is closed.
(§ II, Ord. 539-NS, eff. August 21, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.206. Warning signs.
   The provisions of this article shall not be construed to prohibit the
erection or placing in any highway of mile posts, mile boards, guide posts, or
guide boards or the painting, posting, attaching, or affixing of warning signs,
notices, or signboards upon bridges, fences, buildings, or other structures
belonging to the City with the permission of the City Engineer.
(§ II, Ord. 539-NS, eff. August 21, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.207. Reserved.
(§ II, Ord. 539-NS, eff. August 21, 1975, and repealed by § 3, Ord. 1621-NS,
eff. September 30, 2016)
Article 3. General Provisions
*Sec. 4-3.301. Operation of electric carts.
   Physically disabled persons and persons fifty (50) years of age or older are
hereby authorized to operate electric carts on public sidewalks or bicycle
lanes within the City; provided, however, any such person who owns an electric
cart shall apply to the Chief of Police for a permit and an identification
sticker to so operate the cart, and such sticker shall be affixed to the cart
in order to operate it upon any public sidewalk or bicycle lane within the
City.
(§ I, Ord. 424-NS, eff. February 14, 1974, as amended by § I, Ord. 746-NS, eff.
April 24, 1980)
*   Section 4-3.301 entitled "Riding bicycles on sidewalks," recodified from
Section 731, T.O.O.C., repealed by Section I, Ordinance No. 419-NS, effective
December 27, 1973.
*Sec. 4-3.302. State authority.
   Every person operating a motor vehicle shall have all the rights and shall
be subject to all the duties applicable by the laws of the State or by the laws
of the City, except those provisions of laws and ordinances which by their
nature have no application and except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
(See Vehicle Code Sections 21200 et seq.)
(§ V, Ord. 550-NS, eff. November 13, 1975)
*   Section 4-3.302 entitled "Riding on handlebars of bicycles and
motorcycles," recodified from Section 7131.1, T.O.O.C., repealed by Section I,
Ordinance No 550-NS, effective November 13, 1975.
*Sec. 4-3.303. Obedience to official traffic control devices.
   It shall be unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle or handling an
animal to fail to obey any official traffic control device applicable to him,
unless otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic officer.
(§ V, Ord. 550-NS, eff. November 13, 1975)
*   Section 4-3.303 entitled “Clinging to moving vehicles,” recodified from
Section 7133, T.O.O.C., repealed by Section I, Ordinance No. 550-NS, effective
November 13, 1975.
*Sec. 4-3.304. Motor vehicle operation in bicycle lanes.
(§ V, Ord. 550-NS, eff. November 13, 1975; repealed by § 1, Ord. 856-NS, eff.
April 17, 1984)
*   Section 4-3.304 entitled “Driving through funeral processions,” recodified
from Section 7132, T.O.O.C., repealed by Section I, said Ordinance No. 550-NS.
Sec. 4-3.305. Scope.
   The provisions of the Vehicle Code and this Code relative to traffic upon
highways and official traffic control devices upon highways shall be applicable
to the following:
   (a)   All highways;
   (b)   Those driveways, paths, roads, parking facilities, and grounds owned,
operated, or controlled by the City as determined and designated by the City
Engineer and when signs giving notice thereof have been erected; and
   (c)   Those privately owned and maintained roads and parking facilities as
determined and designated by the Council by resolution according to the
provisions of the Vehicle Code and City policy and when signs giving notice
thereof have been erected.
(§ 7134, T.O.O.C.; repealed by § I, Ord. 550-NS, eff. November 13, 1975;
reenacted by § III, Ord. 722-NS, eff. August 23, 1979)
Sec. 4-3.306. Transporting hydrocyanic acid.
(§§ 7135 and 7135.1 through 7135.9, T.O.O.C.; repealed by § 1, Ord. 856-NS,
eff. April 17, 1984)
Sec. 4-3.307. Transporting trash.
   Every vehicle carrying trash upon a highway shall be covered with a cover
sufficient to prevent any material from failing or being blown from such
vehicle; provided, however, when traveling from house to house or from place to
place to pick up material, vehicles used in collecting trash or garbage need
not be covered so long as the distance between such stops for loading is not
more than one-half (1/2) mile.
(§§ 7154 and 7154.1, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 4-3.308. Damaging streets.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, drive, or drag, or cause to be
ridden, driven, or dragged, any unlicensed vehicle, tractor, sled, or implement
over, along, or across any street in such a manner as to cause injury or damage
to such street.
(§ 7151, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 4-3.309. Emergency vehicles.
   The provisions of this chapter regulating the moving, parking, and standing
of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles being used by any authorized Police or
Fire Department, the Street Department, or the Division of Highways of the
State while the driver of any such vehicle is engaged in the necessary
performance of public emergency duties.
(§ 7171, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 4-3.310. Motorcycles: Operation on private or vacant property.
(§§ 1, 2, and 3, Ord. 223; repealed by § 1, Ord. 150-NS, eff. May 14, 1970)
Sec. 4-3.311. Traffic laws applicable to bicyclists.
(§ I, Ord. 485-NS, eff. July 9, 1974; repealed by § I, Ord. 550-NS, eff.
November 13, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.312. Obedience to traffic control devices.
(§ I, Ord. 485-NS, eff. July 9, 1974; repealed by § I, Ord. 550-NS, eff.
November 13, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.313. Rights-of-way.
(§ I, Ord. 485-NS, eff. July 9, 1974; repealed by § I, Ord. 550-NS, eff.
November 13, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.314. Riding on roadways and bicycle lanes.
(§ I, Ord. 485-NS, eff. July 9, 1974; repealed by § I, Ord. 550-NS, eff.
November 13, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.315. Carrying articles.
(§ I, Ord. 485-NS, eff. July 9, 1974; repealed by § I, Ord. 550-NS, eff.
November 13, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.316. Parking bicycles.
(§ I, Ord. 485-NS, eff. July 9, 1974; repealed by § I, Ord. 550-NS, eff.
November 13, 1975)
Article 4. Parking
*Sec. 4-3.401. Living in vehicle.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle or a
transportable living facility on any street, highway, or public or private
property for purposes of living or residing therein, except as permitted by
ordinance, resolution or other formal action of the City Council. This section
shall not apply to registered guests, campers or residents at licensed mobile
home or recreational vehicle parks.
(§ 2, Ord. 856-NS, eff. April 17, 1984, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1307-NS, eff.
November 20, 1997)
*   Section 4-3.401 entitled “Vehicles for Sale,” recodified from Section 7141,
T.O.O.C.; repealed by Section 1, Ordinance No. 856-NS, effective April 17,
1984.
Sec. 4-3.402. Loading zones.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park or stop such
vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or
materials; provided, however, no stop for the loading of passengers shall be
made for more than three (3) minutes nor for the loading or unloading of
materials for more than twenty (20) minutes in any of the following places:
   (a)   In any alley within any business or residence district; and
   (b)   In any loading zone designated by the City Engineer; provided,
however, such loading zone shall be designated by yellow painted curb markings
or signs.
(§ 7142, 7142.1, and 7142.2, T.O.O.C., as amended by § I, Ord. 489-NS, eff.
August 22, 1974, and § I, Ord. 538-NS, eff. August 21, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.403. Passenger loading zones.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park or stop such
vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers;
provided, however, no stop for the loading or unloading of passengers shall be
made for more than three (3) minutes in any of the following places:
   (a)   For a distance of thirty (30) feet along any curb at the main entrance
to any hotel;
   (b)   At any curb in front of any portion of the main entrance and outside
vestibule of any theater during any time such theater is open for public
performance; and
   (c)   In any passenger loading zone designated by the City Engineer;
provided, however, such passenger loading zone shall be designated by white
painted curb markings or signs.
(§§ 7143, 7143.1, 7143.2, and 7413.3, T.O.O.C., as amended by § I, Ord. 489-NS,
eff. August 22, 1974, and § II, Ord. 538-NS, eff. August 21, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.404. Bus zones.
   The City Engineer is hereby authorized to establish and located bus zones
within fifty (50) feet of any intersection when such zones are found by him to
be necessary and will not cause a safety hazard.
(§ 7149.10, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 4-3.405. Parallel parking.
   Except as otherwise provided in Section 4-3.406 of this article, it shall be
unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand, or park such vehicle
in a roadway other than parallel with the curb or right-hand edge of the
roadway with the two (2) right-hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen (18”)
inches of the regularly established curb line or, where no curb line exists, as
near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practicable.
(§ 7144, T.O.O.C., as amended by § III, Ord. 538-NS, eff. August 21, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.406. Angle parking.
   (a)   Determination. The City Engineer shall determine the location of
streets, or parts of streets, where angle parking shall be permitted.
   (b)   Method. When the City Engineer shall determine the location of
streets, or parts of streets, where angle parking shall be permitted, it shall
be unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park, or cause or permit to be
stopped, stood, or parked, any vehicle in any roadway otherwise than at the
prescribed angle with the nearest wheel not to exceed one (1’) foot from such
curb.
   (c)   Demarcation. The City Engineer shall indicate the proper angle for
such parking upon the portions of such streets by the painting of white lines
upon the surface of the roadway adjacent to the curb line thereof.
   (d)   Prohibited on portion of Thousand Oaks Boulevard. In the best
interests of the public health, safety, and welfare, there shall be no diagonal
parking within the public right-of-way along Thousand Oaks Boulevard beginning
at the easterly line of Moorpark Road, easterly to the easterly line of
Pleasant Way.
(§§ 7145, 7145.1, and 7145.2, T.O.O.C., and § I, Ord. 87, as amended by § I,
Ord. 489-NS, eff. August 22, 1974, and § 1, Ord. 1551-NS, eff. February 10,
2011)
Sec. 4-3.407. Prohibited parking or stopping.
   No person shall park, stop, or leave standing any vehicle, trailer, or
camper, whether attended or unattended, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer or
official traffic control device in any of the following places:
   (a)   Within an intersection;
   (b)   On a crosswalk, except that a bus engaged as a common carrier or a
taxicab may stop in an unmarked crosswalk to load or unload passengers;
   (c)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent right-hand curb or within the
area between the zone and the curb as may be indicated by a sign or red paint
on the curb;
   (d)   Within fifteen (15) feet of the driveway entrance to or exit from any
fire station. This subsection shall not apply to any vehicle owned or operated
by a fire department and clearly marked as a fire department vehicle;
   (e)   Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant, except when such vehicle
is attended by a licensed driver who is seated in the front seat and who can
immediately move such vehicle in case of necessity. This subsection shall not
apply in respect to any vehicle owned or operated by a fire department and
clearly marked as a fire department vehicle;
   (f)   In front of a public or private driveway, except that a bus engaged as
a common carrier, school bus, or taxicab may stop to load or unload passengers;
   (g)   On a sidewalk, curb, median island, or other parking lot island,
except as permitted by ordinance;
   (h)   Alongside, opposite, or within any street or highway excavation,
obstruction, or construction when such stopping, standing, or parking would
obstruct traffic or construction operations;
   (i)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped, parked, or standing at the
curb or edge of a highway;
   (j)   In any “No Parking or Stopping Any Time Zone” or emergency parking
only zone determined and designated by the City Engineer; provided, however,
such zone shall be designated by red curb painted markings or signs; and
   (k)   On any roadway in such a position as to obstruct the normal movement
of traffic or in such a condition as to create a hazard to other traffic upon
the street;
   (l)   Parking in other than a designated space or across or over the lines
or defined limits of a parking space. This shall include taking more than one
space for parking;
   (m)   Parking in a designated space for electrical vehicle charging by a
non-electric vehicle.
   (n)   In any lane designated as a Fire Lane by the Ventura County Fire
Protection District with such zone being designated by red curb painted
markings and signs or white lettering reading “Fire Lane”.
(§§ 7147 and 7147.1 through 7147.6, T.O.O.C.; repealed by § IV, Ord. 538-NS,
eff. August 21, 1975; reenacted by § V, said Ord. 538-NS, as amended by §§ 3
and 4, Ord. 856-NS, eff. April 17, 1984, as amended by part 3, Ord. 1434-NS,
eff. July 1, 2005, as amended by part 1, Ord. 1451-NS, eff. February 10, 2006)
Sec. 4-3.408. Prohibited or restricted parking.
   It shall be unlawful to park, stop, or leave standing any vehicle, trailer,
or camper, whether attended or unattended, on any street or part of a street,
except as provided in this Chapter. Such prohibited or restricted parking may
apply to such vehicles, in such locations, during certain hours or days as
determined by the City Engineer; provided, however, such restrictions shall be
designated by curb painted markings or signs.
(§ 7147.7, T.O.O.C., as amended by § I, Ord. 489-NS, eff. August 22, 1974, § I,
Ord. 711-NS, eff. May 10, 1979, and § IV, Ord. 722-NS, eff. August 23, 1979)
Sec. 4-3.409. Parking on hills.
   No person driving, or in charge of, or in control of a vehicle, trailer, or
camper shall permit it to stand on any street unattended when upon any grade
exceeding three percent (3%) within any business or residence district without
blocking the wheels by turning them against the curb or by other means.
(§ 7190, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 2, Ord. 83; repealed by § IV, Ord. 538-NS,
eff. August 21, 1975; reenacted by § V, said Ord. 538-NS)
Sec. 4-3.410. Improper storage on City streets.
   No person who owns or has possession, custody, or control of any vehicle,
trailer, or camper shall store such upon any City right-of-way or alley.
“Store” for the purpose of this Section shall be any of the following:
   (a)   When a motorized or non-motorized vehicle is parked or left standing
for seventy-two (72) or more consecutive hours.
   (b)   When the motorized vehicle is parked at or about the same location,
but has not been moved an appreciable distance and used for purposes other than
to avoid a violation of this Section during a seventy-two (72) hour period. If
during that seventy-two (72) hour the odometer, if any, has not changed more
than one mile, it will be presumed the vehicle has not been moved an
appreciable distance and was used only to avoid violating this Section. This
presumption may be overcome by proof of the vehicle owner or operator that said
vehicle has been used for purposes other than to violate this Section.
   (c)   When a non-motorized vehicle, trailer or camper is unhooked or
unattached to a motorized vehicle for any period of time unless:
   (1)   Emergency repairs are being made, or
   (2)   The unhooked or unattached non-motorized vehicle, trailer or camper is
otherwise lawfully parked between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. and is
being used in connection with a delivery to, a requested pick-up from, or work
performed at, the adjacent property, and said trailer or camper is braked or
blocked and does not exceed a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of ten
(10,000) thousand pounds or more.
(§ 7191, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 2, Ord. 83; repealed by § IV, Ord. 538-NS,
eff. August 21, 1975; reenacted by § V, said Ord. 538-NS, as amended by § 1,
Ord. 964-NS, eff. June 2, 1987, and § 1, Ord. 1318-NS, eff. May 28, 1998)
Sec. 4-3.411. Removal of vehicles.
   Any member of the Highway Patrol of the State or any member of the Police
Department authorized by the Chief of Police may remove a vehicle, trailer, or
camper from a street under the circumstances noted in the Vehicle Code of the
State and under the following circumstances:
   (a)   When a vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street for seventy-
two (72) or more consecutive hours;
   (b)   When a vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street in such a
position as to obstruct the normal movement of traffic or in such a condition
as to create a hazard to other traffic upon the street;
   (c)   When any vehicle is illegally parked so as to block the entrance to a
driveway;
   (d)   When any vehicle is illegally parked so as to prevent access by
firefighting equipment to a fire hydrant; and
   (e)   When any vehicle is illegally parked in any parking restricted zone
designated by the City Engineer to be a tow away zone; provided, however, such
zone shall be designated by signs;
   (f)   When any non-motorized vehicle, trailer, or camper is unhooked or
unattached from a motorized vehicle for any period of time, unless emergency
repairs are being made.
(§ 7146, T.O.O.C., repealed by § IV, Ord. 538-NS, eff. August 21, 1975;
reenacted by § V, said Ord. 538-NS, and amended by § 1, Ord. 1145-NS, eff.
April 21, 1992)
Sec. 4-3.412. Trains blocking crossings.
(§ 7149, T.O.O.C., repealed by Ord. 1437-NS, eff. July 7, 2005)
Sec. 4-3.413. Private entrances.
(§§ 7148 and 7148.1, T.O.O.C., repealed by § IV, Ord. 538-NS, eff. August 21,
1975)
Sec. 4-3.414. Commercial vehicles in residential districts.
   For the purposes of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, “commercial
vehicle” shall mean any vehicle used or maintained for the transportation of
persons for hire, compensation or profit, or any vehicle designed, used or
maintained primarily for the transportation of property for hire, compensation
or profit. A van pool vehicle maintained and used primarily for the nonprofit
and work-related transportation of adults for the purpose of ride sharing is
not a commercial vehicle.
   (a)   On private property in residential districts. It shall be unlawful to
park a commercial vehicle, having a specific manufacturer’s gross vehicle
weight rating of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds or more, upon private property
in a residential district and off of a public street, when the parking is not
connected with a delivery to that property, or work being performed on that
property or property in the immediate area where the vehicle is parked.
   (b)   On streets in residential districts. It shall be unlawful to park a
commercial vehicle, having a specific manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight
rating of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds or more, on any street in a
residential district, when the parking is not connected with deliveries to an
adjoining property or in connection with work being performed at the adjoining
property.
(§ 7250, T.O.O.C., as added by § 1, Ord. 83, as amended by § 5, Ord. 856-NS,
eff. April 17, 1984, Ord. 1068-NS, eff. April 3, 1990, and § 2, Ord. 1241-NS,
eff. September 19, 1995)
Sec. 4-3.415. Commercial vending vehicles near schools.
   Prohibited during certain hours. No person operating or controlling a
vehicle designed for, or intended to be a vehicle for, the selling of any
merchandise consisting of food or other commodity may stop or park within five
hundred (500) feet of the property line of any public school between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on the days the public school is in session, unless
approved by the City Engineer. A written request shall be evaluated by the City
Engineer or designee and only approved if determined that no hazard to persons
or property or interference with traffic will result.
(§§ 1 through 4, Ord. 123, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1188-NS, eff. October 12,
1993, as amended by part 3, Ord. 1656-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 4-3.416. Time limited parking zones.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park or stop such
vehicle in any time limited parking zone designated by the City Engineer in
excess of the indicated time limit; provided, however, such time limited zone
shall be designated by green painted curb markings or signs.
(§ 1, Ord. 592-NS, eff. October 14, 1976)
Sec. 4-3.417. Disabled persons parking zones.
   (a)   Parking.
   (1)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle, other than a
vehicle bearing a distinguishing license plate as defined by the State Vehicle
Code to park or stop such vehicle in a parking zone identified as reserved for
disabled or handicapped person pursuant to subsection (c) below. The fine for
this violation shall be as prescribed by the Vehicle Code.
   (2)   Physically handicapped parking zones. It is unlawful for any person to
obstruct, block or otherwise bar access to those parking stalls, spaces, curb
cuts or ramps except as provided in subdivision (1) of subsection (a) of this
section.
   (b)   Improper parking in cross hatch section.
   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, including disabled persons who
may lawfully park in
a physically handicapped parking stall, to park a vehicle on or otherwise block
or obstruct the blue paint cross hatch section designated for the loading and
unloading of vehicles parked in the adjacent physically handicapped stall or
space.
   (c)   Improper display of placard.
   (1)   It shall be unlawful to fail to, or improperly display a disabled
person’s placard.
   (2)   If a citation is issued for parking or stopping in a zone identified
as reserved for disabled persons, the Finance Director or staff as authorized
by the Finance Director may, in his/her discretion, reduce the charge for
violation of 4-3.417(a) to a charge of improper display under this subsection,
and impose a fine not to exceed the base parking fine.
   (d)   Space identification.
   (1)   Such physically handicapped on-street parking zones shall be
designated by blue paint on the curb or edge of the paved portion of the street
adjacent to the space. In addition to the blue paint, the space shall also be
indicated by signs or other suitable means.
   (2)   Such disabled persons or disabled veterans off-street parking zones,
stalls or spaces shall be indicated by either signs, or markings, or both as
specified in the Vehicle Code.
(§ 1, Ord. 592-NS, eff. October 14, 1976, as amended by §6, Ord. 856-NS, eff.
April 17, 1984, § 1, Ord. 866-NS, eff. July 24, 1984, §§ 3 and 4, Ord. 988-NS,
eff. February 16, 1988, § 1, Ord. 1017-NS, eff. February 7, 1989, § 1, Ord.
1046-NS, eff. October 17, 1989, and § 1, Ord. 1288-NS, eff. August 14, 1997, as
amended by part 4, Ord. 1434-NS, eff. July 1, 2005, as amended by part 1, Ord.
1452-NS, eff. February 10, 2006)
Sec. 4-3.418. Permit parking.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this Section the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning herein given. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the
singular number include the plural number. The word shall is always mandatory
and not merely directory.
   (1)   “Resident” shall mean a person who lives in a dwelling unit located in
a preferential parking district.
   (2)   “Merchant” shall mean a person who, as proprietor, operates a
commercial business involved in the retailing of goods or services within a
preferential parking district.
   (3)   “Employee of merchant” shall mean any person employed by a merchant
within a preferential parking district.
   (4)   “Guest” shall mean any person visiting or intending to visit, for any
purpose, either a resident or merchant located in a preferential parking
district.
   (5)   “Preferential parking permit district” or “district,” shall mean a
residential area with streets or boundaries designated by the ordinance
establishing the district wherein vehicles displaying a valid permit shall be
exempt from parking restrictions established pursuant to this Section.
   (6)   “Dwelling unit” shall mean a house, apartment, condominium, mobile
home or other type of residence.
   (b)   Designation of preferential parking permit district. The City Council
may, upon receipt of a petition signed by residents or merchants living or
working in sixty percent of the dwelling units or businesses comprising not
less than sixty percent of the developed frontage of the area proposed for
designation, designate a certain area or areas to be a preferential parking
permit district by motion.
   (c)   Issuance of permits.
   (1)   Parking permits for preferential parking districts may be issued by
the City Engineer.
   (2)   The number of permits to be issued to any one dwelling unit or to any
merchant’s business establishment (including its employees) shall be determined
by the City Engineer based on the parking conditions within each district.
   (3)   Parking permits may be issued only to the following persons:
residents, merchants, employees of merchants or guests within the prescribed
preferential parking districts.
   (d)   Requirements. To obtain a Resident Parking Permit a resident must:
   (1)   Present “proof of residence” and “proof of vehicle ownership” as
determined by the City Engineer;
   (2)   Pay any required application fees; and
   (3)   Provide complete and correct information on the application for a
Resident Parking Permit.
   (e)   Specific resident vehicle. A Resident Parking Permit may only be used
by the vehicle which has been identified in the application for the permit. If
the vehicle is not owned by the resident, sufficient evidence must be presented
to prove that the resident has the legal right to use the vehicle so that it
can be considered a resident vehicle. At such time as the vehicle is no longer
used by the resident, the Permit Holder shall advise and return the Permit to
the City Engineer. Proof of residence and vehicle ownership shall not be
required for any renewals so long as ownerships have not changed.
   (f)   Visitor permits. Five (5) Visitor Parking Permits may be issued for
each legal dwelling unit within a designated Permit Parking Area for use by the
resident or the resident’s temporary visitors in accordance with applicable
rules and regulations. The same privileges and restrictions applicable to a
Resident Parking Permit shall be applicable to a Visitor Parking Permit.
   (g)   Special function permits. Residents may apply for a one-day special
function parking permit (for parties, etc.) in person at the Public Works
Department for a fee determined by the City Engineer. Said permit must be
obtained a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the special
function.
   (h)   Permit fees. Permit fees shall be established by the City Council. In
the absence of any such order, the City Engineer may establish and collect a
fee for the issuance of permits.
   (i)   Lost, stolen, or damaged permits. Replacement permits may be obtained
after payment of a fee for each such replacement permit as specified in the
City’s Master Fee Resolution.
   (j)   Deposit of permit fees. Any permit fees collected under the provisions
of this part shall be paid into the treasury of the City and deposited in the
Preferential Parking Program Fund. Said funds shall earn interest paid into the
funds annually.
   (k)   Display of Permit. In order to be valid, a permit must be displayed so
that it is clearly visible to a police officer and in the following manner:
   (1)   Either suspended from or affixed to the back of the interior rear view
mirror facing the front of the vehicle, except as authorized herein.
   (2)   On a motorcycle, in the middle of the left front fork facing outward.
   (3)   A Visitor permit shall be suspended from the interior rear view mirror
facing the front of the vehicle.
   (l)   Permit appearance. The City Engineer is authorized to establish the
design, designation, style, color and other similar characteristics for each
Preferential Parking Permit.
   (m)   Duration of permit. Except as otherwise provided, each parking permit
issued by the City Engineer shall be valid until rescinded by the City
Engineer.
   (n) Posting signs in permit parking area. Upon approval by the City Council
designating a preferential parking district and the specified parking
regulations applicable thereto, the City Engineer shall cause appropriate signs
to be erected in the district indicating prominently thereon the parking
limitation, period of the day for its application, and the fact that motor
vehicles with valid permits shall be exempt therefrom.
   (o)   Permit parking exemption.
   (1)   A motor vehicle on which is displayed a valid parking permit shall be
permitted to stand or be parked in the preferential parking district for which
it is issued without being limited by parking restrictions established pursuant
to this Section. Except as provided below, all other motor vehicles parked
within a preferential parking district shall be subject to the parking
restrictions and penalties as provided in this Section.
   (2)   A preferential parking permit shall not guarantee or serve to the
holder thereof an on-street parking space within the designated preferential
parking district.
   (3)   A vehicle displaying a valid parking permit will be subject to all on-
street parking restrictions and limitations except those restrictions and
limitations imposed pursuant to Section 4-3.418 of this Code.
   (p)   Exemption of certain vehicles. No person shall, without a permit
therefor, park or leave standing any vehicle or trailer in a preferential
parking district in excess of the parking restrictions authorized pursuant to
this part, except for the following:
   (1)   Repair, maintenance, refuse, utility, City, fuel or delivery vehicles
doing business in the preferential parking district;
   (2)   Vehicles delivering life-support and health commodities to residential
areas and schools located in the preferential parking district; and
   (3)   Emergency vehicles.
   (q)   Grounds for refusal to issue or revocation of a resident parking
permit. Any of the following are grounds for refusal to issue or to revoke a
Resident Parking Permit:
   (1)   Current Residence. The applicant or permit holder cannot provide
required evidence that the dwelling is the principal residence of the applicant
or permit holder.
   (2)   Incomplete Application. Failure of applicant to provide complete and
correct information required by the City Engineer.
   (r)   Permit revocation procedure. The City Engineer is authorized to
suspend and revoke a Resident Parking Permit under these rules and regulations.
If the City Engineer determines that there are adequate grounds to revoke such
a permit he shall give a permit holder a notice of revocation which states (1)
the grounds for revocation, (2) that the permit has been suspended, and (3) the
procedure for review and appeal of that notice of revocation. Such a notice may
be delivered by leaving a copy on the windshield of the permitted vehicle or by
delivering notice as authorized in the appeal process established by these
rules and regulations.
   A Resident Parking Permit is automatically suspended as soon as notice of
revocation is delivered to the permit holder. The suspension shall become a
permanent revocation if either (1) no timely appeal is filed, or (2) the City
Engineer, or his designee, does not rescind the notice of revocation. During
any period of suspension, a Resident Parking Permit shall not be valid nor
shall it exempt a vehicle from compliance with this Section.
   (1)   Reconsideration by City Engineer (first step). An applicant or permit
holder may appeal a decision to deny or revoke a permit to the City Engineer.
Any such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the City Engineer
within seven (7) calendar days after delivery of a notice of denial or
revocation. If such an appeal is made, the applicant or permit holder shall be
given an opportunity for a review and meeting concerning the decision by the
City Engineer or his designee. The City Engineer or his designee is authorized
to affirm, reverse or modify any such decision. Notice of the determination on
reconsideration shall be in writing.
   (2)   Appeal to the City Council (final appeal). Any applicant or permit
holder may appeal the determination of the City Engineer to the City Council.
Any such appeal (1) shall be in writing, (2) shall state the reasons for the
appeal, and (3) shall be filed with the City Engineer’s determination. If such
an appeal is timely made, the applicant or permit holder shall be given an
opportunity for a review by and meeting with the City Council concerning the
denial or revocation of the permit. The City Council is authorized to affirm,
reverse or modify any such denial or revocation.
   (s)   Penalty provisions.
   (1)   Unless exempted by provisions of this Section, no person shall stand
or park a motor vehicle in any preferential parking district established
pursuant to this Section in violation of any parking restrictions established
pursuant to this Section.
   (2)   No person shall falsely represent himself as eligible for a parking
permit or furnish false information to the City Engineer in an application for
a preferential parking permit.
   (3)   No permit issued pursuant to this Section shall thereafter be
assigned, transferred, or used for any consideration, monetary or otherwise.
   (4)   No person shall copy, produce, or create a facsimile or counterfeit
parking permit, nor shall any person use or display a facsimile or counterfeit
preferential parking district permit.
   (5)   A violation of this Section shall constitute an infraction.
   (t)   Dissolving district. The designation process as set forth in this
Section shall be utilized by the City Council in determining whether to
dissolve a preferential parking district.
(§ 1, Ord. 924-NS, eff. July 1, 1986, as amended by § 3, 1556-NS, eff. July 1,
2011)
Sec. 4-3.419. Parking of vehicles for sale.
   (a)   Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to park on a public
street or permit any vehicle, trailer, boat or camper owned or controlled by
them to be so parked when such vehicle, trailer, boat or camper displays a sign
or other markings indicating that the vehicle is “for sale” in any zone
designated as and posted as a “No Parking of Vehicles for Sale” zone.
   (b)   Designation. The City Traffic Engineer may post specified areas within
the City to restrict or prohibit the parking of vehicles for sale. Each zone so
restricted shall be designated only upon the following findings by the City
Engineer:
   (1)   That at least two (2) surveys of the proposed area taken a minimum of
twenty-four (24) hours apart have indicated that three (3) or more vehicles
displaying “for sale” signs have been parked at that location or along a high
volume street;
   (2)   That the parking of vehicles at this location or along this street in
groups significantly interferes with the flow of traffic or with vehicular or
pedestrian safety;
   (3)   That the rights of those who own, control or have possession of a
vehicle, as defined in the California Vehicle Code, to display their vehicle
for sale elsewhere in the City along public streets has not been materially
diminished by the designation of this area or street as “no parking” for that
purpose; and
   (4)   That no alternative solution is feasible or practical.
(§ 1, Ord. 1022-NS, eff. April 25, 1989, as amended by § I, Ord. 1106-NS, eff.
June 13, 1991)
Sec. 4-3.420. Prohibition of overnight parking on posted public streets.
   (a)   Designation. Upon filing with the City of a petition signed by
seventy-five (75%) percent of the property owners of property adjoining any
public street which is requested to have restricted parking, the City Council
shall hold a noticed public hearing and may, by resolution, direct the City
Engineer to post specified public streets, or portions thereof, within
residential zones of the City, restricting parking or standing of vehicles
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
   (b)    Prohibition. Between the hours of 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m., it is
unlawful for any person in any residential zone to park or leave standing a
vehicle, as defined by the California Vehicle Code, on a posted public street
without a properly issued City permit visibly shown in the vehicle.
   (c)   Exemptions. The following vehicles are exempted from the no-parking
and no-standing provisions of this section:
   (1)   Any vehicle registered with the California Department of Motor
Vehicles to a disabled person, as defined in Section 22511.5 of the Vehicle
Code, and bearing a distinguished license plate issued by the Department of
Motor Vehicles;
   (2)   Any vehicle which cannot be parked off the roadway because of ongoing
construction activity at the adjoining property, and the Police Department has
been notified;
   (3)   Any vehicle parked only for such time as the person parking the
vehicle shall be making deliveries or pickups at a property within the
immediate area;
   (4)   Any ambulance or other vehicle parked for an existing fire, safety, or
health emergency purpose;
   (5)   Any vehicle which has been issued and displays a permit issued under
this Section;
   (6)   Any vehicle owned, leased or operated by the City, or any other
governmental agency or by any public utility company;
   (7)   A recreational vehicle which is parked for only one twenty-four (24)
hour period for the purpose of loading and unloading.
   (d)   Permit. The Public Works Department shall review and may issue twelve
(12) month permits for each dwelling unit to be used for parking by the
occupants of that dwelling upon submission of a written application, payment of
appropriate processing fee, and in accordance with specific guidelines
established by the City Council by resolution. Such permits shall allow parking
or standing of vehicles on public streets between the hours of 2:00 a.m. to 6:
00 a.m. No permit shall be issued unless all required garage parking areas or
carports are being used for the parking of licensed and operative vehicles.
Guest permits may be obtained consistent with the City Council’s resolution
authorizing such posting.
(§ 1, Ord. 1139-NS, eff. March 17, 1992)
Sec. 4-3.421. Prohibitions and restrictions on overnight parking permits.
   (a)   No vehicle issued an overnight parking permit shall be parked or
stopped between the hours of 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. unless such vehicle shall
have prominently displayed on the left side of the rear bumper thereof a permit
issued under this section.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to transfer, assign, sell, rent,
or lease, or cause to be transferred, assigned, sold, rented, or leased, any
overnight parking permit. Upon violation of this subsection, all overnight
parking permits issued to, or for the benefit of, the dwelling unit for which
the transferred, assigned, sold, rented, or leased permit was authorized, shall
be void.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to buy, or otherwise acquire for
value or use, any overnight parking permit, except as provided for in this
section.
(§ 1, Ord. 1139-NS, eff. March 17, 1992)
Sec. 4-3.422. Revocation of permit.
   Where any permit issued under this section has been procured through fraud
or misrepresentation, or where the permittee has violated provisions of this
section, the Public Works Department shall hold a hearing, with notice of the
time and place of such hearing mailed to the permittee, at least five (5) days
preceding the hearing. If the permit is revoked following the hearing, the
permittee shall be mailed written notice of the revocation and the reasons
therefor.
(§ 1, Ord. 1139-NS, eff. March 17, 1992)
Sec. 4-3.423. Civil penalty.
   Any violation of this article and any violation under the California Vehicle
Code for the parking or standing of a vehicle on a street, highway, alley,
parking lot or other patrolled area in the City (including any concurrently
issued improper vehicle equipment violation) shall be subject to a civil
penalty plus the administrative charges or penalties as authorized by the
California Vehicle Code.
   The various civil penalties shall be in the amounts as set forth by City
Council resolution.
(§ 2, Ord. 1183-NS, eff. June 1, 1993, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1524-NS, eff.
August 20, 2009)
Sec. 4-3.424. Oversized vehicles: Parking prohibited: Parking permits.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words or
phrases shall be defined as follows unless the context clearly otherwise
requires:
   (1)   “Out-of-town visitor” means any person who does not reside in the City
and who is temporarily visiting a resident of the City.
   (2)   “Oversized vehicle” means any vehicle, as that word is defined in
Section 570 of the California Vehicle Code, or a combination of connected
vehicles, which exceeds twenty-five (25') feet in length, or eighty (80")
inches in width, or eighty-two (82") inches in height, exclusive of such
projecting lights or devices as are expressly allowed pursuant to the
California Vehicle Code as it now exists or hereafter may be amended. Oversize
vehicle shall not mean or include a pickup truck, which is less than twenty-
five (25') feet in length and eighty-two (82") inches in height.
   (3)   “Residential areas” means those residential areas of the City as
defined by the local zoning ordinance.
   (4)   “Commercial areas” mean those commercial areas of the City as defined
by the local zoning ordinance.
   (5)   “Highway” shall mean any street, road or highway as that word is
defined in Section 360 of the California Vehicle Code.
   (b)   No person shall park or leave standing any oversized vehicle on any
highway between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday,
excluding holidays recognized by the City, except as provided in Subsection (c)
or (d) of this section.
   (c)   Exceptions. This section shall not apply to:
   (1)   Any oversized vehicle actively engaged in the loading or unloading of
persons, materials, supplies or goods, in the delivery of goods, wares,
merchandise, or other materials, or during construction or other work at an
adjacent residence or business;
   (2)   Any oversized vehicle to which a person is actively engaged in making
temporary or emergency repairs;
   (3)   Any oversized vehicle that has been issued and is displaying a permit
issued pursuant to subsection (d) of this section;
   (4)   Any public emergency or utility service vehicle; or
   (5)   Any oversized vehicle properly displaying valid disabled license
plates issued by a governmental entity.
   (d)   Permits.
   (1)   Oversized Vehicle Parking Permit. An oversized vehicle may be parked
on a highway in a residential area or a commercial area if an oversized vehicle
parking permit is issued by the City pursuant to the following:
   (i)   Purpose. The purpose of authorizing the issuance of oversized vehicle
parking permits is to allow a resident or an out-of-town visitor to park on a
highway adjacent to the residence where he or she lives or is visiting,
respectively, for a designated time period.
   (ii)   Issuance of Permits. Oversized vehicle parking permits shall be
issued by the police chief of the City, or designee.
   (iii)   Requirements for Oversized Vehicle Parking Permits. Any City
resident or out-of-town visitor to a resident within the City may obtain an
oversized vehicle parking permit authorizing the resident or visitor to park an
oversized vehicle on a highway adjacent to a specified residence where he or
she lives or is a guest, respectively.
   (iv)   Application Forms--Fees. Each applicant desiring an oversized vehicle
parking permit shall file with the police chief, a completed City application
form and pay an application fee approved by City Council Resolution.
   (v)   Description of Permits. Oversized vehicle parking shall be issued on a
form approved by the police chief, and shall include the license plate number
of the oversized vehicle to which it relates, the address or location the
vehicle is approved to park, and the dates of issuance and expiration of the
permit.
   (vi)   Display. All permits shall be placed at the lower driver's side of
the windshield of the oversized vehicle to which it relates, so it is clearly
visible from the exterior of the oversized vehicle.
   (vii)   Oversized Vehicle Permit--Duration-- Renewal. An oversized vehicle
parking permit shall be valid for a period not to exceed five (5) consecutive
calendar days. A resident may apply for and be granted an extension if the
resident still qualifies under the conditions set forth herein. In no event
shall oversized vehicle parking permits be issued to a specific residence for a
total period in excess of ten (10) days within any consecutive ninety (90) day
period.
   (e)   No enforcement action against an owner or other responsible party of a
vehicle subject to this section will be taken until twenty-four (24) hours have
elapsed from receipt of a complaint or notice of violation by the enforcement
agency.
   (f)   Signs giving reasonable notice of the prohibitions contained in this
section shall be posted at all entrances to the City.
   (g)   If the provisions of this section conflict with any other section of
this article, the provisions of this section shall prevail.
(§ 1, Ord. 1523-NS, eff. January 1, 2010, as amended by § I, Ord. 1683-NS, eff.
February 26, 2021)
Article 5. Speed Limits*
*   Article 5, consisting of Section 4-3.501, codified from Ordinance Nos. 66,
67, 79, 80, 81, 82, 128, 144, 166, 199, 202, 214, and 240, as amended by
Ordinance Nos. 103-NS, effective August 14, 1969, 123-NS, effective December
25, 1969, 148-NS, effective May 7, 1970, 170-NS, effective October 1, 1970,
186-NS, 187-NS, and 188-NS, effective January 2, 1971, 211-NS, effective June
24, 1971, 229-NS, effective October 7, 1971, 234-NS, effective September 21,
1971, 239-NS, effective November 18, 1971, and 251-NS, effective January 20,
1972, repealed by Section I, Ordinance No. 266-NS, effective April 6, 1972.
Section 4-3.501, added by Section II, said Ordinance No. 266-NS, as amended by
Ordinance Nos. 293-NS, effective July 27, 1972, 308-NS, effective October 26,
1972, 314-NS, effective November 2, 1972, 333-NS, effective December 7, 1972,
336-NS, effective December 21, 1972, 365-NS, effective May 10, 1973, 368-NS,
effective May 17, 1973, 415-NS, effective December 6, 1973, 483-NS, effective
August 8, 1974, 501-NS, effective October 31, 1974, 515-NS, effective February
20, 1975, 533-NS, effective May 15, 1975, 536-NS, effective July 24, 1975, and
537-NS, effective August 7, 1975, repealed by Section I, Ordinance No. 544-NS,
effective October 2, 1975.
Sec. 4-3.501. Established.
   The prima facie speed limits shall be those as set forth in the Vehicle Code
and as established in this article.
(§ II, Ord. 554-NS, eff. October 2, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.502. Violations.
   The speed of any vehicle upon a street in excess of the prima facie speed
limits shall be prima facie unlawful.
(§ II, Ord. 544-NS, eff. October 2, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.503. (Not used).
Sec. 4-3.504. (Not used).
Sec. 4-3.505. (Not used).
Sec. 4-3.506. Agoura Road.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Agoura Road is
hereby declared as follows:
   (a)   From Westlake Boulevard to the easterly City limits, forty-five (45)
miles per hour.
(§ II, Ord. 544-NS, eff. October 2, 1975, as amended by § I, Ord. 693-NS, eff.
November 9, 1978, and Ord. 1390-NS, eff. May 23, 2002)
Sec. 4-3.506.2. Aranmoor Avenue.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Aranmoor Avenue is
hereby declared as follows:
   (a)   From Stonesgate Street to Triunfo Canyon Road twenty-five (25) miles
per hour.
(Ord. 1390-NS, eff. May 23, 2002)
Sec. 4-3.506.5. Auto Mall Drive/Duesenberg Drive.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Auto Mall Drive is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Thousand Oaks Boulevard to its easterly terminus, thirty-five
(35) miles per hour.
(Ord. 1390-NS, eff. May 23, 2002)
Sec. 4-3.507. (Not used).
Sec. 4-3.508. Avenida de las Flores.
   The prima facie speed limits on the following portions of Avenida de las
Flores are hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Lynn Road to Montegomery Road, thirty-five (35) miles per hour.
   (b)   From Montgomery Road to Erbes Road, forty (40) miles per hour.
(§ II, Ord. 544-NS, eff. October 2, 1975, as amended by § I, Ord. 611-NS, eff.
February 24, 1977, and § I, Ord. 1281-NS, eff. April 30, 1997)
Sec. 4-3.509. (Not used).
Sec. 4-3.510. Avenida de las Plantas.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Avenida de las
Plantas is hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Avenida de los Arboles to Avenida de las Flores, thirty (30)
miles per hour.
(§ II, Ord. 544-NS, eff. October 2, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.511. (Not used).
Sec. 4-3.512. Avenida de los Arboles.
   The prima facie speed limits on the following portions of Avenida de los
Arboles are hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Westlake Boulevard to Erbes Road, forty-five (45) miles per hour;
   (b)   From Erbes Road to Route 23, forty-five (45) miles per hour;
   (c)   From Route 23 to Moorpark Road, thirty-five (35) miles per hour;
   (d)   From Moorpark Road to Keats Avenue, thirty-five (35) miles per hour;
   (e)   From Keats Avenue to Lynn Road, thirty-five (35) miles per hour; and
   (f)   From Lynn Road to Big Sky Drive, forty-five (45) miles per hour.
(§ II, Ord. 544-NS, eff. October 2, 1975, as amended by § II, Ord. 611-NS, eff.
February 24, 1977, § I, Ord. 674-NS, eff. June 22, 1978, and § I, Ord. 1120-NS,
eff. September 24, 1991)
Sec. 4-3.513. Blue Mesa Street.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Blue Mesa Street is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Hillcrest Drive to Cumberland Court, thirty (30) miles per hour.
(§ 1, Ord. 1404-NS, eff. Feb. 6, 2003)
Sec. 4-3.514. Borchard Road.
   The prima facie speed limits on the following portions of Borchard Road are
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Route 101 Freeway to Reino Road, forty-five (45) miles per hour;
and
   (b)   From Reino Road to Los Vientos Drive, forty-five (45) miles per hour.
(§ II, Ord. 544-NS, eff. October 2, 1975, as amended by § I, Ord. 738-NS, eff.
February 21, 1980, and Ord. 1390-NS, eff. May 23. 2002)
Sec. 4-3.514.5. Bowfield Street.
   The prima facie speed limits on the following portions of Bowfield Street
are hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Lindero Canyon Road to Misty Canyon Avenue thirty-five (35) miles
per hour.
   (b)   From Misty Canyon Avenue to the southerly intersection with Rockfield
Street, thirty (30) miles per hour
(§ 1, Ord. 1296-NS, eff. October 9, 1997, and Ord. 1390-NS, eff. May 23, 2002)
Sec. 4-3.515. Bridgegate Street.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portions of Bridgegate Street
are hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Westlake Boulevard to Valecroft Avenue thirty-five (35) miles per
hour.
   (b)   From Valecroft Avenue to its westerly terminus, thirty (30) miles per
hour.
(§ I, Ord. 558-NS, eff. February 19, 1976, as amended by Ord. 1390-NS, eff. May
23, 2002)
Sec. 4-3.515.1. Cabrillo Avenue.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Cabrillo Avenue is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Borchard Road to Reino Road, twenty-five (25) miles per hour.
(§ 1, Ord. 1560-NS, eff. August 19, 2011)
Sec. 4-3.515.3. Calle del Prado.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Calle del Prado is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Via Las Brisas to Via Rio, thirty-five (35) miles per hour.
(§ 1, Ord. 1404-NS, eff. Feb. 6, 2003)
Sec. 4-3.515.5. Camino Dos Rios.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Camino Dos Rios is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Route 101 to Marion Street, forty (40) miles per hour.
   (b)   From DeHavilland Drive east to Lawrence Drive, forty (40) miles per
hour. (Camino Dos Rios becomes Ventu Park Road at Lawrence Drive.)
(§ I, Ord. 1119-NS, eff. September 10, 1991, as amended by § I, Ord. 1134-NS,
eff. February 4, 1992, and Ord. 1364-NS, eff. October 12, 2000)
Sec. 4-3.515.8. Campus Drive.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Campus Drive is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Olsen Road to five-hundred (500') feet south of Bainbridge Court,
thirty-five (35) miles per hour.
(Ord. 1364-NS, eff. October 12, 2000, as amended by part 1, Ord. 1581-NS, eff.
October 19, 2012)
Sec. 4-3.515.9. Cascade Avenue.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Cascade Avenue is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Westlake Boulevard to Panamint Court, thirty-five (35) miles per
hour.
(§ 1, Ord. 1404-NS, eff. Feb. 6, 2003)
Sec. 4-3.516. Conejo School Road.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portions of Conejo School Road
is hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Hillcrest Drive to Thousand Oaks Boulevard, thirty (30) miles per
hour.
   (b)   Except as provided in subsection (a), from Willow Lane to Ranch View
Place, thirty-five (35) miles per hour.
(§ II, Ord. 544-NS, eff. October 2, 1975; repealed by § I, Ord. 836-NS, eff.
June 28, 1983, as amended by Ord. 880-NS, eff. February 19, 1985, and Ord.
1390-NS, eff. May 23, 2002, as amended by part 1, Ord. 1429-NS, eff. December
16, 2004, and part 1, Ord. 1581-NS, eff. October 19, 2012)
Sec. 4-3.516.2. Clearwater Street.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Clearwater Street is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Duesenberg Drive to Medicine Bow Court, thirty-five (35) miles
per hour.
(§ 1, Ord. 1404-NS, eff. Feb. 6, 2003)
Sec. 4-3.516.5. DeHavilland Drive.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of DeHavilland Drive is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Rancho Conejo Boulevard to Camino dos Rios, forty (40) miles per
hour.
(§ II Ord. 1067-NS, eff. March 27, 1990, as amended by § I, Ord. 1281-NS, eff.
April 30, 1997)
Sec. 4-3.517. Duesenberg Drive.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Duesenberg Drive is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Hillcrest Drive to Thousand Oaks Boulevard, thirty-five (35)
miles per hour.
(§ I, Ord. 891-NS, eff. July 18, 1985, as amended by § I, Ord. 1281-NS, eff.
April 30, 1997, and Ord. 1390-NS, eff. May 23, 2002, and part 1, Ord. 1581-NS,
eff. October 19, 2012)
Sec. 4-3.518. Erbes Road.
   The prima facie speed limits on the following portions of Erbes Road are
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Thousand Oaks Boulevard to Tubbs Street, forty (40) miles per
hour.
   (b)   From Tubbs Street to Olsen Road, forty-five (45) miles per hour.
   (c)   From Olsen Road to its northerly terminus, twenty-five (25) miles per
hour.
(§ II, Ord. 544-NS, eff. October 2, 1975, as amended by §I, Ord. 591-NS, eff.
October 7, 1976, Ord. 1390-NS, eff. May 23, 2002, and § 1, Ord. 1560-NS, eff.
August 19, 2011)
Sec. 4-3.519. (Not used).
Sec. 4-3.520. Gainsborough Road.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portions of Gainsborough Road
is hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Lynn Road to Camino Manzanas, forty (40) miles per hour.
   (b)   From Camino Manzanas to Galsworthy Street, thirty-five (35) miles per
hour.
(§ II, Ord. 544-NS, eff. October 2, 1975, as amended by § II, Ord. 836-NS, eff.
June 28, 1983, and § I, Ord. 1281-NS, eff. April 30, 1997)
Sec. 4-3.520.7. Greenmeadow Drive.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Greenmeadow Drive is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Lynn Road to its easterly terminus, thirty (30) miles per hour.
(§ 1, Ord. 1560-NS, eff. August 19, 2011)
Sec. 4-3.521. Green Meadow Drive.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Green Meadow Drive
is hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From South Moorpark Road to Green Heath Place, thirty (30) miles per
hour.
(§ I, Ord. 656-NS, eff. November 17, 1977)
Sec. 4-3.521.3. Haaland Drive.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portions of Haaland Drive are
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Rancho Road to Rolling Oaks Drive forty (40) miles per hour.
(Ord. 1390-NS, eff. May 23, 2002)
Sec. 4-3.521.5. Haigh Road.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Haigh Road is hereby
declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Lynn Road to Newbury Road, thirty-five (35) miles per hour.
(§ 1, Ord. 1296-NS, eff. October 9, 1997)
Sec. 4-3.522. Hampshire Road.
   The prima facie speed limits on the following portions of Hampshire Road are
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Thousand Oaks Boulevard to Route 101, thirty-five (35) miles per
hour; and
   (b)   From Route 101 to Westlake Boulevard, forty-five (45) miles per hour.
(§ II, Ord. 544-NS, eff. October 2, 1975, as amended by § I, Ord. 693-NS, eff.
November 9, 1978)
Sec. 4-3.523. (Not used).
Sec. 4-3.524. Hillcrest Drive.
   The prima facie speed limits on the following portions of Hillcrest Drive
are hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Camino dos Rios to Rancho Conejo Boulevard forty (40) miles per
hour.
   (b)   From Rancho Conejo Boulevard to Ventu Park Road, forty-five (45) miles
per hour.
   (c)   From Ventu Park Road to Hodencamp Road, forty-five (45) miles per
hour.
   (d)   From Hodencamp Road to Erbes Road, forty (40) miles per hour.
   (e)   From Erbes Road to Duesenberg Drive, forty-five (45) miles per hour.
   (f)   From Duesenberg Drive to Westlake Boulevard, forty-five (45) miles per
hour.
(§ II, Ord. 544-NS, eff. October 2, 1975, as amended by § I, Ord. 723-NS, eff.
August 23, 1979, §§ I and II, Ord. 781-NS, eff. June 18, 1981, § II, Ord. 836-
NS, eff. June 28, 1983, § I, Ord. 897-NS, eff. August 22, 1985, § I, Ord. 1097-
NS, eff. April 11, 1991, § I, Ord. 1281-NS, eff. April 30, 1997, and Ord 1390-
NS, eff. May 23, 2002)
Sec. 4-3.525. Hodencamp Road.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Hodencamp Road is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Thousand Oaks Boulevard to Wilbur Road, thirty-five, (35) miles
per hour.
(§ III, Ord. 836-NS, eff. June 28, 1983)
Sec. 4-3.525.1. Holloway Street.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Holloway Street is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Wendy Drive to Knollwood Drive, twenty-five (25) miles per hour.
(§ I, Ord. 832-NS, eff. May 3, 1983)
Sec. 4-3.526. Janss Road.
   The prima facie speed limits on the following portions of Janss Road are
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From La Granada Drive to El Monte Drive, forty (40) miles per hour;
   (b)   From El Monte Drive to Moorpark Road, forty (40) miles per hour;
   (c)   From Moorpark Road to Lynn Road, thirty-five (35) miles per hour;
   (d)   From Lynn Road to Lynnmere Drive (west intersection) thirty (30) miles
per hour.
(§ II, Ord. 544-NS, eff. October 2, 1975, as amended by § II, Ord. 836-NS, eff.
June 28, 1983, Ord. 1032-NS, eff. June 27, 1989, and Ord. 1390-NS, eff. May 23,
2002)
Sec. 4-3.526.6. Kanan Road.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Kanan Road is hereby
declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Westlake Boulevard to the easterly City limits, forty-five (45)
miles per hour.
(§ I, Ord. 942-NS, eff. November 4, 1986)
Sec. 4-3.527. Keats Avenue.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Keats Avenue is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Avenida de los Arboles to Avenida de las Flores, thirty-five (35)
miles per hour
(§ I, Ord. 582-NS, eff. August 12, 1976, as amended by Ord. 1390-NS, eff. May
23, 2002)
Sec. 4-3.528. Kelley Road.
(§ II, Ord. 554-NS, eff. October 2, 1975, as amended by § I, Ord. 793-NS, eff.
September 15, 1981; repealed by § I, Ord. 836-NS, eff. June 28, 1983)
Sec. 4-3.529. (Not used).
Sec. 4-3.530. Kimber Drive.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portions of Kimber Drive is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Wendy Drive to Reino Road forty (40) miles per hour.
   (b)   From Reino Road to its westerly terminus, thirty-five (35) miles per
hour.
(§ II, Ord. 544-NS, eff. October 2, 1975, as amended by § I, Ord. 726-NS, eff.
September 27, 1979, and Ord. 1390-NS, eff. May 23, 2002)
Sec. 4-3.531. (Not used).
Sec. 4-3.532. La Granada Drive.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of La Granada Drive is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Janss Road to the easterly terminus, thirty-five (35) miles per
hour.
(§ II, Ord. 544-NS, eff. October 2, 1975, as amended by § II, Ord. 836-NS, eff.
June 28, 1984 and § I, Ord. 1067-NS, eff. March 27, 1990)
Sec. 4-3.532.3. La Venta Drive.
   The prima fade speed limit on the following portion of La Venta is hereby
declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Agoura Road to Lakeridge Lane, thirty-five (35) miles per hour
(§ II, Ord. 1067-NS, eff. March 27, 1990, as amended by § I, Ord. 1097-NS, eff.
April 11, 1991, and Ord. 1390-NS, eff. May 23, 2002)
Sec. 4-3.532.4. Lang Ranch Parkway.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Lang Ranch Parkway
is hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Westlake Boulevard to Oak Valley Lane, thirty-five (35) miles per
hour.
(Ord. 1364-NS, eff. October 12, 2000)
Sec.    The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Lesser Drive is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Reino Road to San Telmo Circle, thirty (30) miles per hour.
(Ord. 970-NS, eff. July 14, 1987, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1162-NS, eff.
September 15, 1992, and part 1, Ord. 1581-NS, eff. October 19, 2012)4-3.532.5.
Lesser Drive.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Lesser Drive is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Reino Road to San Telmo Circle, thirty-five (35) miles per hour.
(Ord. 970-NS, eff. July 14, 1987, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1162-NS, eff.
September 15, 1992)
Sec. 4-3.532.9. Lindero Canyon Road.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Lindero Canyon Road
is hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From the southerly City limits to the northerly City limits, fifty
(50) miles per hour.
(§ I, Ord. 942-NS, eff. November 4, 1986, as amended by Ord. 1390-NS, eff. May
23, 2002)
Sec. 4-3.533. Lakeview Canyon Road.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portions of Lakeview Canyon
Road is hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From the southerly City limits to the northerly terminus, forty (40)
miles per hour.
   (b)   From Valley Spring Drive to Lindero Canyon Road thirty-five (35) miles
per hour.
(§ III, Ord. 836-NS, eff. June 28, 1983, as amended by Ord. 1008-NS, eff.
September 6, 1988, and Ord. 1390-NS, eff. May 23, 2002)
Sec. 4-3.533.1. Los Padres Drive.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Los Padres Drive is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Moorpark Road to Rolling Oaks Drive, thirty-five (35) miles per
hour.
(§ I, Ord. 844-NS, eff. September 27, 1983)
Sec. 4-3.533.5. Lawrence Drive.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Lawrence Drive is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Hillcrest Drive to Rancho Conejo Boulevard, forty (40) miles per
hour.
(Ord. 1364-NS, eff. October 12, 2000)
*Sec. 4-3.534. Lynn Road.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Lynn Road is hereby
declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Wildwood Avenue to Avenida de Los Arboles, fifty (50) miles per
hour.
   (b)   From Avenida de los Arboles to Route 101, forty-five (45) miles per
hour.
    (c)   From Route 101 to westerly City limits, fifty (50) miles per hour
(§ II, Ord. 820-NS, eff. October 21, 1982, as amended by Ord. 1390-NS, eff. May
23, 2002 and Ord. 1514-NS, eff. May 7, 2009)
*   Section 4-3.534, codified from Section II, Ordinance No. 544-NS, effective
October 2, 1975, as amended by Ordinance No. 714-NS, effective June 23, 1979,
repealed by Section I, Ordinance No. 820-NS, effective October 21, 1982.
Sec. 4-3.535. (Not used).
Sec. 4-3.536. McCloud Avenue.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of McCloud Avenue is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Hillcrest Drive to St. Charles Avenue, thirty-five (35) miles per
hour.
(§ II, Ord. 544-NS, eff. October 2, 1975, as amended by Ord. 1390-NS, eff. May
23, 2002)
Sec. 4-3.537. Michael Drive.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Michael Drive is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Eagleview Place to Madrid Avenue, thirty (30) miles per hour.
(§ 1, Ord. 1296-NS, eff. October 9, 1997, as amended by Ord. 1390-NS, eff. May
23, 2002)
Sec. 4-3.538. Montgomery Road.
(§ II, Ord. 544-NS, eff. October 2, 1975; repealed by § I, Ord. 836-NS, eff.
June 28, 1983)
Sec. 4-3.539. (Not used).
Sec. 4-3.540. Moorpark Road.
   The prima facie speed limits on the following portions of Moorpark Road are
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Santa Rosa Road to Wilbur Road, forty-five (45) miles per hour;
   (b)   From Wilbur Road to Route 101 Freeway, thirty-five (35) miles per
hour.
   (c)   From Route 101 Freeway to its southerly terminus, forty (40) miles per
hour.
(§ II, Ord. 544-NS, eff. October 2, 1975, as amended by § I, Ord. 1097-NS, eff.
April 11, 1991, and § I, Ord. 1281-NS, eff. April 30, 1997)
Sec. 4-3.541. Mountclef Boulevard.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Mountclef Boulevard
is hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Avenida de los Arboles to Magellan Street, thirty-five (35) miles
per hour.
(§ III, Ord. 836-NS, eff. June 28, 1983, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1296-NS, eff.
October 9, 1997, and Ord. 1390-NS, eff. May 23, 2002)
Sec. 4-3.542. Newbury Road.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portions of Newbury Road is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Michael Drive to East Kelley Road, thirty-five (35) miles per
hour.
   (b)   From East Kelley Road to Haigh Road, forty (40) miles per hour.
(§ II, Ord. 544-NS, eff. October 2, 1975, as amended by § II, Ord. 836-NS, eff.
June 28, 1983, and § I, Ord. 1281-NS. eff. April 30, 1997)
Sec. 4-3.543. Northwood Parkway.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portions of Northwood Parkway
are hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Pederson Road to Radcliffe Road, thirty-five (35) miles per hour.
(§ 1, Ord. 908-NS, eff. February 11, 1986)
Sec. 4-3.544. Old Conejo Road.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portions of Old Conejo Road are
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Wendy Drive to Reino Road, forty-five (45) miles per hour.
   (b)   From Reino Road to its westerly terminus, forty (40) miles per hour.
(§ II, Ord. 544-NS, eff. October 2, 1975, as amended by § III, Ord. 781-NS,
eff. June 18, 1981, and § I, Ord. 1281-NS, eff. April 30, 1997)
Sec. 4-3.545. (Not used).
Sec. 4-3.546. Olsen Road.
   The prima facie speed limits on the following portions of Olsen Road are
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From the east City limits to Route 23 Freeway, fifty-five (55) miles
per hour.
   (b)   From Route 23 Freeway to Wildwood Avenue, fifty (50) miles per hour.
(§ II, Ord. 544-NS, eff. October 2, 1975, as amended by § II, Ord. 714-NS, eff.
June 23, 1979, § I, Ord. 1119-NS, eff. September 10, 1991, and § I, Ord. 1281-
NS, eff. April 30, 1997)
Sec. 4-3.546.1. Paige Lane.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Paige Lane is hereby
declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Combes Avenue to La Granada Drive, thirty-five (35) miles per
hour.
(§ I, Ord. 879-NS, eff. February 19, 1985)
Sec. 4-3.546.2. Parkview Drive.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Parkview Drive is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Avenida de los Arboles to one hundred fifty (150) feet north of
Knightsbridge Avenue, thirty-five (35) miles per hour.
(§ II, Ord. 1097-NS, eff. April 11, 1991)
Sec. 4-3.546.3. Potrero Road.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Potrero Road is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From 1,000 feet west of Briar Avenue to Reino Road, thirty-five (35)
miles per hour; and
   (b)   From Reino Road to City Limits, forty-five (45) miles per hour; and
   (c)   From City Limits to Westlake Boulevard, forty-five (45) miles per
hour.
(§ II, Ord. 1097-NS, eff. April 11, 1991, as amended by part 1, Ord. 1429-NS,
eff. December 16, 2004, and part 1, Ord. 1581-NS, eff. October 19, 2012)
Sec. 4-3.547. Pederson Road.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portions of Pederson Road are
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Olsen Road to Calle Castano, forty (40) miles per hour.
   (b)   From Calle Castano to Erbes Road, forty-five (45) miles per hour.
(§ II, Ord. 726-NS, eff. September 27, 1989, as amended by § I, Ord. 1281-NS,
eff. April 30, 1997)
Sec. 4-3.547.1. Ramona Drive.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Ramona Drive is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Ventu Park Road to Haigh Road, twenty-five (25) miles per hour.
(Ord. 1364-NS, eff. October 12, 2000)
Sec. 4-3.547.3. Rancho Conejo Boulevard.
   The prima facie speed limits on the following portions of Rancho Conejo
Boulevard are hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Northerly terminus to Lawrence Drive, forty-five (45) miles per
hour.
   (b)   From Lawrence Drive to Route 101 Freeway, forty (40) miles per hours.
(§ II, Ord. 1281-NS, eff. April 30, 1997)
Sec. 4-3.547.4. Rancho Dos Vientos Drive.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Rancho Dos Vientos
Drive is hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Lynn Road to Borchard Road, forty-five (45) miles per hour.
(§ 1, Ord. 1404-NS, eff. Feb. 6, 2003)
Sec. 4-3.547.5. Rancho Road.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portions of Rancho Road are
hereby declared to be as follows:
    (a)   From Hillcrest Drive to Thousand Oaks Boulevard, thirty-five (35)
miles per hour.
   (b)   From Thousand Oaks Boulevard to the southerly City limits, forty (40)
miles per hour.
(§ II, Ord. 1067-NS, eff. March 27, 1990, as amended by Ord. 1296-NS, eff.
October 9, 1997, and Ord. 1390-NS, eff. May 23, 2002)
Sec. 4-3.547.8. Regal Oak Court.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Regal Oak Court is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Lynn Road to its southerly terminus, twenty-five (25) miles per
hour.
(Ord. 1363-NS, eff. October 12, 2000)
Sec. 4-3.548. Reino Road.
   The prima facie speed limits on the following portions of Reino Road are
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Potrero Road to Lynn Road, forty (40) miles per hour; and
   (b)   From Lynn Road to Borchard Road, forty- five (45) miles per hour; and
   (c)   From Borchard Road to Old Conejo Road, forty (40) miles per hour.
(§ II, Ord. 544-NS, eff. October 2, 1975, as amended by part 1, Ord. 1429-NS,
eff. December 16, 2004)
Sec. 4-3.548.1. Route 23 Northbound and Southbound Connection Roads.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portions of the Route 23
northbound and southbound connector roads is hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Thousand Oaks Boulevard to Hillcrest Drive, forty (40) miles per
hour.
(§ I, Ord. 1119-NS, eff. September 10, 1991)
Sec. 4-3.548.3. Rockfield Street.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Rockfield Street is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Lindero Canyon Road to northerly intersection with Bowfield
Street, thirty-five (35) miles per hour.
(§ 1, Ord. 1296-NS, eff. October 9, 1997, as amended by Ord. 1390-NS, eff. May
23, 2002)
Sec. 4-3.548.5. Rolling Oaks Drive.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Rolling Oaks Drive
is hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Moorpark Road to the east City limits, thirty-five (35) miles per
hour.
(§ II, Ord. 1097-NS, eff. April 11, 1991)
Sec. 4-3.549. Skyline Drive.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Skyline Drive is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Thousand Oaks Boulevard to Hillcrest Drive, thirty (30) miles per
hour.
(§ I, Ord. 938-NS, eff. October 14, 1986)
Sec. 4-3.550. St. Charles Drive.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of St. Charles Drive is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Wilbur Road to McCloud Avenue, thirty-five (35) miles per hour
(§ II, Ord. 544-NS, eff. October 2, 1975, as amended by Ord. 1390-NS, eff. May
23, 2002)
Sec. 4-3.551. Stonesgate Avenue.
(§ I, Ord. 558-NS, eff. February 29, 1976; repealed by § I, Ord. 836-NS, eff.
June 28, 1983)
Sec. 4-3.552. Sunset Hills Boulevard.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Sunset Hills
Boulevard is hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Olsen Road to Erbes Road, fifty (50) miles per hour; and
   (b)   From Erbes Road to its easterly terminus, forty (40) miles per hour.
(§ II, Ord. 544-NS, eff. October 2, 1975, as amended by § I, Ord. 1281-NS, eff.
April 30, 1997, and Ord. 1364-NS, eff. October 12, 2000)
Sec. 4-3.552.5. Teller Road.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Teller Road is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Marion Street to Rancho Conejo Boulevard, forty (40) miles per
hour.
(Ord. 1364-NS, eff. October 12, 2000)
Sec. 4-3.553. Tuolumne Avenue.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Tuolumne Avenue is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From McCloud Avenue to Gainsborough Road, thirty-five (35) miles per
hour.
(§ II, Ord. 847-NS, eff. December 13, 1983, as amended by Ord. 1390-NS, eff.
May 23, 2002)
Sec. 4-3.554. Thousand Oaks Boulevard.
   The prima facie speed limits on the following portions of Thousand Oaks
Boulevard are hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Wilbur Road to Duesenberg Drive, thirty-five (35) miles per hour;
and
   (b)   From Duesenberg Drive to Westlake Boulevard, forty (40) miles per
hour;
   (c)   From Westlake Boulevard to the Los Angeles County Line, forty-five
(45) miles per hour.
(§ II, Ord. 544-NS, eff. October 2, 1975, as amended by § I, Ord. 847-NS, eff.
December 13, 1983, as amended by part 1, Ord. 1429-NS, eff. December 16, 2004)
Sec. 4-3.555. Townsgate Road.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Townsgate Road is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Hampshire Road to Lakeview Canyon Road, forty (40) miles per
hour.
(§ III, Ord. 836-NS, eff. June 28, 1983, as amended by § II, Ord. 1134-NS, eff.
February 4, 1992, § I, Ord. 1281-NS, eff. April 30, 1997, and Ord. 1390-NS,
eff. May 23, 2002)
Sec. 4-3.556. Triunfo Canyon Road.
   The prima facie speed limits on the following portions of Triunfo Canyon
Road are hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From the Los Angeles County line to Westlake Boulevard, forty-five
(45) miles per hour; and
   (b)   From Westlake Boulevard to Hampshire Road, thirty-five (35) miles per
hour.
(§ II, Ord. 544-NS, eff. October 2, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.556.5. Upper Ranch Road.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Upper Ranch Road is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Golf Course Drive to north end, twenty-five (25) miles per hour.
(§ I, Ord. 1137-NS, eff. February 18, 1992)
Sec. 4-3.557. Ventu Park Road.
   The prima facie speed limits on the following portions of Ventu Park Road
are hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Rancho Conejo Boulevard to Lynn Road, forty (40) miles per hour;
and
   (b)   From Lynn Road to the southerly City limits, twenty-five (25) miles
per hour.
(§ I, Ord. 737-NS, eff. February 21, 1980, as amended by § II, Ord. 1134-NS,
eff. February 4, 1992, and Ord. 1364-NS, eff. October 12, 2000)
Sec. 4-3.557.1. Via De La Mesa.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Via De La Mesa is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Rancho Dos Vientos Drive and Via Las Brisas to its southerly
terminus, twenty-five (25) miles per hour.
(§ 1, Ord. 1560-NS, eff. August 19, 2011)
Sec. 4-3.557.2. Via Las Brisas.
   The prima fade speed limit on the following portion of Via Las Brisas is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Lynn Road to Borchard Road, forty-five (45) miles per hour.
(§ 1, Ord. 1404-NS, eff. Feb. 6, 2003)
Sec. 4-3.557.5. Via Merida.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portions of Via Merida is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Lakeview Canyon Road to Thousand Oaks Boulevard, forty (40) miles
per hour.
   (b)   From Thousand Oaks Boulevard to Via Colinas, forty-five (45) miles per
hour.
(§ II, Ord. 1067-NS, eff. March 27, 1990, as amended by § I, Ord. 1120-NS, eff.
September 24, 1991, and Ord. 1390-NS, eff. May 23, 2002)
Sec. 4-3.557.6. Via Ricardo.
   The prima facie speed limits on the following portions of Via Ricardo are
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Rancho Dos Vientos Drive to Via Rincon, thirty-five (35) miles
per hour.
   (b)   From Via El Toro to Borchard Road, thirty (30) miles per hour.
(§ 1, Ord. 1404-NS, eff. Feb. 6, 2003, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1560-NS, eff.
August 19, 2011)
Sec. 4-3.557.7. Via Rio.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Via Rio is hereby
declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Via Las Brisas to its easterly terminus, thirty-five (35) miles
per hour.
(§ 1, Ord. 1404-NS, eff. Feb. 6, 2003)
Sec. 4-3.557.8. Village Glen.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portions of Village Glen is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Townsgate Road to Agoura Road, thirty-five (35) miles per hour.
(§ II, Ord. 1067-NS, eff. March 27, 1990, as amended by Ord. 1390-NS, eff. May
23, 2002)
Sec. 4-3.558. Wendy Drive.
   The prima facie speed limits on the following portions of Wendy Drive are
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Potrero Road to Lynn Road, forty-five (45) miles per hour.
   (b)   From Lynn Road to Kimber Drive, forty (40) miles per hour.
   (c)   From Kimber Drive to Borchard Road, thirty-five (35) miles per hour.
   (d)   From Lois Avenue to Camino dos Rios, thirty-five (35) miles per hour.
(§ II, Ord. 544-NS, eff. October 2, 1975, as amended by § IV, Ord. 781-NS, eff.
June 18, 1981, and § I, Ord. 1281-NS, eff. April 30, 1997)
Sec. 4-3.559. Valley Spring Drive.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Valley Spring Drive
is hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Westlake Boulevard to Lakeview Canyon Road, thirty-five (35)
miles per hour.
(§ 1, Ord. 869-NS, eff. September 18, 1984)
Sec. 4-3.559.5. Water Gate Road.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Watergate Road is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Lakewood Court to La Venta Drive, thirty (30) miles per hour.
(Part 1, Ord. 1429-NS, eff. December 16, 2004)
Sec. 4-3.560. Westlake Boulevard.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portions of Westlake Boulevard
is hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Autumn Ridge Drive to Avenida de los Arboles, forty-five (45)
miles per hour.
   (b)   From Avenida de los Arboles to Route 101 Freeway, fifty (50) miles per
hour.
(§ II, Ord. 544-NS, eff. October 2, 1975, as amended by § I, Ord. 710-NS, eff.
May 10, 1979, § I, Ord. 1067-NS, eff. March 27, 1990, § I, Ord. 1097-NS, eff.
April 11, 1991, § I, Ord. 1120-NS, eff. September 24, 1991, Ord. 1364-NS, eff.
October 12, 2000, and Ord. 1390-NS, eff. May 23, 2002)
Sec. 4-3.561. Wildwood Avenue.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Wildwood Avenue is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Lynn Road to Camino de Celeste, forty (40) miles per hour.
(§ I, Ord. 809-NS, eff. June 24, 1982)
Sec. 4-3.562. Wilbur Road.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Wilbur Road is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Hillcrest Drive to Yorkshire Avenue, thirty-five (35) miles per
hour.
(§ II, Ord. 544-NS, eff. October 2, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.563. Willow Lane.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Willow Lane is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Conejo School Road to Hampshire Road, forty (40) miles per hour.
(§ I, Ord. 659-NS, eff. December 1, 1977, as amended by § I, Ord. 1097-NS, eff.
April 11, 1991, and § I, Ord. 1281-NS, eff. April 30, 1997)
Sec. 4-3.564. Windsor Drive.
(§ II, Ord. 544-NS, eff. October 2, 1975; repealed by § 1, Ord. 920-NS, eff.
May 6, 1986)
Sec. 4-3.565. (Not used).
Sec. 4-3.566. Young Avenue.
   The prima facie speed limit on the following portion of Young Avenue is
hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   From Janss Road to Avenida de las Flores, thirty (30) miles per hour.
(§ II, Ord. 544-NS, eff. October 2, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.567. (Not used).
Sec. 4-3.568. Private property.
   The prima facie speed limits on all lanes within and adjacent to the
following off-street parking facilities are hereby declared to be as follows:
   (a)   Within the Westlake Shopping Center, fifteen (15) miles per hour;
   (b)   Within the Village Glen Condominiums, ten (10) miles per hour;
   (c)   Within the Park Oaks Shopping Center, fifteen (15) miles per hour;
   (d)   Within the Los Robles Inn, fifteen (15) miles per hour;
   (e)   Within the Conejo Village Mall Shopping Center, fifteen (15) miles per
hour; and
   (f)   Within the Granada Gardens Apartments, fifteen (15) miles per hour.
(§ II, Ord. 544-NS, eff. October 2, 1975)
Article 6. Through Streets
(Sections 4-3.601 and 4-3.602, recodified from Sections 7161 and 7161.1,
T.O.O.C., repealed by Section 1, Ordinance No. 539-NS, effective August 21,
1975)
Article 7. Truck Routes
Sec. 4-3.701. Authority to place signs.
   The Public Works Director, or designated assignee, is hereby authorized to
place traffic signs prohibiting trucks over six (6) tons gross vehicle weight,
except for local deliveries on all City streets, at City road entrances and to
apply for State authorization to provide similar signs on State rights-of-way.
(§ 1(a), Ord. 177, as amended by Ord. 1375-NS, eff. May 10, 2001 and Ord. 1522-
NS, eff. January 1, 2010)
Sec. 4-3.702. Truck prohibition.
   When signs prohibiting trucks over six (6) tons are placed at road entrances
into the City of Thousand Oaks, no person shall drive a truck, as defined by
the California Vehicle Code, exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of six (6)
tons on any City street, roadway, highway or alley, in the City of Thousand
Oaks except if allowed by posted signs or for local deliveries; provided,
however, the provision of this article shall not prohibit the use set forth in
Sections 35703 and 35704 of Article 4 of Chapter 5 of Division 15 of the
Vehicle Code of the State. The provisions of this article shall not apply to
passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission of
the State.
(§ 1(b), Ord. 177, as amended by Ord. 1375-NS, eff. May 10, 2001 and Ord. 1522-
NS, eff. January 1, 2010)
Sec. 4-3.703. Reserved.
(§ 1(c), Ord. 177, as amended by § 1, Ord. 244, and § 1, Ord. 112-NS, eff.
September 2, 1969, Ord. 1375-NS, eff. May 10, 2001 and repealed by § 1, Ord.
1522-NS, eff. January 1, 2010)
Sec. 4-3.704. Repairing vehicles on highways.
   Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for any
person to repair or modify any vehicle or install any part or accessory on any
vehicle while such vehicle is on any public highway, street, or alley. The
provisions of this section shall not prohibit emergency repairs to any vehicle
located on any public highway, street, or alley whenever the mechanical
condition of such vehicle is such that it cannot be moved from the public
highway, street, or alley without such emergency repairs.
(§ 1, Ord. 288-NS, eff. July 20, 1972)
Article 8. Regulation of Vehicles on Public and Private Property*
*   Article 8 entitled “Regulation of Motor Vehicles on Private Property,”
consisting of Sections 4-3.801 through 4-3.804, as added by Ordinance No. 150-
NS, eff. May 14, 1970, repealed by Section 1, Ordinance No. 709-NS, effective
May 3, 1979.
Sec. 4-3.801. Use of vehicles regulated.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle upon any land in
the City, except upon a City, County, or State highway; a specifically
designated parking area; a well-defined private roadway or driveway; or on
private property where express permission from a person in lawful possession
has been obtained.
(§ 2, Ord. 709-NS, eff. May 3, 1979)
Sec. 4-3.802. Exemptions for official vehicles.
   This article shall not apply to publicly-owned or operated vehicles while
engaged in official business nor to vehicles engaged in an emergency where the
preservation or protection of life or property is involved.
(§ 2, Ord. 709-NS, eff. May 3, 1979)
Sec. 4-3.803. Exceptions for designated areas.
   (a)   This article shall not apply to trails or areas which may be
designated as open to use by vehicles by resolution of the Council.
   (b)   Whenever a trail or area is designated by resolution of the Council as
open to the use of vehicles, the trail shall be so posted. No person operating
a vehicle upon a trail or area open to the use of vehicles shall cause the
vehicle to proceed cross country, use short cuts on switchbacks or other turns
of any trail, or depart in any other way from the traveled portion of any trail
or area.
(§ 2, Ord. 709-NS, eff. May 3, 1979)
Sec. 4-3.804. Operation of vehicles propelled by internal combustion engines,
required equipment for such vehicles, and emission of noise within 300 feet of
residential areas prohibited.
   (a)   No person shall operate any vehicle propelled by an internal
combustion engine on private property within the City without a United States
Forestry Service or State-approved spark arrestor or a noise-muffling device
approved by the State.
   (b)   No person shall operate any vehicle propelled by an internal
combustion engine on private property within three hundred (300) feet of the
exterior boundaries of any residential property, except where reasonably
necessary upon his own property or property of others over which a lawful
easement right is owned for purposes of ingress or egress.
   (c)   No person shall operate within the City any vehicle propelled by an
internal combustion engine beyond three hundred (300) feet of the exterior
boundary of any residential property (whether on his own property or that of
others) with equipment on such vehicle (or in such a manner) that the volume of
the exhaust, sound, or motor noise is audible to the extent that such noise
volume is so loud, raucous, or jarring as to be disturbing or a nuisance to the
peace or quiet of any adjacent neighborhood or a person residing in an adjacent
neighborhood or conducting a lawful business therein. There shall be a
rebuttable presumption of compliance with the equipment requirements of this
subsection if the vehicle is determined to be in compliance with the provisions
of subsection (a) of this section.
(§ 2, Ord. 709-NS, eff. May 3, 1979)
Sec. 4-3.805. Vehicle defined.
   For the purposes of this article, “Vehicle” shall mean any device so defined
by the Vehicle Code of the State.
(§ 2, Ord. 709-NS, eff. May 3, 1979)
Sec. 4-3.806. Violation: Penalties.
   Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a
violation of this Code pursuant to Section 1-2.01 of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of
this Code.
(§ 2, Ord. 709-NS, eff. May 3, 1979, as amended by § VII, Ord. 770-NS, eff.
February 26, 1981)
Article 9. Vehicle Removal*
*   Article 9 entitled “Regulation of Displaying, Advertising, or Offering
Vehicles for Sale,” consisting of Sections 4-3.901 through 4-3.905, codified
from Section 1, Ord. 370-NS, effective May 17, 1973, repealed by Section 1,
Ord. 856-NS, effective April 17, 1984.
Sec. 4-3.901. Vehicle removal. Administrative fee.
   (a)   An administrative fee on the registered owner of a vehicle lawfully
removed, impounded, stored or released by the Thousand Oaks Police Department
is hereby established to reimburse the City for costs incurred by the Thousand
Oaks Police Department relating to the removal, impound, storage, or release of
a vehicle pursuant to sections 22651(a), (b), (d), (e), (f), (h), (j), (l),
(o), (p), (r), 22655.5 or 22850.5 of the California Vehicle Code. The owner of
the vehicle shall pay this fee to the City Manager’s designee prior to the
release of the vehicle.
   (b)   The Chief of Police shall propose the fee authorized by this section
which fee then shall be set by City Council Resolution. The fee shall not
exceed an amount necessary to cover the actual costs incurred by the Police
Department in the removal, impoundment, storage or release of the vehicle.
   (c)   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to adopt any other rules,
regulations and procedures necessary to collect, adjust, refund and administer
any fees imposed by this section.
(§ 1, Ord. 1258-NS, eff. April 16, 1996)
Article 10. Regulation of Bicycles
Sec. 4-3.1001. State authority.
(§ III, Ord. 550-NS, eff. November 13, 1975; repealed by § 1, Ord. 856-NS, eff.
April 17, 1984)
Sec. 4-3.1002. Obedience to official traffic control devices.
(§ III, Ord. 550-NS, eff. November 13, 1975; repealed by § 1, Ord. 856-NS, eff.
April 17, 1984)
Sec. 4-3.1003. Rights-of-way.
(§ III, Ord. 550-NS, eff. November 13, 1975; repealed by § 1, Ord. 856-NS, eff.
April 17, 1984)
Sec. 4-3.1004. Operation of bicycles on roadways and bicycle routes.
   (a)   A person operating a bicycle may ride on any sidewalk or off-street
bicycle path, but shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrians or
equestrians. No person shall ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk or off-street
bicycle path that has been posted with signs prohibiting such riding. The
definition of pedestrian and bicycle shall be as defined in the California
Vehicle Code.
   (b)   A person operating a bicycle on a roadway shall ride in the same
direction as the vehicles are required to be driven on the roadway. A person
operating a bicycle on a sidewalk or off-street bicycle path shall ride on the
right side of such sidewalk or path unless indicated otherwise by posted signs.
(§ III, Ord. 550-NS, eff. November 13, 1975, as amended by §§ I and II, Ord.
701-NS, eff. December 21, 1978; repealed by § 1, Ord. 856-NS, eff. April 17,
1984; reenacted by § 1, Ord. 1229-NS, eff. February 14, 1995, as amended by §
1, Ord. 1311-NS, eff. February 2, 1998)
Sec. 4-3.1005. Parking bicycles.
   (a)   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street or against a building in
such a manner as to obstruct pedestrian, bicycle, or motor vehicular traffic.
   (b)   No person shall leave a bicycle lying on its side on any sidewalk or
park a bicycle on a sidewalk in a position that does not leave an adequate path
for pedestrian traffic.
   (c)   Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b) of this section, no person
shall park a bicycle at any location which has been posted with signs
prohibiting such parking.
(§ III, Ord. 550-NS, eff. November 13, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.1006. Riding on bicycles.
(§ III, Ord. 550-NS, eff. November 13, 1975; repealed by § 2, Ord. 1229-NS,
eff. February 14, 1995)
Sec. 4-3.1007. Bicycle equipment.
(§ III, Ord. 550-NS, eff. November 13, 1975; repealed by § 2, Ord. 1229-NS,
eff. February 14, 1995)
Sec. 4-3.1008. Reports of bicycle accidents.
(§ III, Ord. 550-NS, eff. November 13, 1975; repealed by § 2, Ord. 1229-NS,
eff. February 14, 1995)
Article 11. Regulation of Pedestrians
(Sections 4-3.1101 through 4-3.1104, codified from § IV, Ord. 550-NS, effective
November 13, 1975; repealed by §1, Ord. 856-NS, effective April 17, 1984)
Article 12. Licensing of Bicycles
Sec. 4-3.1201. Licensing required.
   (a)   No City resident shall ride, move, haul, or leave standing or allow to
be ridden, moved, hauled, or left standing, any bicycle on any road, street,
highway, or other public property unless such bicycle is licensed in accordance
with this chapter.
   (b)   This section shall not apply to bicycle manufacturers or bicycle
dealers transporting bicycles in the normal course of business.
(§ II, Ord. 548-NS, eff. October 23, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.1202. Licensing permitted.
   Any owner of a bicycle not subject to the provisions of this chapter may
have such a bicycle licensed pursuant to this chapter if he chooses to do so.
(§ II, Ord. 548-NS, eff. October 23, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.1203. Licensing agency.
   The Chief of Police shall be responsible for carrying out the provisions of
this article and is hereby authorized and directed to register and license
bicycles upon a written application for a license and the payment of the
required fee. The Fire Department and bicycle dealers may perform the functions
of the Chief of Police with respect to the registration and licensing of
bicycles.
(§ II, Ord. 548-NS, eff. October 23, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.1204. Sales by dealers.
   (a)   Each bicycle dealer shall register and license each bicycle sold by
the dealer in accordance with the provisions of this article.
   (b)   No dealer shall be required to renew a license or register and license
bicycles not sold by the dealer.
(§ II, Ord. 548-NS, eff. October 23, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.1205. License plates.
   The bicycle license shall be State-wide bicycle plate provided by the
Department of Motor Vehicles of the State to the licensing agency.
(§ II, Ord. 548-NS, eff. October 23, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.1206. Registration forms.
   The registration form shall contain the following:
   (a)   The name and address of the registered owner;
   (b)   The make, type, and model of the bicycle;
   (c)   The serial number of the bicycle;
   (d)   The license number of the bicycle;
   (e)   The original date of sale;
   (f)   A place for the name and address of a new registered owner;
   (g)   A place for the signature of the registered owner;
   (h)   A place for the signature of the registered owner releasing his
interest;
   (i)   A place for the signature of the new registered owner; and
   (j)   A place for the name of the licensing agency.
(§ II, Ord. 548-NS, eff. October 23, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.1207. Licensing and registration forms.
   (a)   Bicycle licenses and registration forms shall be supplied to the
licensing agency by the city.
   (b)   The license shall be permanently affixed to the bicycle by the
licensing agency and the registration form completed at the time of the
registration or sale, whichever occurs first.
   (c)   Records shall be maintained by each licensing agency during the period
of validity of the license.
(§ II, Ord. 548-NS, eff. October 23, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.1208. Distribution of copies of registration forms.
   One copy of the registration form as to each bicycle registered shall be
given to each of the following:
   (a)   The City (submit monthly to the Director of Finance with revenues);
   (b)   The Police Department (submit monthly);
   (c)   The owner (submit when issued); and
   (d)   The licensing agency (retain when issued).
(§ II, Ord. 548-NS, eff. October 23, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.1209. Registration and license fees.
   (a)   A registration fee shall be paid to the City for the registration and
licensing of every bicycle subject to registration and licensing by this
article.
   (b)   For each transfer of the registration certificate, a fee shall be paid
to the City.
   (c)   The amount of registration and license fees shall be set out in the
City's Master Fee Resolution.
(§ II, Ord. 548-NS, eff. October 23, 1975,§ 4, Ord. 1478-NS, eff. July 1, 2007)
Sec. 4-3.1210. Reduced fees and portion of registration period.
   Upon an application for registration and licensing, the fee required
pursuant to the provisions of subsection (a) of Section 4-3.1209 of this
article shall be as follows:
   (a)   For January 1, 1976, to January 1, 1979, Two and no/100ths ($2.00)
Dollars;
   (b) For January 1, 1977, to January 1, 1979, One and 50/100ths ($1.50)
Dollars; and
   (c) For January 1, 1978, to January 1, 1979, One and no/100ths ($1.00)
Dollar.
(§ II, Ord. 548-NS, eff. October 23, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.1211. Expiration and registration period.
   The initial State-wide bicycle plate shall expire on December 31, 1978.
Renewal shall be indicated by a supplementary adhesive device affixed near the
license plate and shall be issued for a three (3) year period commencing
January 1, 1979.
(§ II, Ord. 548-NS, eff. October 23, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.1212. Disposition of fees.
   (a)   For each bicycle registered and licensed by a bicycle dealer a fee of
fifty (50¢) cents out of the license fee received may be retained by the
bicycle dealer for his services.
   (b)   Revenues from the registration, replacement, and renewal of the
license shall be paid to the Director of Finance monthly, and shall be retained
by the City in a separate account, and shall be used for the support of the
bicycle licensing and registration programs, and to improve bicycle safety
programs, and to establish bicycle facilities, including bicycle paths and
lanes, within the incorporated City limits.
(§ II, Ord. 548-NS. eff. October 23, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.1213. Dealer’s records.
   All of the records of a bicycle dealer pertaining to the sale, registration,
and licensing of bicycles shall be open to inspection by any police officer at
any time during the regular business hours of the dealer.
(§ II, Ord. 548-NS, eff. October 23, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.1214. Renewal of expired licenses.
   The owner of a bicycle may have an expired bicycle license renewed upon the
presentation of the bicycle, the last issued registration form or its copy, and
the payment of the fee prescribed.
(§ II, Ord. 548-NS, eff. October 23, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.1215. Transfers of ownership.
   (a)   Whenever the owner of a bicycle licensed pursuant to this article
sells or otherwise disposes of a bicycle, he shall, within ten (10) days,
notify the licensing agency of such disposition.
   (b)   Any person who purchases or otherwise acquires the possession of a
bicycle shall, within ten (10) days of taking such possession, apply for the
transfer of the license for such bicycle to his name.
(§ II, Ord. 548-NS, eff. October 23, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.1216. Notification of change of address.
   Whenever the owner of a registered bicycle licensed pursuant to this article
changes his address, he shall, within ten (10) days, notify the licensing
agency of the old and new address.
(§ II, Ord. 548-NS, eff. October 23, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.1217. Tampering with registration certificates, bicycle licenses, and
serial numbers.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, destroy, mutilate,
or alter any registration certificate issued pursuant to the provisions of this
article.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate, or
in any way alter or tamper with any bicycle license issued pursuant to the
provisions of this article.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, alter, or mutilate the
serial number of any bicycle frame licensed pursuant to the provisions of this
article.
(§ II, Ord. 548-NS, eff. October 23, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.1218. Bicycles in violation of laws.
   The licensing agency shall have the right to impound and retain the
possession of any bicycle on which the manufacturer's identification numbers
have been altered, defaced, removed, or destroyed.
(§ II, Ord. 548-NS, eff. October 23, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.1219. Police authorized to number bicycle frame.
   All bicycles sold on and after October 23, 1975, shall have, as a means of
identification, serial numbers stamped on the front of the bicycle in a manner
determined by the Director of Motor Vehicles. The Police Department (or other
appropriate City or County agency) may stamp numbers on the left rear fork ends
of such bicycle not bearing manufacturers' serial numbers.
(§ II, Ord. 548-NS, eff. October 23, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.1220. Rental agencies.
   A rental agency operating within the City shall not rent or offer any
bicycle for rent unless such bicycle is licensed as provided in this article.
(§ II, Ord. 548-NS, eff. October 23, 1975)
Sec. 4-3.1221. Violations.
   Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be an infraction.
(§ II, Ord. 548-NS, eff. October 23, 1975, as amended by § 12, Ord. 1374-NS,
eff. April 26, 2001)
Sec. 4-3.1222. Fines.
   (a)   For each impounding fee for bicycles found to be in violation of the
provisions of this chapter, there shall be paid a sum of Five and no/100ths
($5.00) Dollars.
   (b)   For each violation of the provisions of this chapter, there shall be a
fine of Ten and no/100ths ($10.00) Dollars.
(§ II, Ord. 548-NS, eff. October 23, 1975, as amended by § 12, Ord. 1250-NS,
eff. January 9, 1996)
Article 13. Charges and Costs of Emergency Response
Sec. 4-3.1300. Recovery of emergency costs for driving under the influence.
   As authorized under State law, the City may recover its costs for providing
emergency response to an incident involving any person who operated a motor
vehicle, boat, vessel or civil aircraft while under the influence of an
alcoholic beverage or any drug, or the combined influence of both pursuant to
the provisions of the California Government Code.
(§ 1, Ord. 1050-NS, eff. November 28, 1989)
CHAPTER 4. EMERGENCY AND DISASTER PLAN AND ORGANIZATION
Sec. 4-4.01. Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the preparation and
implementation of plans for the protection of persons and property within the
City in the event of an emergency or a disaster and to provide for the
coordination of the emergency or disaster functions of the City within the
Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS) with all other public agencies
and affected private persons, corporations, and organizations. Any expenditures
made in connection with such emergency or disaster activities, including mutual
aid and activities and emergency preparedness services provided the City under
contract or agreement, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct
protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 191-NS, eff. February 11, 1971, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1360-NS,
eff. August 10, 2000)
Sec. 4-4.02. Definitions.
   (a)   “Disaster” shall mean a sudden calamitous emergency event bringing
injury, death, damage, loss, or destruction to persons or property.
   (b)   “Emergency” shall mean a condition of disaster or of extreme peril to
the safety of persons arid property caused by such conditions as air pollution,
fire, flood, hazardous material incident, storm, epidemic, riot, drought,
sudden and severe energy shortage, plant or animal infestations or disease, the
Governor’s warning of an earthquake or volcanic prediction, or an earthquake,
or other conditions (excepting conditions resulting from a labor controversy).
   (c)   “Emergency Plans” shall mean those official and approved documents
which describe principles, policies, concepts of cooperation, methods and
procedures to be applied in carrying out emergency operations or rendering
mutual aid during emergencies. These plans include such elements as continuity
of government, emergency functions of governmental agencies, mobilization and
application of resources, mutual aid, and public information.
(§ 1, Ord. 191-NS, eff. February 11, 1971, as amended by §§ 1 and 2, Ord. 197-
NS, eff. April 8, 1971, and § 1, Ord. 1360-NS, eff. August 10, 2000)
Sec. 4-4.03. Emergency and Disaster Council: Membership.
   The City of Thousand Oaks Emergency and Disaster Council, which shall meet
at times and at a location as determined by the City Manager, is hereby created
and shall consist of the following:
   (a)   The Mayor, who shall be chair;
   (b)   The Director of Emergency Services (City Manager), who shall be the
vice-chair;
   (c)   The Assistant Director of Emergency Services, appointed by the City
Manager, who, under the supervision of the Director, shall develop emergency
and disaster plans and organize the emergency and disaster program of the City
and shall have such other duties as may be assigned by the Director;
   (d)   Such department representatives of emergency and disaster departments,
agencies, services, or divisions as are provided for by resolution pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter; and
   (e)   Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, or
professional or other organizations having an official group or organization
with emergency and disaster responsibility as may be appointed by the City
Council.
(§ 1, Ord. 191-NS, eff. February 11, 1971, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1360-NS,
eff. August 10, 2000)
Sec. 4-4.04. Emergency and Disaster Council: Powers and duties.
   The duty of the City of Thousand Oaks Emergency and Disaster Council is to
review and recommend, as needed, City Council emergency, disaster, and mutual
aid plans and agreements, including such ordinances, resolutions, rules, and
regulations necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The Emergency and
Disaster Council shall meet upon call of the chair or, in his/her absence from
the City or inability to call such a meeting, upon the call of any member.
(§ 1, Ord. 191-NS, eff. February 11, 1971, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1360-NS,
eff. August 10, 2000)
Sec. 4-4.05. Director of Emergency Services: Powers and duties.
   The Director of Emergency Services is empowered to:
   (a)   Request the City Council to proclaim the existence or threatened
existence of a disaster or an emergency and the termination thereof, if the
City Council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the City Council
is not in session, subject to confirmation by the City Council at the earliest
practicable time;
   (b)   Request the Governor to proclaim a state of emergency when, in the
opinion of the Director, the resources of the area or region are inadequate to
cope with the emergency or disaster;
   (c)   Require the emergency services of any City officer or employee and, in
the event of the proclamation of a state of disaster or state of emergency by
the Governor in the County in which this City is located, to command the aid of
as many citizens of this community as he/she deems necessary in the execution
of his/her duties; such persons shall be entitled to all the privileges,
benefits, and immunities as are provided by State law for registered disaster
emergency service workers;
   (d)   Requisition necessary personnel or materials of any City department or
agency; and
   (e)   Execute all ordinary powers as City Manager, all of the special powers
conferred upon him/her by the provisions of this chapter or by resolution
adopted pursuant thereto, and all powers conferred upon him/her by any statute,
agreement approved by the City Council, or by any other lawful authority.
(§ 1, Ord. 191-NS, eff. February 11, 1971, as amended by § 3, Ord. 197-NS, eff.
April 8, 1971, and § 1, Ord. 1360-NS, eff. August 10, 2000)
Sec. 4-4.06. Director of Emergency Services: Emergency powers and duties.
   In the event of the proclamation of a local disaster or an emergency as
herein provided, or the proclamation of a state of emergency by the Governor or
the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services during a “state of war
emergency,” with or without a proclamation thereof by the Governor or whenever
this State or nation is attacked by an enemy of the United States, or upon
receipt by the State of a warning from the Federal Government indicating that
such an enemy attack is probable or imminent, the Director is empowered to:
   (a)   Make and issue and enforce rules and regulations on matters reasonably
related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency;
provided such rules and regulations be confirmed at the earliest practicable
time by the Council;
   (b)   Obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found
lacking and needed for the protection of the life and property and bind the
City for the fair value thereof, and if required immediately, to commandeer the
same for public use;
   (c)   Require emergency services of any City officer or employee and, in the
event of the proclamation of a state of disaster or state of emergency by the
Governor in the County in which this City is located, to command the aid of as
many citizens of this community as he/she deems necessary in the execution of
his/her duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and
immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster emergency
service workers;
   (d)   Requisition necessary personnel or material of any City department or
agency;
   (e)   Execute all ordinary powers as City Manager, all of the special powers
conferred upon him/her by this chapter or by resolution adopted pursuant
thereto, all powers conferred upon him/her by any statute, agreement approved
by the City Council, or by any other lawful authority.
(§ 1, Ord. 191-NS, eff. February 11, 1971, as amended by § 3, Ord. 197-NS, eff.
April 8, 1971, and § 1, Ord. 1360-NS, eff. August 10, 2000)
Sec. 4-4.07. Emergency and Disaster Organization.
   All officers and employees of the City, together with those volunteer forces
enrolled to aid them during an emergency or a disaster, and all groups,
organizations and persons pressed into service under the provisions of this
chapter, charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in
the City during such disaster, shall constitute the Emergency and Disaster
Organization of the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 191-NS, eff. February 11, 1971, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1360-NS,
eff. August 10, 2000)
Sec. 4-4.08. Division, services, and staff of the Emergency and Disaster
Organization.
   The City of Thousand Oaks Emergency and Disaster, Council shall be
responsible for the development of the City of Thousand Oaks Emergency Plan
which shall provide for the effective mobilization of all the resources of the
City, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local
emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency and which plan shall
provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the
emergency organization.
(§ 1, Ord. 191-NS, eff. February 11, 1971, as amended by § 5, Ord. 197-NS, eff.
April 8, 1971, and § 1, Ord. 1360-NS, eff. August 10, 2000)
Sec. 4-4.09. Punishment of violations.
   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Code, pursuant to Section 1-
2.01, for any person during a disaster to:
   (a)   Wilfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the Emergency and
Disaster Organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule, order, or
regulation issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or in the
performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of the provisions of this
chapter;
   (b)   Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter if such act is of such a nature as to give,
or be likely to give, assistance to the enemy, or to imperil the lives or
property of inhabitants of the City, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense
or protection thereof;
   (c)   Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification
specified by the emergency agency of the State.
(§ 1, Ord. 191-NS, eff. February 11, 1971, as amended by § IX, Ord. 770-NS,
eff. February 26, 1981, and § 1, Ord. 1360-NS, eff. August 10, 2000)
Sec. 4-4.10. Severability.
   If any provision of this chapter is held invalid, such invalidity shall not
affect the remaining provisions of this chapter which can be given effect
without the invalid provision or application. To this end the provisions of
this chapter are declared to be severable.
(§ 1, Ord. 191-NS, eff. February 11, 1971)
CHAPTER 5. PARADE REGULATIONS AND PERMITS
Sec. 4-5.01. Parade defined.
   For the purposes of this chapter, “parade” shall mean any march or
procession consisting of persons, animals, or vehicles, or combinations
thereof, upon any public street, sidewalk, alley, or other public place, which
parade does not comply with normal and usual traffic regulations or controls.
(§ 1, Ord. 347-NS, eff. February 22, 1973)
Sec. 4-5.02. Parade permits required.
   No person shall conduct, manage, or participate in any parade without a
written permit from the City Manager.
(§ 1, Ord. 347-NS, eff. February 22, 1973, as amended by § I, Ord. 489-NS, eff.
August 22, 1974)
Sec. 4-5.03. Interference with parades.
   No person shall knowingly join or participate in any parade conducted
pursuant to a permit from the City Manager in violation of any of the terms of
such permit, nor knowingly join or participate in any permitted parade without
the consent and over the objection of permittee, nor in any manner interfere
with the progress or orderly conduct of a parade.
(§ 1, Ord. 347-NS, eff. February 22, 1973, as amended by § I, Ord. 489-NS, eff.
August 22, 1974)
Sec. 4-5.04. Applications for permits.
   Any person desiring to conduct or manage a parade shall, not less than
twelve (12) nor more than one hundred eighty (180) business days before the
date on which it is proposed to conduct such parade, file a verified
application for a permit.
   (a)   Such application shall contain:
   (1)   The name of the applicant, the sponsoring organization, the parade
chairman, and the addresses and telephone numbers of each; the assembly area,
the disbanding area, and the route to be traveled; the assembly time; and the
starting time; and
   (2)   So far as reasonably practicable, the disbanding time; the maximum
parade length; the total number of bands, sound vehicles, or musical units, if
any, their type, and the number of members in each unit; the total number of
marching units, if any, their type, and the number of members in each unit; the
number of animals, if any, and type; the number of floats, if any, their size,
type, and how powered; and the space between the units and their speed.
   (b)   If such parade is designed to be held by and on behalf of or for any
organization other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file
a communication in writing from such organization authorizing the applicant to
apply for such permit on its behalf.
(§ 1, Ord. 347-NS, eff. February 22, 1973, as amended by § 13, Ord. 1374-NS,
eff. April 26, 2001)
Cross-reference:
   See also § 4-5.14
Sec. 4-5.05. Applications: Investigations: Recommendations.
   Upon the filing of the application, it shall be referred by the City Clerk
to the Police Department for investigation, report, and recommendation. Such
investigation shall be completed and such report and recommendation made in
writing to the City Manager within ten (10) business days after the filing of
the application unless the applicant requests or consents to an extension of
such time period. If the recommendation shall be adverse to the applicant, the
grounds for such recommendation shall be set forth. At the time of the filing
of such report and recommendation with the City Manager, a copy thereof shall
be served personally or by certified mail on the applicant, accompanied by a
notice that the applicant may request to be heard, when the City Manager
considers such application, by filing a written request therefor with the City
Manager within three (3) days after the service of such notice and that failure
to do so will constitute a waiver of his right to such hearing. The City
Manager shall act to grant or deny such application on or before two (2)
business days after the filing of such Police Department recommendation unless
the time for such granting or denial of the permit shall be waived by the
applicant in writing.
(§ 1, Ord. 347-NS, eff. February 22, 1973, as amended by § I, Ord. 489-NS, eff.
August 22, 1974, and § 14, Ord. 1374-NS, eff. April 26, 2001)
Sec. 4-5.06. Hearings.
   (a)   If the applicant requests a hearing, the City Manager shall conduct
such hearing. The City Manager shall determine the time and place of the
hearing, which shall be as soon as the calendar of business will permit and in
no event later than seven (7) business days after the filing of such request
for a hearing unless the applicant requests or consents to a later time for
such hearing. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be given to
all parties at least three (3) business days prior to such hearing.
   (b)   Where the hearing is before the City Manager, no member who did not
hear the evidence or who has not read or heard the record or proceedings shall
vote on the decision.
   (c)   The decision of the City Manager shall be in writing and shall contain
findings of fact and a determination of the issues presented, together with the
decision of the City Manager to grant or deny the permit for a parade. The
decision shall become effective upon delivery.
   (d)   The decision of the City Manager relative to the issuance or denial of
a parade permit shall be subject to appeal to the Council in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter 4 of Title 1 of this Code.
(§ 1, Ord. 347-NS, eff. February 22, 1973, as amended by § I, Ord. 489-NS, eff.
August 22, 1974, and § 15, Ord. 1374-NS, eff. April 26, 2001)
Sec. 4-5.07. Granting of permits: Conditions.
   (a)   The Council may adopt, by resolution, uniform rules and regulations to
carry out the purposes of this chapter, based upon the standards set forth in
this chapter, concerning the maximum sizes of any sign, banner, or placard to
be carried in any parade and the type of materials to be used in any sign,
placard, or carrying device therefor. As a condition of granting such permit,
the City Manager may impose reasonable requirements concerning the time and
place of such parade; the area and manner of assembling and disbanding such
parade; the route of spacing of all units of such parade; the maximum length
thereof; the maximum and minimum speed thereof; the stops permitted, if any;
the accommodation of other traffic; the number and type of vehicles, if any;
and such other requirements as are found by the City Manager to be reasonably
necessary for the protection of persons or property and the control of other
traffic.
   (b)   No permit shall be issued, nor shall any permit be valid, until the
applicant has furnished to the City Clerk a certificate of insurance from a
licensed liability insurance carrier in the State certifying that the applicant
has been insured for liability coverages (bodily injury and property damage)
for the event contemplated by the permit application. Any such certificate
shall show that the City has been named as an additional insured for the
purpose contemplated by the permit and that such insurance will not be
cancelled without ten (10) days’ advance written notice served upon the City
Clerk. The limits of liability and the form of the insurance shall be in an
amount and in a form approved by the City Attorney.
(§ 1, Ord. 347-NS, eff. February 22, 1973, as amended by § I, Ord. 489-NS, eff.
August 22, 1974)
Sec. 4-5.08. Issuance of permits.
   Upon standards uniformly applied under similar conditions, the City Manager
shall issue the permit conditioned upon the applicant’s written agreement to
comply with the terms of such permit unless the City Manager finds that:
   (a)   The time, route, and size of the parade will disrupt to an
unreasonable extent the movement of other traffic; or
   (b)   The parade is of a size or nature that requires the diversion of so
great a number of police officers of the City to properly police the line of
movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent reasonable police
protection to the City; or
   (c)   The permittee has not provided for the services of monitors to control
the orderly conduct of the parade in conformity with such permit; or
   (d)   The permittee has failed to provide reasonable means for informing all
the persons participating therein of the terms and conditions of such permit;
or
   (e)   The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at assembly and
disbanding areas and along the parade route will prevent proper fire and police
protection or ambulance service; or
   (f)   Such parade will not move from its assembly area to its disbanding
area expeditiously or not without stopping en route except when reasonably
required for the same and orderly conduct of the parade; or
   (g)   Such parade will interfere with another parade for which a permit has
been granted.
(§ 1, Ord. 347-NS, eff. February 22, 1973, as amended by § I, Ord. 489-NS, eff.
August 22, 1974)
Sec. 4-5.09. Denial of permits.
   The City Manager shall deny such parade permit and notify the applicant
thereof where:
   (a)   The City Manager makes any finding specified in Section 4-5.08 of this
chapter as cause for not issuing such permit; or
   (b)   The applicant after due notice fails to appear at the hearing; or
   (c)   The facts contained in the application are found to be false or
nonexistent in any material detail; or
   (d)   The applicant refuses to agree to abide by or comply with all the
conditions of the permit.
(§ 1, Ord. 347-NS, eff. February 22, 1973, as amended by § I, Ord. 489-NS, eff.
August 22, 1974)
Sec. 4-5.10. Reconsideration.
   The City Manager may order a reconsideration of all or part of the
application for a permit, or of any permit theretofore granted, either upon his
own motion, with five (5) days’ written notice thereof to the applicant, or
upon the request of the applicant. A motion for reconsideration shall not be a
condition precedent to judicial review.
(§ 1, Ord. 347-NS, eff. February 22, 1973, as amended by § I, Ord. 489-NS, eff.
August 22, 1974)
Sec. 4-5.11. Contents of permits.
   In each permit the City Manager shall prescribe:
   (a)   The assembly area and the time therefor;
   (b)   The starting time;
   (c)   The minimum and maximum speeds;
   (d)   The route of the parade;
   (e)   What portions of streets to be traversed may be occupied by such
parade;
   (f)   The maximum number of platoons or units and the maximum and minimum
intervals of space to be maintained between the units of such parade;
   (g)   The maximum length of such parade in miles or fractions thereof;
   (h)   The disbanding area and disbanding time;
   (i)   The number of persons required to monitor the parade;
   (j)   The number and type of vehicles, if any;
   (k)   The material and maximum size of any sign, banner, placard, or
carrying device therefor;
   (1)   That the permittee advise all participants in the parade, either
orally or by written notice, of the terms and conditions of the permit prior to
the commencement of such parade;
   (m)    That the amplification of sound permitted to be emitted from sound
trucks or bull horns be fixed and not variable;
   (n)   That the parade continue to move at a fixed rate of speed and that any
wilful delay or wilful stopping of such parade, except when reasonably required
for the safe and orderly conduct of the parade, shall constitute a violation of
the parade permit; and
   (o)   Such other requirements as are found by the City Manager to be
reasonably necessary for the protection of persons or property. All conditions
of the permit shall be complied with so far as reasonably practicable.
(§ 1, Ord. 347-NS, eff. February 22, 1973, as amended by § I, Ord. 489-NS, eff.
August 22, 1974)
Sec. 4-5.12. Requests for alterative permits.
   If the recommendation for the denial of a permit is based in whole or in
part on the date, hour, or route of travel, the applicant may submit with his
request to be heard a proposed alterative date, route of travel, or hours.
(§ 1, Ord. 347-NS, eff. February 22, 1973)
Sec. 4-5.13. Alternative permits.
   Within twenty-four (24) hours after the completion of a hearing on an
application for a permit, the City Manager shall make his order denying or
granting such application and shall, by personal service or certified mail,
notify the applicant of his action. If the City Manager denies such
application, he may authorize the conduct of such parade on a date, at a time,
or over a route different from that named by the applicant, and, if the
applicant desires to accept the proposed date, time, and route, he shall,
within three (3) days after notice of the action of the City Manager, file a
notice of acceptance with the City Manager.
   The City Manager shall thereupon issue a permit. Such permit shall conform
to the requirements of Section 4-5.11 of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 347-NS, eff. February 22, 1973, as amended by § I, Ord. 489-NS, eff.
August 1974)
Sec. 4-5.14. Late applications: Consideration by City Manager.
   The City Manager shall consider any application for a permit to conduct a
parade which is filed less than ten (10) business days before the date such
parade is proposed to be conducted if the Police Department has sufficient
resources available prior to the proposed date of the parade to investigate,
report, and make a recommendation on the application to the City Manager and it
appears on the face of the application that:
   (a)   The time, route, and size of the parade shall not disrupt to an
unreasonable extent the movement of other traffic;
   (b)   The parade is of a size or nature that does not require the diversion
of so great a number of police officers of the City to properly police the line
of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent reasonable police
protection to the City;
   (c)   The permittee has provided for the services of monitors to control the
orderly conduct of the parade in conformity with such permit;
   (d)   The permittee has provided reasonable means for informing all the
persons participating therein of the terms and conditions of such permit;
   (e)   The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at assembly and
disbanding areas and along the parade route will not prevent proper fire and
police protection or ambulance service;
   (f)   Such parade will move from its assembly area to its disbanding area
expeditiously or not without stopping en route except when reasonably required
for the same and orderly conduct of the parade; and
   (g)   Such parade will not interfere with another parade for which a permit
has been granted.
(§ 1, Ord. 347-NS, eff. February 22, 1973, as amended by § I, Ord. 489-NS, eff.
August 22, 1974, and § 16, Ord. 1374-NS, eff. April 26, 2001)
Sec. 4-5.15. Officials to be notified.
   Immediately upon the granting of a parade permit, the City Manager shall
send a copy thereof to the following:
   (a)   The Fire Chief;
   (b)   The Director of the local emergency hospital;
   (c)   The Chief of Police;
   (d)   The Public Works Director;
   (e)   The Postmaster of the Thousand Oaks Post Office; and
   (f)   The general manager or responsible head of each public transportation
utility, the regular routes of whose vehicles will be affected by the route of
the proposed parade.
(§ 1, Ord. 347-NS, eff. February 22, 1973, as amended by § I, Ord. 489-NS, eff.
August 22, 1974)
Sec. 4-5.16. Parades prohibited.
   No permit shall be issued authorizing the conduct of a parade which the City
Manager finds is proposed to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any
product, goods, wares, merchandise, or event and which parade is designed to be
held purely for private profit.
(§ 1, Ord. 347-NS, eff. February 22, 1973, as amended by § 1, Ord. 489-NS, eff.
August 22, 1974)
Sec. 4-5.17. Revocation of permits.
   Any permit for a parade issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
may be summarily revoked by the City Manager at any time when, by reason of
disaster, public calamity, or other emergency, the City Manager determines that
the safety of persons or property demands such revocation.
(§ 1, Ord. 347-NS, eff. February 22, 1973, as amended by § I, Ord. 489-NS, eff.
August 22, 1974)
Sec. 4-5.18. Permit fees.
   Any applicant for a parade permit shall pay to the City Clerk the sum of Ten
and no/100ths ($10.00) Dollars at the time of filing any application for a
parade permit.
(§ 1, Ord. 347-NS, eff. February 22, 1973)
Sec. 4-5.19. Violations.
   The wilful violation of any of the terms or conditions of the parade permit
by the permittee or any participant in such parade shall be a violation of this
Code pursuant to Section 1-2.01 of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code.
(§ 1, Ord. 347-NS, eff. February 22, 1973, as amended by § X, Ord. 770-NS, eff.
February 26, 1981)
Sec. 4-5.20. Severability.
   If any section, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
chapter, or the application thereof to any person, is for any reason held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this chapter or its application to other persons. The Council
hereby declares that it would have adopted the provisions of this chapter, and
each section, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion thereof,
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subdivisions,
sentences, clauses, phrases, or portions, or the application thereof to any
person, be declared invalid or unconstitutional.
(§ 1, Ord. 347-NS, eff. February 22, 1973)
CHAPTER 6. FIRE CONTROL AND PREVENTION*
*   Sections 4-6.01 through 4-6.07, as added by Ordinance No. 391-NS, effective
August 9, 1973, and Section 4-6.08, as added by Ordinance No. 520-NS, effective
May 15, 1975, repealed by Section 1, Ordinance No. 691-NS, effective November
2, 1978.
Sec. 4-6.01. Uniform Fire Code.
   The Ventura County Fire Protection District, pursuant to Section 13869.7 of
the California Health and Safety Code, will adopt the most recent version of
the Uniform Fire Code and any applicable local amendments thereto. The City
Council shall ratify, as required by law, any local amendments to the Uniform
Fire Code adopted by the Ventura County Fire Protection District.
(§ 4, Ord. 1351-NS, eff. January 4, 2000)
Sec. 4-6.02. Enforcement.
   The Chief of the Ventura County Fire Protection District or his or her
authorized representative shall be responsible for enforcement of the adopted
Uniform Fire Code and of California Health and Safety Code Sections 13800 et
seq.
(§ 4, Ord. 1351-NS, eff. January 4, 2000, as amended by part 11, Ord. 1437-NS,
eff. July 7, 2005)
Sec. 4-6.03. Rules and regulations.
(§ 2, Ord. 691-NS, eff. November 2, 1978; repealed by § 1, Ord. 1351-NS, eff.
January 4, 2000)
Sec. 4-6.04. Authority of fire personnel to exercise powers of police officers.
(§ 2, Ord. 691-NS, eff. November 2, 1978; repealed by § 1, Ord. 1351-NS, eff.
January 4, 2000)
Sec. 4-6.05. Compliance and penalties.
(§ 2, Ord. 691-NS, eff. November 2, 1978, as amended by § XI, Ord. 77-NS, eff.
February 26, 1981; repealed by § 1, Ord. 1351-NS, eff. January 4, 2000)
Sec. 4-6.06. Amendments to Uniform Fire Code.
(§ 2, Ord. 691-NS, eff. November 2, 1978, as amended by § XII, Ord. 770-NS,
eff. February 26, 1981; repealed by Ord. 1351-NS, eff. January 4, 2000)
CHAPTER 7. FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION*
*   Chapter 7 entitled “Flood Damage Prevention,” codified from Ordinance No.
696-NS, repealed by Section I, Ordinance No. 994-NS, effective April 12, 1988
and repealed by § 1, 1531-NS, effective February 11, 2010.
Sec. 4-7.01. Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and methods.
   (a)   Statutory authorization. The Legislature of the State of California
has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local
governments the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public
health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry.
   (b)   Findings of fact. The City Council finds:
   (1)   The flood hazard areas of the City of Thousand Oaks are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax
base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
   (2)   These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of
obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and
velocities also contributes to flood losses.
   (c)   Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private
losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by legally enforceable
regulations applied uniformly throughout the community to all publicly and
privately owned land within flood prone, mudslide [i.e. mudflow] or flood
related erosion areas. These regulations are designed to:
   (1)   Protect human life and health;
   (2)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (3)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (4)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (5)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
   (6)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted
areas caused by flood damage;
   (7)   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard; and
   (8)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
   (d)   Methods of reducing flood losses. In order to accomplish its purposes,
this chapter includes regulations to:
   (1)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and
property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases
in erosion or flood heights or velocities;
   (2)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (3)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;
   (4)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase flood damage;
   (5)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other
areas.
(§ 1, Ord. 696-NS, eff. November 16, 1978; repealed by § I, Ord. 994-NS, eff.
April 12, 1988; reenacted by § II, said Ord. 994-NS; repealed by § 1, Ord.
1531-NS, eff. February 11, 2010; reenacted by § 2, said Ord. 1531-NS)
Sec. 4-7.02. Definitions.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
   (a)   “A zone.” See “Special flood hazard area”.
   (b)   “Accessory structure” means a structure that is either:
   (1)   Solely for the parking of no more than two (2) cars; or
   (2)   A small, low cost shed for limited storage, less than one hundred and
fifty (150) square feet and One Thousand Five Hundred and no/100ths ($1,500.00)
Dollars in value.
   (c)   “Accessory use” means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the
principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located.
   (d)   “Alluvial fan” means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone
or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been
eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on
the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows,
debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration.
   (e)   “Apex” means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below
which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes
unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
   (f)   “Appeal” means a request for a review of the Floodplain
Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
   (g)   “Area of shallow flooding” means a designated AO or AH Zone on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one (1') to
three (3') feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding
is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
   (h)   “Area of special flood hazard.” See “Special flood hazard area.”
   (i)   “Base flood” means a flood which has a one (1%) percent chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “one hundred
(100)-year flood”). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter.
   (j)   “Base flood, elevation” (BFE) means the elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map for Zones AE, AH, A1-30, VE and V1-V30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one (1%) percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
   (k)   “Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade
i.e., below ground level, on all sides.
   (l)   “Building” See “Structure”.
   (m)   “Development” means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
   (n)   “Encroachment” means the advance or infringement of uses, plant
growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a
floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   (o)   “Existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before October
17, 1978.
   (p)   “Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means
the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   (q)   “Flood, flooding, or flood water” means:
   (1)   A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the
unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source;
and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and
   (2)   The condition resulting from flood-related erosion.
   (r)   “Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM)” means the official map on
which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance
Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the
floodway.
   (s)   “Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
   (t)   “Flood Insurance Study” means the official report provided by the
Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood
Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface
elevation of the base flood.
   (u)   “Floodplain or flood-prone area” means any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source. See “Flooding.”
   (v)   “Floodplain Administrator” is the community official designated by
title to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.
   (w)   “Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and
enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but
not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain
management regulations, and open space plans.
   (x)   “Floodplain management regulations” means this chapter and other
zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other
application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas.
This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination
thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and
damage.
   (y)   “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures, and their contents. For guidelines on dry and wet
floodproofing, see FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93.
   (z)   “Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1')
foot. Also referred to as “Regulatory Floodway.”
   (aa)   “Floodway fringe” is that area of the floodplain on either side of
the “Regulatory Floodway” where encroachment may be permitted.
   (bb)   “Fraud and victimization” as related to Sec. 4-7.06 of this chapter,
means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the
public. In examining this requirement, the City of Thousand Oaks will consider
the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government
responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty (50) to one-
hundred (100) years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the
base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of
damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a
whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that
those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase
the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be
insured only at very high flood insurance rates.
   (cc)   “Functionally dependent use” means a use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are
necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship
building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or
related manufacturing facilities.
   (dd)   “Governing body” is the local governing unit, i.e. county or
municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide
for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.
   (ee)   “Hardship” as related to Sec. 4-7.06 of this chapter means the
exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested
variance. The City requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and
peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is
not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps,
personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as
a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be
resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the
alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build
elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.
   (ff)   “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   (gg)   “Historic structure” means any structure that is:
   (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
   (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
   (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary
of Interior; or
   (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either
by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or
directly by “the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
   (hh)   “Levee” means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment,
designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to
contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.
   (ii)   “Levee system” means a flood protection system which consists of a
levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage
devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering
practices.
   (jj)   “Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area,
including basement (see “Basement” definition).
   (1)   An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that
is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor
provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements,
including, but not limited to:
   (2)   The flood openings standard in Sec. 4-7.05(a)(3);
   (3)   The anchoring standards in Sec. 4-7.05(a)(1);
   (4)   The construction materials and methods standards in Sec. 4-7.05(b);
and
   (5)   The standards for utilities in Sec. 4-7.05(b).
   (kk)   “Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or
without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The
term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle”.
   (ll)   “Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or
sale.
   (mm)   “Market value” is defined in the City of Thousand Oaks substantial
damage/ improvement procedures. See Sec. 4-7.04(b)(2).
   (nn)   “Mean sea level” means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations
shown on a community's Flood. Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
   (oo)   “New construction,” for floodplain management purposes, means
structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after October
17,1978, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   (pp)   “New manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after.
   (qq)   “Obstruction” includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation,
channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel,
refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or
projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the
direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its
propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its
likelihood of being carried downstream.
   (rr)   “One-hundred-year flood” or “100-year flood” see “Base flood.”
   (ss)   “Program deficiency” means a defect in a community's floodplain
management regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective
implementation of those floodplain management regulations.
   (tt)   “Public safety and nuisance” as related to Sec. 4-7.06 of this
chapter, means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything
which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood,
or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage
or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream,
canal, or basin.
   (uu)   “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:
   (1)   Built on a single chassis;
   (2)   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
   (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
   (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   (w)   “Regulatory floodway” means the channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one (1') foot.
   (ww)   “Remedy a violation” means to bring the structure or other
development into compliance with State or local floodplain management
regulations, or if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its
noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the
structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the
enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar
violations, or reducing State or Federal financial exposure with regard to the
structure or other development.
   (xx)   “Riverine” means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river
(including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
   (yy)   “Sheet flow area.” See “Area of shallow flooding.”
   (zz)   “Special flood hazard area (SFHA)” means an area in the floodplain
subject to a one (1%) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or, AH.
   (aaa)   “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one
hundred and eighty (180) days from the date of the permit. The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
   (bbb)   “Structure” means a walled and roofed building that is principally
above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured
home.
   (ccc)   “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged
condition would equal or exceed fifty (50%) percent of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
   (ddd)   “Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds fifty (50%) percent of the market value of the structure before the
“start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
   (eee)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
   (fff)   Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
“historic structure.”
   (ggg)   “Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this
chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
   (hhh)   “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to
be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without
the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of
compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such
time as that documentation is provided.
   (iii)   “Water surface elevation” means the height, in relation to the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies
in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
   (jjj)   “Watercourse” means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo,
channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least
periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which
substantial flood damage may occur.
(§ 1, Ord. 696-NS, eff. November 16, 1978; repealed by § I, Ord. 994-NS, eff.
April 12, 1988; reenacted by § II, said Ord. 994-NS; repealed by § 1, Ord.
1531-NS, eff. February 11, 2010; reenacted by § 2, said Ord. 1531-NS)
Sec. 4-7.03. General Provisions.
   (a)   Lands to which this chapter applies. This chapter shall apply to all
areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the City of Thousand
Oaks.
   (b)   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. The areas of
special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) in the "Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Ventura County, California and
Incorporated Areas" dated January 3, 1983, with accompanying Flood Insurance
Rate Maps (FIRM'S) dated January 3, 1983 and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps
(FBFM's), dated June 7, 1974, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions,
are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This
FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter
and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation
of this chapter and which are recommended to the City Council by the Floodplain
Administrator. The study, FIRM'S and FBFM's are on file at the Public Works
Department, 2100 E. Thousand Oaks Boulevard, Thousand Oaks, California.
   (c)   Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed,
located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms
of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements
(including violations of conditions and safeguards) shall constitute a
misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the City Council from taking such
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
   (d)   Abrogation and greater restrictions. This chapter is not intended to
repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement,
covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.
   (e)   Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter,
all provisions shall be:
   (1)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (2)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (3)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
   (f)   Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection
required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and
is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and
will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or
natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of
special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part
of City of Thousand Oaks, any officer or employee thereof, the State of
California, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages
that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made hereunder.
   (g)   Severability. This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby
declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the
courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the
section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(§ 1, Ord. 696-NS, eff. November 16, 1978; repealed by § I, Ord. 994-NS, eff.
April 12, 1988; reenacted by § II, said Ord. 994-NS; repealed by § 1, Ord.
1531-NS, eff. February 11, 2010; reenacted by § 2, said Ord. 1531-NS; as
amended by § 2, Ord. 1650-NS, eff. September 28, 2018)
Sec. 4-7.04. Administration.
   (a)   Designation Of The Floodplain Administrator. The City Engineer or his/
her designee is hereby appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this
chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its
provisions.
   (b)   Duties And Responsibilities Of The Floodplain Administrator. The
duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but
not be limited to the following:
   (1)   Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine:
   (i)   Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied, including
determination of substantial improvement and substantial damage of existing
structures;
   (ii)   All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;
   (iii)   The site is reasonably safe from flooding;
   (iv)   The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying
capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a
floodway has not been designated. This means that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one (1') foot at any point within the City of Thousand Oaks; and
   (v)   All letters of map revision (LOMR's) for flood control projects are
approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building Permits must not
be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMR's). Approved
CLOMR's allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land
preparation as specified in the "start of construction" definition.
   (2)   Development of Substantial Improvement and Substantial Damage
Procedures. Using FEMA publication FEMA 213, "Answers to Questions About
Substantially Damaged Buildings," develop detailed procedures for identifying
and administering requirements for substantial improvement and substantial
damage, to include defining "Market Value." Assure procedures are coordinated
with other departments/divisions and implemented by City staff.
   (3)   Review, use and development of other base flood data. When base flood
elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Sec.
4-7.03(b), the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or
state agency, or other source, in order to administer Sec.
4-7.05.
   NOTE: A base flood elevation may be obtained using one of two methods from
the FEMA publication, FEMA 265, "Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate
Zone A Areas - A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year) Flood
Elevations" dated July 1995.
   (4)   Notification of other agencies.
   (i)   Alteration or relocation of a watercourse:
   (aa)   Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water
Resources prior to alteration or relocation;
   (ab)   Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency; and
   (ac)   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.
   (ii)   Base flood elevation changes due to physical alterations:
   (aa)   Within six (6) months of information becoming available or project
completion, whichever comes first, the floodplain administrator shall submit or
assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA
for a letter of map revision (LOMR).
   (ab)   All LOMR's for flood control projects are approved prior to the
issuance of building permits. Building Permits must not be issued based on
conditional letters of map revision (CLOMR's). Approved CLOMR's allow
construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation' as
specified in the "start of construction" definition.
Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical
changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain
management requirements are based on current data.
   (iii)   Changes in corporate boundaries:
   Notify FEMA in writing whenever the corporate boundaries have been modified
by annexation or other means and include a copy of a map of the community
clearly delineating the new corporate limits.
   (5)   Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for
public inspection and make available as needed the following:
   (i)   Certification required by Sec.
4-7.05(a)(4)(i) and Sec.
4-7.05 (lowest floor elevations);
   (ii)   Certification required by Sec.
4-7.05(a)(4)(ii) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures);
   (iii)   Certification required by Secs.
4-7.05(a)(4)(iii) (wet floodproofing standard);
   (iv)   Certification of elevation required by Sec.
4-7.05(c)(1)(iii) (subdivisions and other proposed development standards);
   (v)   Certification required by Sec.
4-7.05(f)(2) (floodway encroachments); and
   (vi)   Maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification
for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report
submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   (6)   Map Determination. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact
location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions.
The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Sec.
4-7.04(d).
   (7)   Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as
specified in Sec.
4-7.03(c).
   (8)   Biennial Report. Complete and submit Biennial Report to FEMA.
   (9)   Planning. Assure community's General Plan is consistent with
floodplain management objectives herein.
   (c)   Development Permit. A development permit shall be obtained before any
construction or other development, including manufactured homes, within any
area of special flood hazard established in Sec.
4-7.03(b). Application for a development permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the City of Thousand Oaks. The applicant shall provide the
following minimum information:
   (1)   Plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing:
   (i)   Location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question, existing
or proposed structures, storage of materials and equipment and their location;
   (ii)   Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and other
utilities;
   (iii)   Grading information showing existing and proposed contours, any
proposed fill, and drainage facilities;
   (iv)   Location of the regulatory floodway when applicable;
   (v)   Base flood elevation information as specified in Sec.
4-7.03(b) or Sec.
4-7.04(b)(3);
   (vi)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures; and
   (vii)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in Sec.
4-7.05(a)(4)(ii) of this chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-
93.
   (2)   Certification from a registered civil engineer or architect that the
nonresidential floodproofed building meets the floodproofing criteria in Sec.
4-7.05(a)(4)(ii).
   (3)   For a crawl-space foundation, location and total net area of
foundation openings as required in Sec.
4-7.05(a)(4)(iii) of this chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93
and 7-93.
   (4)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
   (5)   All appropriate certifications listed in Sec.
4-7.04(b)(5) of this chapter.
   (d)   Appeals. The City Council of City of Thousand Oaks shall hear and
decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement,
decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 696-NS, eff. November 16, 1978; repealed by § I, Ord. 994-NS, eff.
April 12, 1988; reenacted by § II, said Ord. 994-NS; repealed by § 1, Ord.
1531-NS, eff. February 11, 2010; reenacted by § 2, said Ord. 1531-NS)
Sec. 4-7.05. Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
   (a)   Standards of construction. In all areas of special flood hazards the
following standards are required:
   (1)   Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements of
structures, including manufactured homes, shall be adequately anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
   (2)   Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and
substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be
constructed:
   (i)   With flood resistant materials, and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage for areas below the base flood elevation;
   (ii)   Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
   (iii)   With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as
to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding; and
   (iv)   Within Zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths
around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed
structures.
   (3)   Crawlspace construction. This sub-section applies to buildings with
crawl spaces up to two (2') feet below grade. Below-grade crawl space
construction in accordance with the requirements listed below will not be
considered basements.
   (i)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. Crawl
space construction is not allowed in areas with flood velocities greater than
five (5') feet per second unless the design is reviewed by a qualified design
professional, such as a registered architect or professional engineer;
   (ii)   The crawl space is an enclosed area below the BFE and, as such, must
have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. For guidance on flood openings, see FEMA
Technical Bulletin 1-93;
   (iii)   Crawl space construction is not permitted in V zones. Open pile or
column foundations that withstand storm surge and wave forces are required in V
zones;
   (iv)   Portions of the building below the BFE must be constructed with
materials resistant to flood damage. This includes not only the foundation
walls of the crawl space used to elevate the building, but also any joists,
insulation, or other materials that extend below the BFE; and
   (v)   Any building utility systems within the crawl space must be elevated
above BFE or designed so that floodwaters cannot enter or accumulate within the
system components during flood conditions.
   (vi)   Requirements for all below-grade crawl space construction, in
addition to the above requirements, to include the following:
   (aa)   The interior grade of a crawl space below the BFE must not be more
than two (2') feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade (LAG), shown as D
in Figure 3 of Technical Bulletin 11-01;
   (ab)   The height of the below-grade crawl space, measured from the interior
grade of the crawl space to the top of the crawl space foundation wall must not
exceed four (4') feet (shown as L in Figure 3 of Technical Bulletin 11-01) at
any point;
   (ac)   There must be an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters
from the interior area of the crawl space within a reasonable period of time
after a flood event, not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours; and
   (ad)   The velocity of floodwaters at the site should not exceed five (5')
feet per second for any crawl space. For velocities in excess of five (5') feet
per second, other foundation types should be used.
   (4)   Elevation and floodproofing.
   (i)   Residential construction. All new construction or substantial
improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including
basement:
   (aa)   In AE, AH, A1-30 Zones, elevated to or above the base flood
elevation.
   (ab)   In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height
equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or
elevated at least two (2') feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth
number is specified.
   (ac)   In an A zone, without BFE's specified on the FIRM [unnumbered A
zone], elevated to or above the base flood elevation; as determined under Sec.
4-7.04(b)(3). Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest
floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or
licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be
properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the
Floodplain Administrator.
   (ii)   Nonresidential construction. All new construction or substantial
improvements of nonresidential structures shall either be elevated to conform
with Sec.
4-7.05(a)(4)(i); or
   (ab)   Be floodproofed, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, below the elevation recommended under Sec.
4-7.05(a)(4)(f), so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water;
   (ac)   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
   (ad)   Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect that the
standards of Sec.
4-7.05(a)(4)(ii)(aa) and (ab) are satisfied. Such certification shall be
provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
   (iii)   Flood openings. All new construction and substantial improvements of
structures with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding
basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must meet the
following minimum criteria:
   (aa)   For non-engineered openings:
   (A)   Have a minimum of two (2) openings on different sides having a total
net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding;
   (B)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1') foot above
grade;
   (C)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwater; and
   (D)   Buildings with more than one (1) enclosed area must have openings on
exterior walls for each area to allow flood water to directly enter; or
   (ab)    Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect.
   (iv)   Manufactured homes. See Sec.
4-7.05(d).
   (v)   Garages and low cost accessory structures.
   (aa)   Attached garages.
   (A)   A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the
garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the automatic
entry of flood waters. See Sec.
4-7.05(a)(4)(iii). Areas of the garage below the BFE must be constructed with
flood resistant materials. See Sec.
4-7.05(a)(2).
   (B)   A garage attached to a nonresidential structure must meet the above
requirements or be dry floodproofed. For guidance on below grade parking areas,
see FEMA Technical Bulletin TB-6.
   (ab)   Detached garages and accessory structures.
   (A)   "Accessory structures" used solely for parking (two (2) car detached
garages or smaller) or limited storage (small, low-cost sheds), as defined in
Sec.
4-7.02, may be constructed such that its floor is below the base flood
elevation (BFE), provided the structure is designed and constructed in
accordance with the following requirements:
   I.   Use of the accessory structure must be limited to parking or limited
storage;
   II.   The portions of the accessory structure located below the BFE must be
built using flood-resistant materials;
   III.   The accessory structure must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse and lateral movement;
   IV. Any mechanical and utility equipment in the accessory structure must be
elevated or floodproofed to or above the BFE;
   V.   The accessory structure must comply with floodplain encroachment
provisions in Sec.
4-7.05(f); and
   VI.   The accessory structure must be designed to allow for the automatic
entry of flood waters in accordance with Sec.
4-7.05(a)(4)(iii).
   (B)   Detached garages and accessory structures not meeting the above
standards must be constructed in accordance with all applicable standards in
Sec.
4-7.05(a).
   (b)    Standards for utilities.
   (1)   All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall
be designed to minimize or eliminate:
   (i)   Infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and
   (ii)   Discharge from the systems into flood waters.
   (2)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them, or contamination from them during flooding.
   (c)   Standards for subdivisions and other proposed development.
   (1)   All new subdivisions proposals and other proposed development,
including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than
fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser, shall:
   (i)   Identify the special flood hazard areas (SFHA) and base flood
elevations (BFE).
   (ii)   Identify the elevations of lowest floors of all proposed structures
and pads on the final plans.
   (iii)   If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the following
as-built information for each structure shall be certified by a registered
civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and provided as part of an application
for a letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) to the Floodplain
Administrator:
   (aa)   Lowest floor elevation.
   (ab)   Pad elevation.
   (ac)   Lowest adjacent grade.
   (2)   All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
   (3)   All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall have
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
   (4)   All subdivisions and other proposed development shall provide adequate
drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   (d)   Standards for manufactured homes.
   (1)   All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, on
sites located: (1) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (2) in a
new manufactured home park or subdivision; (3) in an expansion to an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision; or (4) in an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial
damage" as the result of a flood, shall:
   (i)   Within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate
Map, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be
securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
   (2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites
in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH,
and AE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map that are not subject to the
provisions of Sec.
4-7.05(d)(1) will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, and be elevated so
that either the:
   (i)   Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood
elevation; or
   (ii)   Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other
foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than
thirty-six (36") inches in height above grade.
   Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor
including basement shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or
licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be
properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the
Floodplain Administrator.
   (e)   Standards for recreational vehicles.
   (1)   All recreational vehicles placed in Zones A1-30, AH, and AE will
either:
   (i)   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred and eighty (180) consecutive
days; or
   (ii)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle
is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached
to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and
has no permanently attached additions; or
   (iii)   Meet the permit requirements of Sec.
4-7.04(c) of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for
manufactured homes in Sec.
4-7.05(d)(1).
   (f)   Floodways. Since floodways are an extremely hazardous area due to the
velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion
potential, the following provisions apply:
   (1)   Until a regulatory floodway is adopted, no new construction,
substantial development, or other development (including fill) shall be
permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE, unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one (1') foot at any point within the City of Thousand Oaks.
   (2)   Within an adopted regulatory floodway, the City of Thousand Oaks shall
prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development, unless certification by a registered civil
engineer is provided demonstrating that the proposed encroachment shall not
result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood
discharge.
   (3)   If Secs.
4-7.05(f)(1) and (2) are satisfied, all new construction, substantial
improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with all other
applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Sec.
4-7.05.
(§ 1, Ord. 696-NS, eff. November 16, 1978 repealed by § I, Ord. 994-NS, eff.
April 12, 1988; reenacted by § II, said Ord. 994-NS; repealed by § 1, Ord.
1531-NS, eff. February 11, 2010; reenacted by § 2, said Ord. 1531-NS)
Sec. 4-7.06. Variance procedures.
   (a)   Nature of variances. The issuance of a variance is for floodplain
management purposes only. Insurance premium rates are determined by statute
according to actuarial risk and will not be modified by the granting of a
variance.
   The variance criteria set forth in this section of the ordinance are based
on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of
property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel
of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the
requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the
applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be
unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique
characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its
inhabitants, or the property owners.
   It is the duty of the City of Thousand Oaks to help protect its citizens
from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of
insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from
the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite
rare. The long term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can
only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance
guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple
provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The
criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives
other than a variance are more appropriate.
   (b)   Conditions for variances.
   (1)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial
improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-
half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the
procedures of Secs.
4-7.04 and
4-7.05 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the
variance increases.
   (2)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of "historic
structures" (as defined in Sec.
4-7.02 of this chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
   (3)   Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if
any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   (4)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance
is the "minimum necessary" considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
"Minimum necessary" means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the
requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an
elevation requirement, this means the City of Thousand Oaks need not grant
permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation
the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the City of Thousand
Oaks believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local
ordinance.
   (5)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice over the signature of a community official that:
   (i)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base
flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to
amounts as high as Twenty-five and no/100ths ($25.00) Dollars for One Hundred
($100.00) Dollars of insurance coverage, and
   (ii)   Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life
and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by
the Floodplain Administrator in the Office of the Ventura County Recorder and
shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the
affected parcel of land.
   (6)   The Floodplain Administrator will maintain a record of all variance
actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances
issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
   (c)   Appeal Board.
   (1)   In passing upon requests for variances, the City Council shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified
in other sections of this chapter, and the:
   (i)   Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of
others;
   (ii)   Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
   (iii)   Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and
future owners of the property;
   (iv)   Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the
community;
   (v)   Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
   (vi)   Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are
not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
   (vii)   Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
   (viii)   Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
   (ix)   Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles;
   (x)   Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and
   (xi)   Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges.
   (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon a:
   (i)   Showing of good and sufficient cause;
   (ii)   Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional "hardship" to the applicant; and
   (iii)   Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary
public expense, create a nuisance (see "Public safety and nuisance"), cause
"fraud and victimization" of the public, or conflict with existing local laws
or ordinances.
   (3)   Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement,
and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally
dependent use provided that the provisions of Secs.
4-7.06(c)(1) through (4) are satisfied and that the structure or other
development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base
flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not
create a public nuisance.
   (4)   Upon consideration of the factors of Sec.
4-7.06(b)(1) and the purposes of this chapter, the City Council may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 696-NS, eff. November 16, 1978; repealed by § I, Ord. 994-NS, eff.
April 12, 1988; reenacted by § II, said Ord. 994-NS; repealed by § 1, Ord.
1531-NS, eff. February 11, 2010; reenacted by § 2, said Ord. 1531-NS)
Sec. 4-7.07. Alluvial Fan Advisory.
   (a)   Hazards of Alluvial Fan Development. Alluvial fans present a unique
flood hazard environment where the combination of sediment, slope, and
topography create an ultra hazardous condition for which elevation on fill will
not provide reliable protection. Active alluvial fan flooding is characterized
by flow path uncertainty combined with abrupt deposition and erosion. As a
result, any area of an alluvial fan may be subject to intense flood hazards.
   The technology of mathematically modeling the hydrodynamics of water and
debris flows for alluvial fans is still in the early development stage. The
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has formulated a mapping procedure
for the purpose of defining the likelihood of flood hazards on inundated
alluvial fan zones to be used for flood insurance purposes and general
floodplain regulation, referred to as the FEMA alluvial fan methodology.
   An active alluvial fan flooding hazard is indicated by three related
criteria:
   (1)   Flow path uncertainty below the hydrographic apex;
   (2)   Abrupt deposition and ensuing erosion of sediment as a stream or
debris flow loses its competence to carry material eroded from a steeper,
upstream source area; and
   (3)   An environment where the combination of sediment availability, slope,
and topography creates an ultra hazardous condition for which elevation on fill
will not reliably mitigate the risk.
   Inactive alluvial fan flooding is similar to traditional riverine flood
hazards, but occurs only on alluvial fans. It is characterized by flow paths
with a higher degree of certainty in realistic assessments of flood risk or in
the reliable mitigation of the hazard. Counter to active alluvial fan flooding
hazards, an inactive alluvial fan flooding hazard is characterized by
relatively stable flow paths. However, areas of inactive alluvial fan flooding,
as with active alluvial fan flooding, may be subject to sediment deposition and
erosion, but to a degree that does not cause flow path instability and
uncertainty.
   An alluvial fan may exhibit both active alluvial fan flooding and inactive
alluvial fan flooding hazards. The hazards may vary spatially or vary at the
same location, contingent on the level of flow discharge. Spatially, for
example, upstream inactive portions of the alluvial fan may distribute flood
flow to active areas at the distal part of the alluvial fan. Hazards may vary
at the same location, for example, with a flow path that may be stable for
lower flows, but become unstable at higher flows.
   More detailed information can be found at FEMA's website: "Guidelines for
Determining Flood Hazards on Alluvial Fans" at http://www.fema.gov/fhm/
ft_afgd2.shtm#1.
   (b)   Alluvial Fans and LOMR's. The NFIP does not allow for the removal of
land from the floodplain based on the placement of fill (LOMR-F) in alluvial
fan flood hazard areas. The NFIP will credit a major structural flood control
project, through the LOMR process, that will effectively eliminate alluvial fan
flood hazards from the protected area. Details about map revisions for alluvial
fan areas can be found in the Code of Federal Regulations at Title 44, Part
65.13.
   (c)   Alluvial Fan Task Force. As stated in AB 2141 (Longville, Chapter 878,
Statutes of 2004), the State of California Department of Water Resources will
convene an Alluvial Fan Task Force (AFTF). The AFTF will produce an alluvial
fan model ordinance for local communities and a recommendations report to the
legislature.
(§ 2, Ord. 1531-NS, eff. February 11, 2010)
Editor’s Note:
   Former Sec. 4-707 Warnings and disclaimers of liability has been repealed
and replaced by Ord. 1531-NS § 1, effective February 11, 2010. (§ 1, Ord. 696-
NS, eff. November 16, 1978; repealed by § I Ord, 994-NS, eff April 12, 1988)
Sec. 4-7.08. Development permits required.
(§ 1, Ord. 696-NS, eff. November 16, 1978; repealed by § I, Ord. 994-NS, eff.
April 12, 1988)
Sec. 4-7.09. Authority and duties of the Director of Public Works.
(§ 1, Ord. 696-NS, eff. November 16, 1978; repealed by § I, Ord. 994-NS, eff.
April 12, 1988)
Sec. 4-7.10. General standards for flood hazard reduction.
(§ 1, Ord. 696-NS, eff. November 16, 1978; repealed by § I, Ord. 994-NS, eff.
April 12, 1988)
Sec. 4-7.11. Specific standards for flood hazard reduction.
(§ 1, Ord. 696-NS, eff. November 16, 1978; repealed by § I, Ord. 994-NS, eff.
April 12, 1988)
Sec. 4-7.12. Shallow flooding.
(§ 1, Ord. 696-NS, eff. November 16, 1978; repealed by § I, Ord. 994-NS, eff.
April 12, 1988)
CHAPTER 8. FILM PERMITS
Sec. 4-8.01. Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide rules and regulations for the
issuance of commercial filming permits. The development and application of such
rules and regulations are intended to ensure that commercial filming activities
are consistent with considerations of public health, safety and the protection
of property and to promote filming within the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 1309-NS, eff. December 18, 1997)
Sec. 4-8.02. Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context,
certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Current news” shall mean photographing, filming or videotaping for
the purpose of spontaneous, television news broadcast, excluding news style
television programs such as news magazine shows and documentaries, or reporting
for print media by reporters, photographers or cameramen.
   (b)   “Film Liaison” shall be the designated representative of the City to
work directly with the applicant for filming permits, and to handle the
processing, issuance, review and collection of all fees for filming permits.
   (c)   “Governmental filming” shall mean any filming by, and for the use of a
public entity.
   (d)   “Location filming” shall mean and include all activity within the City
limits attendant to staging, making, rehearsing, shooting, or videotaping for a
commercially produced motion picture, television show, program or commercial.
For the purposes of this Chapter, “staging” shall include but is not limited
to, the parking of equipment vehicles, placement of generators or other
mechanical equipment or lighting, erection of tents and similar temporary
structures, placement or storage of miscellaneous materials or items supporting
filming, and the parking of more than five (5) passenger vehicles on a public
or private street.
   (e)   “Still photography” shall mean the taking of non-motion pictures for
commercial purposes, utilizing equipment in addition to a camera, including but
not limited to additional lighting equipment, erection of temporary structures,
use of portable generators or similar equipment or other ancillary equipment or
services. The following are excluded from the definition of still photography:
a photography shoot that will take four (4) hours or less to complete, or a
photography shoot that will take place wholly on private property including the
parking of any vehicles necessary to the shoot.
   (f)   “Student” shall mean an applicant who has submitted a letter written
on school letterhead signed by a school administrator or instructor stating
that the applicant is currently enrolled in a recognized U.S. educational
institution and that the film is not for commercial release.
(§ 1, Ord. 1309-NS, eff. December 18, 1997, as amended by part 12, Ord. 1437-
NS, eff. July 7, 2005 and § 1, Ord. 1525-NS, eff. October 22, 2009)
Sec. 4-8.03. Permit required.
   (a)   No person shall engage in, conduct, or use any public or private
property, building, street, facility or residence in the City for location
filming or still photography without obtaining a City permit pursuant to this
Chapter. Permittee shall have a copy of the current permit on the site of the
location filming or still photography at all times. A copy of the permit shall
be made available upon request by any official or employee of the City.
   (b)   Permit exemptions. No permit shall be required for the following:
   (1)   Governmental filming;
   (2)   Any motion picture, television, video production, or still photography
studio operating at its established or fixed place of business in the City;
   (3)   Current news.
(§ 1, Ord. 1309-NS, eff. December 18, 1997, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1525-NS,
eff. October 22, 2009)
Sec. 4-8.04. Permit requirements and conditions.
   (a)   Written consent from an adult occupant of each dwelling or business
shall be obtained for location filming and still photography as follows:
   (1)   Location filming of three (3) or fewer days- written consent of an
adult occupant of at least ninety (90%) of the residences and businesses within
two hundred (200') feet of the filming location shall be required.
   (2)   Location filming of four (4) or more days- written consent of an adult
occupant of at least ninety-five (95%) percent of the residences and businesses
within three hundred (300') feet of the filming location shall be required.
   (3)   Still photography for one (1) day - written consent of an adult
occupant of a dwelling or business immediately adjacent to or directly across
the street from the still photography location shall be required.
   (4)   Still photography for more than one (1) day- written consent of an
adult occupant of at least ninety (90%) percent of the residences and
businesses within two hundred (200') feet of the filming location shall be
required.
   (b)   Contact information of a film company representative shall be provided
to an adult occupant of each dwelling or business within the designated written
consent area, at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to filming activities, so
the filming company can be notified of issues arising from the filming.
   (c)   A site plan including but not limited to the location of filming,
staging of equipment, and all vehicle parking shall be submitted with the
application. During filming activities, all filming, staging, storage of
equipment, parking or other items depicted on the plan, shall occur as shown on
the approved plan unless otherwise approved by the Film Liaison. A significant
change to the approved plan may require additional consent from affected
occupants.
   (d)   No simulated discharge of weapons, explosions, or sirens shall be
used, except when otherwise approved by the Police Department.
   (e)   Amplified sounds, powered equipment or other audible sounds shall be
in compliance with Chapter 21 of Title 5 (Noise).
   (f)   No filming shall occur in residential zones on the following holidays:
New Year's Day, Memorial Day; Independence Day; Labor Day; Thanksgiving Day;
and Christmas Day.
   (g)   Direct services from the City as enumerated in Section 4-8.05(b)
during the term of the permit shall be at the applicant's sole cost and
expense.
   (h)   The Film Liaison may impose permit conditions to control impacts of
filming including but not limited to parking limitations, security, traffic/
crowd control, insurance requirements, performance bonds, indemnity and hold
harmless agreements, limits on hours and/or days filming may occur, and other
conditions to mitigate filming impacts on surrounding properties.
   (i)   Location filming requests for multiple locations shall require a
separate film permit and payment of associated fees for each proposed location.
(§ 3, Ord. 1525-NS, eff. October 22, 2009)
Sec. 4-8.05. Application processing: Permit fees; Permit issuance.
   (a)   Any person or entity desiring a film permit shall file for a film
permit with the Film Liaison at least ten (10) days before the contemplated
filming or still photography, but in no event less than five (5) days prior to
the filming date. If filming/still photography requires Police Department
personnel on location, and an application is submitted in less than ten (10)
days, the permit may be denied because of lack of available Police resources.
   (b)   Prior to processing application, the City's processing fee for
location filming permit applications shall be paid by the applicant in an
amount set by resolution of the City Council. In the event that any applicant
requires direct services from the City, as determined necessary by the Film
Liaison during location filming activities, including but not limited to, the
use of City property, equipment, or the requirement for Police Department or
other City personnel, the applicant shall reimburse the City for the cost of
all such services provided. Additionally, refundable deposits may be collected
from the applicant to ensure compliance with permit conditions.
   (c)   The Film Liaison shall review the application and may request
additional information or verification of information. The Film Liaison, with
imposed conditions, may issue the permit if determined the location will not
unreasonably impact traffic and it complies with all City standards. The Film
Liaison may impose such limitations or conditions on the permit as he or she
deems necessary to ensure the public safety and welfare.
(§ 1, Ord. 1309-NS, eff. December 18, 1997, as amended by § 4, Ord. 1525-NS,
eff. October 22, 2009)
Sec. 4-8.06. Violations.
   (a)   Any person, firm, company or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Code
pursuant to Section 1-2.01 of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code.
   (b)   The Film Liaison or designee shall have the authority to issue a
written stop notice if there is any violation of the permit conditions. Filming
and all other associated activities shall cease until the violation has been
corrected and the stop notice is released, in writing, by the Film Liaison or
designee.
   (c)   Any person, firm, company or corporation who is convicted of violating
the provision of this chapter, may be prohibited from obtaining a film permit
for a period of 1 year from the date of the conviction.
(§ 1, Ord. 1309-NS, eff. December 18, 1997)
TITLE 5. PUBLIC WELFARE, MORALS AND CONDUCT
CHAPTER 1. ABANDONED APPLIANCES (Repealed)
CHAPTER 2. ADVERTISING DISTRIBUTION
      
5-2.01–Declaration of public nuisance
      
5-2.02–Public places
      
5-2.03–Automobiles
      
5-2.04–Distribution at residences and private businesses (Repealed)
      
5-2.05–Filing of objections to leaving of materials (Repealed)
      
5-2.06–List of objections: Duty to obtain (Repealed)
      
5-2.07–Severability
CHAPTER 3. AIR POLLUTION
      
5-3.01–Statement of necessity
      
5-3.02–Prohibited acts
      
5-3.03–Enforcement
CHAPTER 4. CLOSING-OUT SALES
      
5-4.01–Permits: Required
      
5-4.02–Permits: Applications: Form
      
5-4.03–Permits: Applications: Filing fees
      
5-4.04–Permits: Applications: Investigations
      
5-4.05–Permits: Applications: False statements
      
5-4.06–Permits: Applications: Filing by City Manager
      
5-4.07–Permits: Issuance
      
5-4.08–Permits: Extension of term
      
5-4.09–Permits: Conditions
      
5-4.10–Investigations
      
5-4.11–Additions to stock before sales
      
5-4.12–Additions to stock during sales
      
5-4.13–Advertising
      
5-4.14–Exceptions
      
5-4.15–Violations
CHAPTER 5. PUBLIC DANCES
      
5-5.01–Definitions
      
5-5.02–Public or minor’s dances: Permits required
      
5-5.03–Dance permits: Applications: Form
      
5-5.04–Permits: Fees and approval
      
5-5.05–Permits: No transferability
      
5-5.06–Conditions of permit
      
5-5.07–Noise
      
5-5.08–Minor’s dances: Alcoholic beverages
      
5-5.09–Revocation
CHAPTER 6. BINGO GAMES
      
5-6.01–Bingo game defined
      
5-6.02–Licenses: Applications
      
5-6.03–Licenses: Applications: Procedure
      
5-6.04–Licenses: Applications: Denial: Appeals
      
5-6.05–Licenses: Revocation: Petitions
      
5-6.06–Licenses: Revocation: Petitions: Council hearings
CHAPTER 7. SUBSTANDARD HOUSING OWNERS
      
5-7.01–Findings and determinations
      
5-7.02–Definitions
      
5-7.03–Substandard Housing Owner properties; proactive code compliance
      
5-7.04–Removal of property from proactive enforcement
CHAPTER 8. MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
      
5-8.01–False reports
      
5-8.02–Loitering, curfew and truancy
      
5-8.03–Unclean persons
      
5-8.04–Unlawful advertising and defacing
      
5-8.05–Alcoholic beverages: Public places
      
5-8.06–Parental or property owner’s responsibility to supervise: Minors with
alcohol (Repealed)
      
5-8.07–Public urination and defecation prohibited
      
5-8.08–Regulation of camping
      
5-8.09–Prohibition on sitting and lying in certain public places
      
5-8.10–Aggressive begging
      
5-8.11–Encroachments onto public land
CHAPTER 9. REGISTRATION OF HOTEL AND MOTEL GUESTS
      
5-9.01–Definitions
      
5-9.02–Registers: Required
      
5-9.03–Registers: Contents
      
5-9.04–Registers: Signatures of guests
      
5-9.05–Registers: Maintenance as permanent record
      
5-9.06–Registers: Display
      
5-9.07–Violations
CHAPTER 10. REMOVAL OF ABANDONED, WRECKED,
DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLES
      
5-10.01–Findings and determinations
      
5-10.02–Definitions
      
5-10.03–Exceptions
      
5-10.04–Chapter provisions not exclusive remedy
      
5-10.05–Administration and enforcement
      
5-10.06–Right of entry of certain persons
      
5-10.07–Administrative costs
      
5-10.08–Community Development Director: Powers of removal
      
5-10.09–Public nuisances: Notices of intention to abate
      
5-10.10–Hearings: Notices: When required
      
5-10.11–Hearings: Procedure: Evidence: Rules: Decisions
      
5-10.12–Decisions of Community Development Director: Appeals to Council
      
5-10.13–Decisions: Orders: Abatement and removal of vehicles
      
5-10.14–Notices to the Department of Motor Vehicles
      
5-10.15–Assessment of costs
      
5-10.16–Abandonment violations
      
5-10.17–Refusal to remove violations
CHAPTER 11. WEAPONS
      
5-11.01–Discharging
      
5-11.02–Discharge or possession by minors
      
5-11.03–Reporting lost or stolen firearms
CHAPTER 12. UNLAWFUL CONDUCT ON PRIVATE SCHOOL CAMPUSES (Repealed)
CHAPTER 13. ALARM SYSTEMS
      
5-13.01–Purpose
      
5-13.02–Definitions
      
5-13.03–Alarm requirements
      
5-13.04–Reporting requirements
      
5-13.05–Alarm agents
      
5-13.06–Alarm response, enforcement, and penalties
      
5-13.07–Public nuisance alarms
      
5-13.08–Nonliability
      
5-13.09–Appeals
CHAPTER 14. OAK TREE PRESERVATION AND PROTECTION
(Re-designated as Articles 42 and 43 of Chapter 4 of Title 9)
CHAPTER 15. AMBULANCES
      
5-15.01–Definitions
      
5-15.02–Emergency Medical Response Manual
      
5-15.03–Licenses required
      
5-15.04–Existing ambulance services
      
5-15.05–Applications for licenses
      
5-15.06–Filing and display of rates
      
5-15.07–Ambulance certificates required
      
5-15.08–Insurance
      
5-15.09–Applications for ambulance certificates
      
5-15.10–Drivers and attendants with permits required
      
5-15.11–Applications for driver’s and attendant’s permits
      
5-15.12–Exceptions
      
5-15.13–Suspension and revocation of licenses and permits
      
5-15.14–Suspension and revocation of licenses and permits: Grounds
CHAPTER 16. PROHIBITION OF THE CONDUCT OF PUBLIC NUDITY
      
5-16.01–Purpose
      
5-16.02–Definitions
      
5-16.03–Unlawful public nudity
      
5-16.04–Other prohibitions: Public performances, counseling or assisting
      
5-16.05–Exceptions
CHAPTER 17. MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS, MASSAGE TECHNICIANS,
AND THE PRACTICE OF MASSAGE
      
5-17.01–Declaration of purpose and intent.
      
5-17.02–Definitions.
      
5-17.03–Administration.
      
5-17.04–Certifications required.
      
5-17.05–Massage establishment: Certificate of registration required.
      
5-17.06–Issuance of massage establishment certificate of registration.
      
5-17.07–Display of certificates.
      
5-17.08–Registration fee.
      
5-17.09–Business tax certificates.
      
5-17.10–Prohibited conduct.
      
5-17.11–Facilities and operations.
      
5-17.12–Inspections by City officials and notices of violation.
      
5-17.13–Exceptions.
      
5-17.14–Public nuisance abatement.
      
5-17.15–Revocation.
      
5-17.16–Notice of revocation.
      
5-17.17–Surrender of massage establishment certificate of registration.
      
5-17.18–Criminal liability, civil liability and penalties.
      
5-17.19–Appeal.
CHAPTER 18. DRUG PARAPHERNALIA (Repealed)
CHAPTER 19. PRICES OF EMERGENCY ITEMS AND SERVICES DURING A PROCLAIMED DISASTER
      
5-19.01–Definitions
      
5-19.05–Regulation of prices
      
5-19.10–Penalty
CHAPTER 20. GRAFFITI
      
5-20.01–Intent and purpose
      
5-20.02–Definitions
      
5-20.03–Prohibition of defacement/graffiti
      
5-20.04–Sale of aerosol paint to minors
      
5-20.05–Possession by minors
      
5-20.06–Signs required: Secured display of paint cans and markers
      
5-20.07–Removal
      
5-20.08–Reward
CHAPTER 21. NOISE
      
5-21.01–Noise from radios, television sets and similar devices
      
5-21.02–Powered equipment in residential areas
      
5-21.03–Loud, unnecessary and unusual noise
      
5-21.04–Emergency activities exempted
      
5-21.05–Loud parties or assemblages: Enforcement costs and response fees
CHAPTER 22. HEALTH CLUBS
      
5-22.01–Intent and purpose
      
5-22.02–Definitions
      
5-22.03–Bond or letter of credit requirements
      
5-22.04–Cash deposit, bond, or letter of credit exemption
      
5-22.05–Refund obligation: Cash deposit, bond or letter of credit enforcement
stayed
      
5-22.06–Administration of refunds
      
5-22.07–Deadline for refund claims
      
5-22.08–Term of health club contract
      
5-22.09–Disclosure statement
      
5-22.10–Phase in of compliance for bond, letter of credit, or cash deposit
requirements
CHAPTER 23. VENDING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
      
5-23.01–Purpose and findings
      
5-23.02–Definitions
      
5-23.03–Vendor permit required; Fees
      
5-23.04–Application for street vendor permit
      
5-23.05–Application for sidewalk vendor permit
      
5-23.06–Grant or denial of vendor application
      
5-23.07–Notice to applicant
      
5-23.08–Conditions of street vendor permit
      
5-23.09–Conditions of sidewalk vendor permit
      
5-23.10–Annual permit renewal
      
5-23.11–Revocation, suspension or modification of a vendor permit
      
5-23.12–Appeals
      
5-23.13–Regulations: Vending on private property
      
5-23.14–Exceptions
CHAPTER 24. LANDMARK TREE PRESERVATION AND PROTECTION
(Re-designated as Articles 42 and 43 of Chapter 4 of Title 9)
CHAPTER 25. MOBILE HOME RENT STABILIZATION
      
5-25.01–Findings and purpose
      
5-25.02–Definitions
      
5-25.03–Applicability
      
5-25.04–Planning Commission
      
5-25.05–Restrictions on rents
      
5-25.06–Automatic adjustments to rent
      
5-25.07–Vacancy decontrol/recontrol
      
5-25.08–Administrative adjustments to rent for capital improvements and
rehabilitation work
      
5-25.09–Planning Commission adjustments for just and reasonable return
      
5-25.10–Remedies
      
5-25.11–Refusal of mobile home owner, resident, or tenant to pay
      
5-25.12–Prior ordinances
      
5-25.13–Registration
      
5-25.14–Severability
CHAPTER 26. SOCIAL HOST LIABILITY
      
5-26.01–Findings
      
5-26.02–Purpose
      
5-26.03–Definitions
      
5-26.04–Public nuisance
      
5-26.05–Penalties for violation of this ordinance
      
5-26.06–Recovery of response costs
      
5-26.07–Billing and collection of response costs
      
5-26.08–Protected activities
CHAPTER 27. ALCOHOL ENERGY DRINK
      
5-27.01–Purpose
      
5-27.02–Definitions
      
5-27.03–Duty to post warning signs
CHAPTER 28. TREE PRUNING
      
5-28.01–Purpose
      
5-28.02–Definitions
      
5-28.03–Applicability
      
5-28.04–Pruning regulations
      
5-28.05–Penalties
      
5-28.06–Pruning permits
CHAPTER 29. CANNABIS
      
5-29.01–Purpose and intent
      
5-29.02–Legal authority
      
5-29.03–Commercial cannabis activities prohibited unless specifically
authorized
      
5-29.04–Compliance with laws
      
5-29.05–Definitions
      
5-29.06–Commercial cannabis business permit required
      
5-29.07–Cannabis employee permit required
      
5-29.08–Maximum number and type of authorized commercial cannabis businesses
permitted
      
5-29.09–Commercial cannabis business permit; Initial application procedure
      
5-29.10–Expiration of commercial cannabis business permits
      
5-29.11–Revocation of permits
      
5-29.12–Renewal applications
      
5-29.13–Effect of state license suspension, revocation, or termination
      
5-29.14–Effect of federal enforcement to suspend, prohibit, revoke, terminate
California or local entity licensing laws for recreational or commercial
cannabis
      
5-29.15–Appeals
      
5-29.16–Written request for appeal
      
5-29.17–Appeal hearing
      
5-29.18–Commercial cannabis business permit selection process
      
5-29.19–Change in location; Updated registration form
      
5-29.20–Transfer of commercial cannabis business permit
      
5-29.21–City business tax certificate
      
5-29.22–Building permits and inspection
      
5-29.23–Certification from the Community Development Director
      
5-29.24–Location and design of commercial cannabis businesses
      
5-29.25–Right to occupy and to use property
      
5-29.26–Limitations on City’s liability
      
5-29.27–Records and recordkeeping
      
5-29.28–Security measures
      
5-29.29–Restriction on alcohol and tobacco sales
      
5-29.30–Compliance with laws
      
5-29.31–Fees and charges
      
5-29.32–Miscellaneous operating requirements
      
5-29.33–Other operational requirements
      
5-29.34–Operating requirements for retailer facilities
      
5-29.35–Retailer non-store front and delivery services shall not be permitted
      
5-29.36–Packaging and labeling
      
5-29.37–Operating requirements for testing laboratory
      
5-29.38–Promulgation of regulations, standards and other legal duties
      
5-29.39–Community relations
      
5-29.40–Fees deemed debt to City of Thousand Oaks
      
5-29.41–Permit holder responsible for violations
      
5-29.42–Personal cultivation
      
5-29.43–Inspection and enforcement
      
5-29.44–Compliance with State regulation
      
5-29.45–Violations declared a public nuisance
      
5-29.46–Each violation a separate offense
      
5-29.47–Violations and penalties
      
5-29.48–Remedies cumulative and not exclusive
CHAPTER 1. ABANDONED APPLIANCES
(Sections 5-1.01 through 5-1.04, codified from Sections 1 through 4 of
Ordinance No. 127 and Section 6244, T.O.O.C., repealed by Section 13, Ordinance
No. 1250-NS, effective January 9, 1996)
CHAPTER 2. ADVERTISING DISTRIBUTION
Sec. 5-2.01. Declaration of public nuisance.
   The Council hereby finds and determines that entire communities within the
City and a considerable number of citizens are adversely affected by persons,
without consent, throwing, casting, distributing, scattering, and depositing
handbills, dodgers, circulars, newspapers, booklets, posters, printed matter,
and advertising literature upon public and private property. Such acts are
hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance.
(§ 1, Ord. 98)
Sec. 5-2.02. Public places.
   No person shall throw, cast, distribute, scatter, deposit, or place upon any
public place within the City, including, but not limited to, streets, alleys,
public parks, and school grounds, any handbill, dodger, circular, newspaper,
paper, booklet, poster, or any other printed matter or advertising literature
of any kind; provided, however, the same may be personally delivered to persons
who are willing to accept the same.
(§ 2, Ord. 98)
Sec. 5-2.03. Automobiles.
   No person shall throw, distribute, or place in or on any automobile or other
vehicle in the City any handbill, dodger, circular, newspaper, paper, booklet,
poster, or any other printed matter or advertising literature without first
having obtained the permission of the owner or person in possession thereof.
(§ 3, Ord. 98)
Sec. 5-2.04. Distribution at residences and private businesses. 
(§ 4, Ord. 98, repealed by § 1, Ord. 337-NS, eff. December 21, 1972; reenacted
by § 2, Ord. 337-NS, eff. December 21, 1972, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1116-NS,
eff. August 22, 1991, and § 1, Ord. 1407-NS, eff. June 19, 2003, repealed by
Ord. 1437-NS, eff. July 7, 2005)
Sec. 5-2.05. Filing of objections to leaving of materials. 
(§ 3, Ord. 337-NS, eff. December 21, 1972, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1116-NS,
eff. August 22, 1991, and § 1, Ord. 1407-NS, eff. June 19, 2003, repealed by
Ord. 1437-NS, eff. July 7, 2005)
Sec. 5-2.06. List of objections: Duty to obtain. 
(§ 3, Ord. 337-NS, eff. December 21, 1972, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1116-NS,
eff. August 22, 1991, and § 1, Ord. 1407-NS, ef. June 19, 2003, repealed by
Ord. 1437-NS, eff. July 7, 2005)
Sec. 5-2.07. Severability.
   If any section of this chapter is invalid, all valid sections which are
severable from the invalid section shall remain in effect. If any section of
this chapter is invalid in one or more of its applications, the section shall
remain in effect in all valid applications which are severable from the invalid
applications.
(§ 3, Ord. 337-NS, eff. December 21, 1972, as renumbered by §§ 4, 5, Ord. 1116-
NS, eff. August 22, 1991)
CHAPTER 3. AIR POLLUTION
Sec. 5-3.01. Statement of necessity.
   Recently residents adjacent to construction projects are experiencing
discomfort and annoyance from contaminants discharged by reason of
construction, and construction work in residential areas is in some instances
endangering the property and health of residents adjacent to the construction
area, and there exists a present damage and hazard to the public safety and
health because of the air contaminants generated by construction in residential
areas.
(§ 4, Ord. 140)
Sec. 5-3.02. Prohibited acts.
   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, from any source
whatsoever such quantities of air contaminants or other materials which cause
injury, detriment, nuisance, or annoyance to any considerable number of persons
or to the public, or which endanger the comfort, repose, health, or safety of
any such person or the public, or which cause, or have a natural tendency to
cause, injury or damage to humans or property.
(§ 1, Ord. 140)
Sec. 5-3.03. Enforcement.
   The Community Development Director shall be responsible for enforcing the
provisions of this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 140)
CHAPTER 4. CLOSING-OUT SALES
Sec. 5-4.01. Permits: Required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise, represent, or hold out
that any sale of goods, wares, or merchandise is an insurance, bankruptcy,
liquidation, mortgage, insolvent’s, assignee’s, executor’s, administrator’s,
receiver’s, removal, or closing-out sale, or any particular department of such
stock of goods, wares, or merchandise, under the guise of discontinuing
business or discontinuing that particular department, or a sale of goods,
wares, or merchandise damaged by fire, smoke, water, or otherwise, or a sale of
goods from the stock of a bankrupt, receiver, trustee, insurance company,
receivership, or trusteeship, or to conduct such sale unless he shall have
first obtained a permit to conduct such sale from the City Manager.
(§ 1 (a), Ord. 65)
Sec. 5-4.02. Permits: Applications: Form.
   Applications for permits for the sales set forth in Section 5-4.01 of this
chapter shall be in writing and under oath showing:
   (a)   All the facts in regard to the insurance, bankruptcy, liquidation,
mortgaging, insolvency, assignment, administration, receivership, trusteeship,
or removal by reason of which such sale is to be conducted, or in regard to the
closing out of the applicant’s stock of goods, wares, or merchandise damaged by
fire, smoke, water, or otherwise;
   (b)   All the facts in regard to the sale which the applicant proposes to
conduct and the place and manner of conducting the sale;
   (c)   An inventory of the goods, wares, and merchandise to be sold at such
sale or auction;
   (d)   A statement of the names of the person from whom the goods, wares, and
merchandise to be sold was obtained;
   (e)   The date of delivery of such goods, wares, and merchandise to the
person applying for the permit;
   (f)   The place from which the goods, wares, and merchandise was last taken;
   (g)   All the details necessary to fully identify the goods, wares, and
merchandise so to be sold;
   (h)   The proposed period of time over which such sales shall continue,
which period shall not exceed three (3) months; and
   (i)   The type of sale the applicant proposes to advertise or conduct.
(§ 1 (e) and (f), Ord. 65)
Sec. 5-4.03. Permits: Applications: Filing fees.
   Applicants for such closing-out sales shall, at the time of such
application, pay a minimum filing fee in the amount of One Hundred and no/
100ths ($100.00) Dollars, plus additional fees as follows:
   (a)   For any amount of net inventory over and above Five Thousand and no/
100ths ($5,000.00) Dollars up to Ten Thousand and no/100ths ($10,000.00)
Dollars, the sum of Twenty and no/100ths ($20.00) Dollars per One Thousand and
no/100ths ($1,000.00) Dollars, or fraction thereof;
   (b)   For the next Ten Thousand and no/100ths ($10,000.00) Dollars of net
inventory, the sum of Ten and no/100ths ($10.00) Dollars per One Thousand and
no/100ths ($1,000.00) Dollars or fraction thereof; and
   (c)   For all over Twenty Thousand and no/100ths ($20,000.00) Dollars of net
inventory, the sum of Five and no/100ths ($5.00) Dollars per One Thousand and
no/100ths ($1,000.00) Dollars, or fraction thereof.
   Any person or business with a fixed place of business within the City shall
be exempt from the payment of a fee but shall be required to abide by all the
other terms and conditions of this chapter.
(§§ 1 (d) and 12, Ord. 65)
Sec. 5-4.04. Permits: Applications: Investigations.
   The City Manager shall not grant any permit pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter until the application therefor shall have been referred to the
Police Department for its investigation and report thereon.
(§ 1 (f), Ord. 65)
Sec. 5-4.05. Permits: Applications: False statements.
   Any person making a false statement in the application provided for in this
chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in
Section 5-4.15 of this chapter.
(§ 3, Ord. 65)
Sec. 5-4.06. Permits: Applications: Filing by City Manager.
   The City Manager shall endorse upon such application the date of its filing
and shall preserve the same as a record of his office.
(§ 2, Ord. 65)
Sec. 5-4.07. Permits: Issuance.
   If the City Manager shall be satisfied that such proposed sale is of the
character represented by the applicant, that the applicant is of good moral
character, that neither the applicant nor any of its officers, directors, or
members have violated the provisions of this chapter, and that the advertising
or conducting of such sale will not be injurious to the peace. health, safety,
or welfare of the people of the City, the City Manager may issue a revocable
permit to the person applying for the same, authorizing him to advertise and
conduct a sale of the particular kind set forth in the application in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
(§ 1 (g), Ord. 65)
Sec. 5-4.08. Permits: Extension of term.
   Upon a sworn application to the City Manager at any time during the three
(3) months’ term of such permit that all the goods, wares, and merchandise
described and inventoried in the original application have not been sold,
accompanied by a statement or inventory of what remains thereof, a permit
supplemental to the original permit may be issued by the City Manager upon the
same terms and conditions as the original permit, granting authority to
continue such sale for a further period of three (3) months.
(§ 1 (f), Ord. 65)
Sec. 5-4.09. Permits: Conditions.
   The permit provided for in this chapter shall be valid only for a sale or
auction of the goods, wares, and merchandise inventoried and described in the
application for such permit in the manner and at the time and place set forth
in such application, and any removal of such goods, wares, and merchandise so
inventoried and described in such application from the place of sale set forth
in such application shall cause such goods, wares, and merchandise to lose
their identity as an insurance, bankrupt, liquidation, mortgage, insolvent’s,
assignee’s, executor’s, administrator’s, receiver’s, or trustee’s stock of
goods, wares, or merchandise damaged by fire, smoke, or water, or otherwise,
and no permit shall thereafter be issued for the conducting of a sale of any of
such goods, wares, or merchandise so removed from the place set forth and
described in such application pursuant to the provisions of this chapter at any
other place.
(§ 4, Ord. 65)
Sec. 5-4.10. Investigations.
   The City Manager or any other City officer designated by the City Manager
shall at all times have the power, and it shall be his duty, to make
examinations or investigations of the business, and the books, records,
accounts, and other papers pertaining thereto, of any company or individual
theretofore permitted or authorized to conduct such sales.
(§ 1 (c), Ord. 65)
Sec. 5-4.11. Additions to stock before sales.
   No person, in contemplation of conducting an insurance, bankrupt,
liquidation, mortgage, insolvent’s, assignee’s, executor’s, administrator’s,
receiver’s, or trustee’s removal or closing-out sale or auction, or a sale of
goods, wares, or merchandise damaged by fire, smoke, water, or otherwise, or a
sale of goods from the stock of a bankrupt, receiver, trustee, insurance
company, receivership, or trusteeship, pursuant to a permit, as provided in
this chapter, shall order any goods, wares, or merchandise for the purpose of
selling and disposing of the same at such sale.
   If the City Manager determines that any unusual purchases and additions to
the stock of such goods, wares, or merchandise have been made within sixty (60)
days prior to the filing of the application for a permit to conduct such sale,
he shall refuse to issue the permit.
(§ 5, Ord. 65)
Sec. 5-4.12. Additions to stock during sales.
   It shall be unlawful for any person carrying on or conducting an insurance,
bankrupt, liquidation, mortgage, insolvent, assignee’s, executor’s,
administrator’s, receiver’s, or trustee’s removal or closing-out sale, or sale
of goods, wares, or merchandise damaged by fire, smoke, water, or otherwise, or
a sale of goods from the stock of a bankrupt, receiver, trustee, insurance
company, receivership, or trusteeship, pursuant to a permit granted as provided
in this chapter to add, during the continuance of such sale, any goods, wares,
or merchandise, for the purpose of selling the same, to the stock of goods,
wares, or merchandise described and inventoried in his original application for
such permit, and no goods, wares, or merchandise shall be sold at or during
such sale excepting the goods, wares, or merchandise described and inventoried
in such original application. Each and every addition of goods, wares, or
merchandise for the purpose of sale to such stock of goods, wares, or
merchandise described and inventories in such application and each sale of such
goods, wares, or merchandise as were not inventoried and described in such
application shall constitute a separate offense. Any violation of the
provisions of this section shall be a misdemeanor punishable as provided in
Section 5-4.15 of this chapter.
(§ 6, Ord. 65)
Sec. 5-4.13. Advertising.
   Any person who shall advertise, represent, or hold out any sale or auction
of goods, wares, or merchandise to be an insurance, bankrupt, liquidation,
mortgage, insolvent, assignee’s, executor’s, administrator’s, receiver’s, or
trustee’s removal or closing-out sale, or a sale of goods, wares, or
merchandise damaged by fire, water, smoke, or otherwise, or a sale of goods
from the stock of a bankrupt, receiver, trustee, insurance company,
receivership, or trusteeship without first complying with the provisions of
this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Code pursuant to
Section 1-2.01 of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code.
(§ 7, Ord. 65)
Sec. 5-4.14. Exceptions.
   (a)   Official sales. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to
sheriffs, constables, or other public or court officers or to any other person
acting upon the license, direction, or authority of any State or Federal court
selling goods, wares, or merchandise in the course of their official duties and
pursuant to the provisions of a statute authorizing such sale.
   (b)   Publishers of advertisement. The provisions of this chapter shall not
be deemed to apply to any publisher of a newspaper, magazine, or other
publication who publishes such advertisement in good faith without knowledge of
its false, deceptive, or misleading character or without knowledge that the
provisions of this chapter have not been complied with.
(§§ 9 and 10, Ord. 65)
Sec. 5-4.15. Violations.
   Any person who shall hold, conduct, or carry on any sale or auction of
goods, wares, or merchandise as an insurance, bankrupt, mortgage, insolvent’s,
assignee’s, executor’s, administrator’s, receiver’s, or trustee’s removal or
closing-out sale, or a sale of goods, wares, or merchandise damaged by fire,
water, or otherwise, or a sale of goods, wares, or merchandise from the stock
of a bankrupt, receiver, trustee, insurance company, receivership, or
trusteeship contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or whose advertising,
statement, representation, or assertion is false or untrue in any respect, or
which, by the exercise of reasonable care, should be known to be false or
untrue, deceptive, or misleading, or who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Code pursuant to
Section 1-2.01 of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code.
(§ 8, Ord. 65, as amended by § XIII, Ord. 770-NS, eff. February 26, 1981)
CHAPTER 5. PUBLIC DANCES
Sec. 5-5.01. Definitions.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   (a)   “Alcoholic beverage” shall mean any beverage which contains alcohol
liquor, spirits, wine or beer, and which beverage contains greater than one-
half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by volume.
   (b)   “Minor’s dance” shall mean any activity or function, whether or not
admission is charged, to which persons between the ages of sixteen (16) years
and twenty (20) years, inclusive, are invited, allowed or permitted to attend,
watch or participate in dancing, and one or more persons does so attend, watch
or participate. A minor’s dance shall not include private functions, or events
held by religious or adult-supervised youth organizations, the school district,
the park district, or public agency sponsored activities, nor include a private
dance conducted in a residence.
   (c)   “Public dance” shall mean an activity or function, whether or not
admission is charged, where the general public is invited or allowed to attend,
watch or participate in dancing, and one or more persons does so attend, watch
or participate, and which activity does not occur within a dancing
establishment, as defined, and with a permit issued under Title 9 of this code.
   (d)   “Good moral character” shall mean:
   (1)   Within five (5) years of the date of application, the applicant has
not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any felony offense
involving the sale of a controlled substance specified in Sections 11054,
11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058 of the Health and Safety Code; or any offense in a
jurisdiction outside the State of California which is the equivalent of any of
the aforesaid offenses;
   (2)   Within five (5) years of the date of application, the applicant has
not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any felony offense
involving the use of a controlled substance, other than marijuana, specified in
Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058 of the Health and Safety Code;
   (3)   The applicant is not currently required to register under the
provisions of Section 290 of the Penal Code or Section 11590 of the Health and
Safety Code;
   (4)   Within five (5) years of the date of application, the applicant has
not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any violation of
Sections 266(i), 315, 316, 318, or subsection (b) of Section 647 of the Penal
Code, or a conspiracy or attempt to commit any such offense, or any offense in
a jurisdiction outside the State of California which is the equivalent of any
of the aforesaid offenses;
   (5)   The applicant has not been subjected to a permanent injunction against
the conducting or maintaining of a nuisance pursuant to Section 11225 through
11235 of the Penal Code, or any similar provisions of law in a jurisdiction
outside the State of California;
   (6)   The applicant has not been convicted by a court of competent
jurisdiction of any offense involving gambling as defined in Sections 319
through 337.9 of the Penal Code; or
   (7)   The applicant has not been convicted by a court of competent
jurisdiction of any violent felony.
(§ 2, Ord. 1187-NS, eff. October 5, 1993)
Sec. 5-5.02. Public or minor’s dances: Permits Required.
   No person shall operate, hold, conduct or sponsor a public dance or a
minor's dance on any street, park, parkway, public property, parking lot, or on
any other private property or place, in whole or in part, or in any building,
house, hall, room apartment, tent, without first obtaining a permit pursuant to
this chapter. However, this chapter shall not apply to:
   (a)   Dancing establishments in any restaurant, bar, hotel or motel, club or
lodge, business, or nightclub, wherein dancing is allowed and participated in
on a recurring basis by one or more persons and such use has been authorized by
a permit issued under Title 9 of this Code.
   (b)   Dance academies, schools or studios where dancing is permitted only by
students and instructors engaged in dancing instruction.
   (c)   Public or private schools, which host dances solely for students, or
adult supervised youth organizations, City, park district or other governmental
facilities which host dances.
   (d)   Motels, restaurants and hotels which rent enclosed banquet rooms for
private parties not open to the public.
   (e)   Private parties not open to the public where dancing is conducted
entirely within a residence or within a rented private banquet room.
(§ 2, Ord. 1187-NS, eff. October 5, 1993)
Sec. 5-5.03. Dance permits: Applications: Form.
   Written applications for permits to conduct a public dance or a minor’s
dance shall be filed in the office of the City Manager together with the
corresponding processing fee as set by resolution of the City Council. Written
applications for permits shall be made no less than twenty-one (21) days prior
to the date of the requested public dance or minor’s dance and shall set forth
the following information:
   (a)   The name and residence of the applicant, sponsor and of all other
persons having an interest in the event;
   (b)   The date(s) and exact location where the public dance is to be
conducted;
   (c)   The hours of operation of the dance; and
   (d)   A statement, signed by the applicant, affirming that the applicant and
all those who will be employed by the applicant for the conducting of a public
dance are of good moral character and that the requested dance will be carried
out in such a way so as not to be detrimental to the morals, peace, safety and
well-being of the community;
   (e)   The anticipated number of participants, traffic patterns for ingress
and egress to the location, and the parking availability and the occupancy
capacity, such as pursuant to the building and fire codes occupancy levels for
such building;
   (f)   For a minor’s dance, the number of and names and addresses of the
adult supervisors who will be in attendance at the dance;
   (g)   The minimum number of law enforcement officers, or security personnel,
licensed by the State, in lieu thereof, to be employed by the sponsoring group
or individual, to be present at all times during the dance. The minimum number
of law enforcement officers or security personnel shall not be less than one
for each one hundred (100) minors, or fraction thereof, in attendance or such
larger number as may be deemed necessary by the Chief of Police;
   (h)   A statement, signed by the applicant, affirming that there will be no
alcoholic beverages served or permitted on the premises, and that the requested
dance will be carried out in such a way so as not to be detrimental to the
morals, peace, safety and well-being of the community.
   (i)   Applications for minor’s dances shall be forwarded to the Chief of
Police for investigation as is deemed necessary. The Chief of Police shall
respond within fourteen (14) days with a recommendation to the City Manager for
approval or denial of the permit.
(§ 2, Ord. 1187-NS, eff. October 5, 1993)
Sec. 5-5.04. Permits: Fees and approval.
   (a)   Public dances. Provided the processing fee is paid and a fully
completed application is filed, the City Manager shall approve the application
for the permit, unless one or more of the following circumstances exist:
   (1)   Intentional misstatements were made in the application;
   (2)   The sponsoring individual or any member of the sponsoring group has,
by reason of past activities, demonstrated a lack of good moral character; or
   (3)   By reason of the location or place where such public dance is to be
located:
   (i)   It would be incompatible with or detrimental to the adjoining or
neighboring existing uses,
   (ii)   The facilities used do not meet any building and safety regulations,
or
   (iii)    It would be injurious to public health, order, or morals.
   (b)   Minor’s dances. Provided the processing fee is paid, a fully completed
application is filed and the Chief of Police has responded, the City Manager
shall approve the application for the permit, unless one or more of the
following circumstances exist:
   (1)   Intentional misstatements were made in the application;
   (2)   The sponsoring individual or any member of the sponsoring group, has,
by reason of past activities, demonstrated a lack of good moral character; or
   (3)   By reason of the location or place where such public dance is to be
located, it would be incompatible with adjoining or neighboring uses, or
detrimental to the public health, order, or morals, or violate zoning or
building and safety regulations; or
   (4)   The Chief of Police has recommended denial based upon information of
fraud in the application or lack of good moral character discovered during
review of the application and subsequent investigation.
(§ 2, Ord. 1187-NS, eff. October 5, 1993)
Sec. 5-5.05. Permits: No transferability.
   The permits provided for in this chapter shall authorize the public dance or
minor’s dance to be carried on only at the place and by the person(s) set forth
in the application, and shall not be transferable except upon application to,
and approval by, the City Manager.
(§ 2, Ord. 1187-NS, eff. October 5, 1993)
Sec. 5-5.06. Conditions of permit.
   All permits shall be subject to the following conditions:
   (a)   Hours of operation. Public dances and minor’s dances shall not be
permitted between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. of any day. The permit
shall list the date(s) and authorized location of the dance.
   (b)   Security and supervision.
   (1)   Public dances. Public dances shall provide sufficient security
personnel to maintain order and enforce the rules and the provisions of this
Code. Security shall also be required in parking areas which serve these
establishments. The number of law enforcement officers or licensed security
personnel shall be equal to one per one hundred (100) persons or fraction
thereof of the capacity of the establishment as determined by the fire
department. Additional security may be provided with nonlicensed persons, if
necessary.
   (2)   Minor’s dances. In addition to the required law enforcement officers
or licensed security personnel, minor’s dances shall also require the presence
of adult supervisors. The number of adult supervisors present at a minor’s
dance shall not be less than two (2) supervisors or one supervisor per fifty
(50) minors or fraction thereof in attendance, whichever is greater.
   Adult supervisors and licensed security personnel shall not dance or engage
in any activities which will detract from their ability to fulfill the primary
responsibility of supervision, enforcement of rules, monitoring of entrances
and parking lots, and the like.
   (c)   Minor’s dances: Leaving and reentering. No participant admitted to a
minor's dance shall be permitted to leave and re-enter. No pass-out checks
shall be issued, unless required by the physical arrangement of the premises.
   (d)   Telephones. Public dances and minor's dances shall provide at least
one pay telephone for use by patrons or attendees, and shall have at least one
private telephone for use by the operators of the establishment.
   (e)   Minor’s dances: posting of rules and permit. At least one copy of the
house rules, the conditions of the permit and the provisions of this chapter
shall be posted in a conspicuous location inside and outside the place where
the minor’s dance is held, so that those attending the dance may read them.
Additionally, at least one copy of the duly issued permit shall be posted in a
conspicuous location inside the place where the minor’s dance is held.
   (f)   Inspections. Police officers, code enforcement officers, and fire
department personnel shall be admitted to all public and minor’s dances without
an admission charge, for the purposes of inspection, at any time during the
operating hours of such an operation.
(§ 2, Ord. 1187-NS, eff. October 5, 1993)
Sec. 5-5.07. Noise.
   No person in charge of a public or minor’s dance shall allow the noise level
of the attendees, music or entertainment to reach an excessive level which may
be heard by residences, hospitals, convalescent hospitals, hotels, motels, or
other noise-sensitive uses.
   Noise shall be deemed excessive as defined by Chapter 21 of Title 5 of this
Code.
(§ 2, Ord. 1187-NS, eff. October 5, 1993)
Sec. 5-5.08. Minor's dances: Alcoholic beverages.
   It shall be unlawful to bring, sell, consume, or make available any
alcoholic beverage on the premises in or about which any minor's dance is held.
Admission to a minor’s dance shall be denied to any person showing evidence of
drinking any alcoholic beverage or who has any alcoholic beverage on his
person.
(§ 2, Ord. 1187-NS, eff. October 5, 1993)
Sec. 5-5.09. Revocation.
   Should an unusual level of activity involving unruly or violent behavior,
violation of this chapter restricting alcoholic beverages, or violation of
relevant State codes involving the use or sale of illicit drugs, become
apparent to the police department, a police representative will contact the
City Manager and may result in revocation proceedings by the City Manager or
additional conditions designed to mitigate ongoing problems.
(§ 2, Ord. 1187-NS, eff. October 5, 1993)
CHAPTER 6. BINGO GAMES*
*   Chapter 6 entitled “Fortune-Telling,” consisting of Sections 5-6.01 through
5-6.03, codified from Ordinance No. 33, repealed by Section I, Ordinance No.
428-NS, effective March 21, 1974.
Sec. 5-6.01. Bingo game defined.
   “Bingo game” shall mean a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the
basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conforms to numbers or
symbols selected at random.
(§ 2, Ord. 694-NS, eff. November 9, 1978)
Sec. 5-6.02. Licenses: Applications.
   Upon application, the Sheriff is authorized to issue a license for a bingo
game, pursuant to Section 326.5 of the Penal Code of the State, for the period
through June 30 of any given year. The license may be issued and renewed if the
Sheriff is satisfied that each of the following conditions are and will be met:
   (a)   The license shall be applied for, granted to, for the benefit of, and
administered and conducted only by organizations exempted from the payment of
the bank and corporation tax by Sections 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e,
23701f, 23701g, and 23701l of the California Revenue and Taxation Code of the
State and by mobile home park associations and senior citizen organizations.
   (b)   The individual filing the application on behalf of the organization
shall indicate:
   (1)   The organization’s name and address;
   (2)   Proof of its exempt status as shown by a determination issued by the
Franchise Tax Board of the State pursuant to the Revenue and Taxation Code of
the State or proof of status as a mobile home park association or senior
citizen organization; and
   (3)   Proof of his authority to file the application on behalf of the
organization.
   (c)   The organization shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or
leased by it, and which property is used by such organization for an office or
for the performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized.
The property shall be identified in the application.
   (d)   A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the
organization which organized the bingo game and they shall not receive a
profit, wage, or salary from the bingo game. Only the organization authorized
to conduct a bingo game shall operate, promote, supervise, or hold a financial
interest in the conduct of the bingo game.
   (e)   A bingo game shall be open to all members of the public, other than
minors, who are physically present. The maximum number of players on the
property shall be estimated in the application.
   (f)   All proceeds and profits derived from the conduct of bingo games shall
be used only for charitable purposes and shall be kept in a special fund or
account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account; provided,
however, a portion of such proceeds may be used for:
   (1)   Prizes awarded during the conduct of a bingo game, which prizes shall
not exceed Two Hundred Fifty and no/100ths ($250.00) Dollars in cash or kind,
or both, for each separate game; and
   (2)   All proceeds and profits derived from the conduct of bingo games shall
be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other
fund or account or used for any purpose except as authorized by Penal Code
Section 326.5, and as may be amended.
   (g)   The organization shall keep a current and running record available for
inspection by the Sheriff at his request, indicating:
   (1)   The amount in the above-mentioned special fund account;
   (2)   The dates any bingo games were played;
   (3)   The number of bingo games played for each date;
   (4)   The number of players for each date;
   (5)   The amount of fees or moneys collected for each date; and
   (6)   The total prizes awarded for each date.
(§ 1, Ord. 694-NS, eff. November 9, 1978, as amended by § 14, Ord. 1250-NS,
eff. January 9, 1996, as amended by part 14, Ord. 1437-NS, eff. July 7, 2005)
Sec. 5-6.03. Licenses: Applications: Procedure.
   Upon the receipt of the application for a bingo game license, the Sheriff
shall process the application and notify any department or agency which has a
legitimate interest in the granting or denying of the application. The Sheriff
shall notify the applicant of the granting or denying of the application within
thirty (30) days after its receipt.
(§ 1, Ord. 694-NS, eff. November 9, 1978)
Sec. 5-6.04. Licenses: Applications: Denial: Appeals.
   The applicant may petition the Council to appeal the denial of an
application for a bingo game license.
(§ 1, Ord. 694-NS, eff. November 9, 1978)
Sec. 5-6.05. Licenses: Revocation: Petitions.
   The Sheriff may petition the Council to revoke any bingo game license on the
ground that the conditions of the license have not been met.
(§ 1, Ord. 694-NS, eff. November 9, 1978)
Sec. 5-6.06. Licenses: Revocation: Petitions: Council hearings.
   A petitioner shall file a written statement with the Clerk of the Council
requesting a hearing before the Council and indicating the basis for the
petition. The Clerk of the Council shall set the hearing within thirty (30)
days and give notice to the Sheriff, in the event of an appeal, and to the
licensee, in the event of a request for revocation. At the hearing before the
Council, the petitioner shall have the burden of proof.
(§ 1, Ord. 694-NS, eff. November 9, 1978)
CHAPTER 7. SUBSTANDARD HOUSING OWNERS*
*   Sections 5-7.01 through 5-7.04, codified from Section 6150, T.O.O.C.,
repealed by § 15, Ordinance No. 1250-NS, effective January 9, 1996; Sections 5-
7.01 through 5-7.04, codified from § 1, Ordinance No. 1319-NS, effective June
4, 1998)
Sec. 5-7.01. Findings and determinations.
   (a)   Substandard buildings as defined in the Uniform Housing Code pose a
threat to the health and safety of those who live in such conditions and, if
unattended, detrimentally impact property values, compromise the general
welfare of the surrounding community, and erode public confidence in its local
government. Experience from larger cities reveals that left unchecked,
substandard housing leads to physical and economic blight, demoralizing entire
neighborhoods.
   (b)   Currently, Thousand Oaks has a relatively young housing stock and does
not have a widespread problem with substandard buildings. As the housing stock
ages, the occurrence of substandard conditions will increase. However, it is a
better practice to anticipate future problems and act now to minimize or avoid
these problems. Whenever possible, property owners deserve to be notified and
provided an opportunity to abate substandard conditions occurring on their
property. However, a Property Owner’s repeated failure to correct substandard
conditions will not be tolerated.
   (c)   The purpose of the ordinance codified in this chapter is to identify
those property owners who do not comply with final orders of the Code
Compliance Officer, designate such property owners as “Substandard Housing
Owners,” and place all properties owned by Substandard Housing Owners into a
proactive code compliance program, in order to encourage Property Owners to
properly manage, control and maintain their properties and to deter Property
Owners from allowing people to live in substandard conditions.
(§ 1, Ord. 1319-NS, eff. June 4, 1998)
Sec. 5-7.02. Definitions.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply:
   (a)   “Property Owner” shall mean an individual having any interest in any
real property intended for human habitation, or an individual having any
interest in any entity, partnership, trust, or corporation having any interest
in any real property intended for human habitation. Property owner shall not
include a person with only a mortgage, lien, or similar security interest in
such property.
   (b)   “Substandard Housing Owner” shall mean any Property Owner who, on two
(2) or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period, has failed to obey a
“final order” of the Code Compliance Officer made pursuant to the Uniform
Housing Code.
(§ 1, Ord. 1319-NS, eff. June 4, 1998)
Sec. 5-7.03. Substandard Housing Owner properties; proactive code compliance.
   All property with a building or buildings intended for human habitation
owned by a Substandard Housing Owner shall be subject to the Substandard
Housing Owner Proactive Code Compliance Policy adopted by resolution of the
City Council.
(§ 1, Ord. 1319-NS, eff. June 4, 1998)
Sec. 5-7.04. Removal of property from proactive enforcement.
   A property may be removed from enforcement under the Substandard Housing
Owner Proactive Code Compliance Policy if: (1) a City inspection of the subject
building, condominium unit or apartment unit uncovers no violations of the
Uniform Housing Code, or, if violations are discovered, are abated within the
period required by the Code Compliance Officer; or (2) if after a visual
exterior inspection no violations of any applicable laws or codes are
identified by any City-designated enforcement officers.
(§ 1, Ord. 1319-NS, eff. June 4, 1998)
CHAPTER 8. MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
Sec. 5-8.01. False reports.
   Any person who, in any matter within the jurisdiction of any department or
agency of the City, knowingly falsifies, conceals, or covers up by any trick,
scheme, or device any fact, or makes any false, fictitious, or fraudulent
statement or representation, or makes or uses any false writing or document
when he knows the same to contain any false, fictitious, or fraudulent
statement or entry shall be guilty of a violation of this Code pursuant to
Section 1-2.01 of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code. The provisions of this
section shall not apply to any reports provided for in Section 148.5 of the
Penal Code of the State.
(§ 6241, T.O.O.C., as amended by § XIV, Ord. 770-NS, eff. February 26, 1981)
Sec. 5-8.02. Loitering, curfew and truancy.
   (a)   Definitions. “Loitering” shall mean to idle, to loaf, lie down, to sit
or stand by without any apparent purpose for a sustained period of time, or to
walk, wander, drive or ride about aimlessly without lawful purpose.
   (b)   Minors: Nighttime. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age
of eighteen (18) years to loiter in or upon public streets, sidewalks,
highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public
places or public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, entertainment
places, vacant lots, or be on private property without the express or implied
consent of the owner or person having the care and control of such private
property, or other unsupervised places between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m.
   (c)   Minors: Daytime. It is unlawful for any person under the age of
eighteen (18) years, who is subject to compulsory education or to compulsory
continuation education to loiter, idle, wander, or be in or upon the public
streets, sidewalks, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public
grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement and eating
places, vacant lots or any unsupervised place during the hours of 8:30 a.m. and
1:30 p.m. on days when school is in session.
   (d)   Minors: Responsibility of parents and guardians. It shall be unlawful
for the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a
minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to permit such minor to loiter in or
upon public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other
public grounds, public places or public buildings, places of amusement and
entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
   (e)   Parents: Liability for lack of supervision over minors.
   (1)   Civil penalty. Every parent or legal guardian who, by any act or
omission, or by threats, contributes to, or induces or endeavors to induce any
dependent child or ward to fail or refuse to conform to any lawful order of law
enforcement personnel, probation department, or of the juvenile court, or to
conform to the requirements of the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code concerning
loitering, curfew or truancy, shall be subject to a civil penalty. For purposes
of this section, a parent or legal guardian to any person under the age of
eighteen (18) years shall have the duty to exercise reasonable care,
supervision, protection and control over their minor child or ward.
   Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be liable for a
civil penalty up to, but not to exceed, Two Thousand Five Hundred and no/100ths
($2,500.00) Dollars for each violation, which shall be assessed and recovered
in a civil action brought by the District Attorney or the City Attorney.
   (2)   Cost recovery. As determined by the Chief of Police, or his or her
designee, the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) of a minor committing any public
offense amounting to an act of wilful misconduct in violation of Welfare and
Institutions Code Section 602, where police personnel provide services relating
to the detention, processing or supervision of minors that are over and above
the normal services usually provided by the Thousand Oaks Police Department,
may be assessed and billed for the cost of providing such personnel for such
services beyond those normally provided by said department.
   Any person receiving a bill for police services pursuant to this chapter
may, within fifteen (15) days after the billing date, file a written request
appealing the imposition of said charges. Any billing sent pursuant to this
section shall inform the billed party of the right to appeal said billing. Any
appeal regarding such billing shall be heard by the City Manager, or his or her
designee, as the hearing officer. Within ten days after the hearing, the
hearing officer shall give written notice of the decision to the appellant.
Upon the filing of a request for an appeal, payment of the bill for the police
services shall be suspended until notice of the decision of the hearing
officer. If the appeal is denied in part or in full, all amounts due to the
City shall be paid within thirty (30) days after notice of the decision of the
hearing officer.
   (3)   Cumulative remedies. The remedies provided in this section are in
addition to the remedies and penalties available under the Thousand Oaks
Municipal Code, and all other laws of this state.
   (f)   Minors: Exceptions. The provisions of subsections (b), (c), (d) and
(e) of this section shall not apply when:
   (1)   The minor is accompanied by his or her parent, legal guardian or other
adult person having the legal care or custody of the minor, or by his or her
spouse eighteen (18) years of age or older; or
   (2)   The minor is engaged on an errand as directed by his or her parent or
legal guardian or other adult person having the legal care or custody of the
minor, or by his or her spouse eighteen (18) years of age or older; or
   (3)   The minor is returning directly home from a public meeting, or a place
of public entertainment, such as a movie, play, sporting event or school
activity; or
   (4)   The presence of such minor in said place or places is connected with
or required with respect to a business, trade, profession or occupation in
which the minor is lawfully engaged; or
   (5)   The minor is going or coming directly from or to his/her place of
gainful employment, or to or from a medical appointment; or
   (6)   The minor student has permission to leave school campus for lunch or
school-related activity and has in his/her possession a valid, school issued,
off-campus permit; or
   (7)   The minor is in the active military service of the United States; or
   (8)   The minor is exempt by law from compulsory education or compulsory
continuation education; or
   (9)   When the minor is authorized to be absent from his or her school
pursuant to the provisions of California Education Code Section 48205, or any
other applicable state or federal law; or
   (10)    The minor is lawfully exercising First Amendment rights protected by
the United States Constitution as part of an organized peaceable assembly to
petition; or
   (11)    The minor is traveling to the custody, care or control of his or her
parent, legal guardian or other adult person having the legal care or custody
of the minor, from the custody, care or control of his or her parent, legal
guardian or other adult person having the legal care or custody of the minor.
   (g)   Public property. No person shall loiter or stand in or upon any public
highway, alley, sidewalk, crosswalk or other public way open for pedestrian or
vehicular travel, or otherwise occupy any portion thereof, in such a manner as
unreasonably to annoy or molest any pedestrian thereon or as to obstruct or
unreasonably interfere with the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
   (h)   Private property open to the public. No person shall loiter or stand
in or upon any parking lot, shopping center or other commercial or industrial
property generally open to the public, or otherwise occupy any portion thereof,
in such a manner as unreasonably obstructs, injures or interferes with the
traffic flow or any lawful business or occupation carried on by the owner of
such land, his/her agent or the person in lawful possession thereof after being
requested to leave by the owner of such land, his/her agent or the person in
lawful possession thereof.
(§§ 6242, 6242.1, and 6242.2, T.O.O.C., and §§ 1 and 2, Ord. 217, as amended by
§ I, Ord. 1256-NS, eff. March 26, 1996, and § 17, Ord. 1374-NS, eff. April 26,
2001)
Sec. 5-8.03. Unclean persons.
(§ 6245, T.O.O.C., as amended by § XV, Ord. 770-NS, eff. February 26, 1981;
repealed by § 16, Ord. 1250-NS, eff. January 9, 1996)
Sec. 5-8.04. Unlawful advertising and defacing.
   (a)    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain any sign,
billboard, or advertisement in, over, or on any public street in the City.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to paint or attach any sign or
advertisement to or upon any property belonging to the City or to or upon any
tree, tunnel, rock, or other structure situated in any public street or right-
of-way in the City.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface any property
belonging to the City or any tree, tunnel, rock, or other structure situated in
any public street or right-of-way in the City.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface any tree,
tunnel, rock, or other structure situated on private property adjacent to, and
visible from, any public street in the City without the permission of the owner
of the property.
   (e)   Any sign, billboard, advertisement, defacement, or damage existing in
violation of the provisions of this section is hereby declared a public
nuisance, and the City Engineer and Code Enforcement Officers may immediately
remove or repair it.
   (f)   The provisions of this section shall not apply where they would
conflict with any State law, any zoning regulation of the City, or any permit
issued pursuant to such statute or zoning regulation.
(§ 7153, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 13, Ord. 907-NS, eff. February 11, 1986)
Sec. 5-8.05. Alcoholic beverages: Public places.
   No person shall drink or consume any alcoholic beverage in the following
areas:
   (a)   Upon any public street, sidewalk, highway, or alley;
   (b)   Upon any public school ground, bleacher, or stadium;
   (c)   In any place of public assembly without the consent of the person or
entity in possession or control thereof; or
   (d)   Upon any private property open to the public view without the express
permission of the owner, his or her agent, or the person in lawful possession
thereof.
(§ 1, Ord. 671-NS, eff. April 25, 1978, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1150-NS, eff.
June 2, 1992)
Sec. 5-8.06. Parental or property owner’s responsibility to supervise: Minors
with alcohol. (Repealed)
(§ 1, Ord. 1115-NS, eff. August 22, 1991; as repealed by Ord. 1462-NS, eff.
June 9, 2006)
Sec. 5-8.07. Public urination and defecation prohibited.
   It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in any public place
except when using a urinal, toilet or commode located in a bathroom, restroom,
portable restroom or other structure enclosed from public view.
(§ 1, Ord. 1244-NS, eff. November 7, 1995)
Sec. 5-8.08. Regulation of camping.
   (a)   Purpose. Public places within the City of Thousand Oaks should be
readily accessible and available to residents and the public at large. The use
of these areas for camping purposes or storage of personal property interferes
with the rights of others to use the areas for which they were intended. Such
action can constitute a public health and safety hazard which adversely impacts
public property, neighborhoods and commercial areas. The purpose of this
section is to maintain public places within the City of Thousand Oaks in a
clean and accessible condition, to prevent the accumulation of trash and
debris, and to reduce the risk of both structural and brush fires.
   (b)   Definitions. Unless the particular provisions or the context otherwise
requires, the definitions contained in this section shall govern the
construction, meaning and application of the words and phrases used in this
section.
   (1)   "Camp" means to pitch or occupy camp facilities; or to use camp
paraphernalia, for living purposes in an outdoor area. The act of sleeping on
its own does not constitute camping.
   (2)   "Camp facilities" include, but are not limited to, tents, huts,
unapproved shacks or temporary shelters.
   (3)   "Camp paraphernalia" includes, but is not limited to, tents or tent-
like structures, cots, beds, hammocks or personal cooking facilities and
similar equipment. This definition shall not include blankets, sleeping bags or
bedrolls.
   (4)   "Open Space" means any parcel or area of land or water which is
essentially unimproved and devoted to an open space use, allowing uses only as
listed in Section
9-4.2105, and which is designated on the local open space plan as any of the
following:
      (i)   for the preservation of natural resources;
      (ii)   for the managed production of resources;
      (iii)   for outdoor recreation;
      (iv)   or public health and safety.
   (5)   "Public place" means public property, improved or unimproved, and
includes, but is not limited to, open space, parks, plazas, parking lots,
highways, streets, bridges, alleys, driveways, sidewalks, and walkways.
   (6)   "Store" means to put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put
for safekeeping, to place or leave in a location.
   (c)   Unlawful camping. It shall be unlawful for any person to camp, occupy
camp facilities or use camp paraphernalia in any public place, except as
otherwise provided in this section.
   (d)   Storage of personal property in public places. It shall be unlawful
for any person to store personal property, including camp facilities and camp
paraphernalia, in any public place, improved or unimproved, except as otherwise
provided by the City Council, or except by permission of the property owner.
Nothing herein shall be construed to allow storage where otherwise prohibited
by this Code.
   (e)   Cooking. No person shall cook food in any public place, except as
otherwise allowed by the Municipal Code or by specific permit. This section
shall not prohibit cooking in areas designated for such purposes.
   (f)   Approved uses. This section shall not limit or be construed to limit
the use of public parks, public open space, City streets, parking lots or other
public property for such use of camp facilities and camp paraphernalia which
use is specifically authorized by the property owner.
   (g)   Property Removal. Designated City employees may remove personal
property unlawfully stored or found on public places as outlined in subdivision
(b)(5) above or found in an unlawful encampment as follows.
   (1)   The location of any personal property including camp facilities and
paraphernalia shall be noticed as follows:
   "It is illegal to store personal property on a public place such as public
open space, parks and parking lots. If this personal property is not removed
within 72 hours of the date of this posting, THE PERSONAL PROPERTY SHALL BE
DEEMED INTENTIONALLY ABANDONED AND SUBJECT TO REMOVAL AND POSSIBLE
DESTRUCTION."
   (2)   City personnel may remove any personal property unlawfully stored or
remaining in a public place after the posting period has expired.
   (3)   Personal property which has been abandoned, poses an imminent threat
to public health or safety, is contraband or which is evidence of a crime shall
not be subject to the above notice requirements and shall be removed
immediately by City personnel or police and stored or destroyed according to
the provisions below.
   (h)   Personal Effects.
   (1)   Personal effects for purposes of this chapter
5-8.08, means personal property consisting of the following items.
      (i)   Medication, medical devices, eye glasses or other prescription
lenses;
      (ii)   Sleeping bag or bed roll which is sanitary and non-verminous;
      (iii)   Tents in usable and reasonably good condition;
      (iv)   Clothes stored in a manner protecting them from the elements,
which are not unsanitary, soiled, or verminous;
      (v)   Non-perishable food items; and
      (vi)   Personal property with an estimated individual fair market value
of at least Fifty no/100ths ($50.00) Dollars.
   (2)   At the time of removal of unlawfully stored or remaining personal
effects in the encampment, City personnel shall conspicuously post and date a
notice either at the exact location from which the personal effects were
removed or at another nearby location giving the following information.
      (i)   A list of personal effects removed;
      (ii)   A telephone number for information on retrieving personal effects;
      (iii)   An address where the personal effects are temporarily stored;
      (iv)   The length of time during which the personal effects may be
claimed.
   (3)   Following removal of unlawfully stored or remaining personal effects,
City personnel shall do the following:
      (i)   Maintain an inventory identifying the personal effects; where the
personal effects were approximately located; and the reasonable value of each
item;
      (ii)   Place the removed personal effects in containers labeled in a
manner facilitating identification by City personnel and owner and which
reasonably protect such property from damage or theft; and
      (iii)   Store removed personal effects in an area designated by City for
a period of ninety (90) days.
   (4)   Personal property stored by the City which is claimed within ninety
(90) days from removal shall be released to the person claiming ownership
providing they identify the property and the approximate location where the
property was left.
   (5)   Disposition of property.
      (i)   Property which remains unclaimed after 90 days may be dedicated for
public use or may be given to a local nonprofit agency for charitable use.
      (ii)   All other unlawfully stored or found personal property removed
from an unlawful encampment is deemed intentionally abandoned and may be
summarily abated and destroyed.
(§ 1, Ord. 1299-NS, eff. October 23, 1997, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1495-NS,
December 18, 2007; § 1, Ord. 1663-NS, eff. July 12, 2019)
Sec. 5-8.09. Prohibition on sitting and lying in certain public places.
   (a)   Purpose/Findings.
   (1)   Public streets, sidewalks and walkways are created and maintained for
the primary purposes of enabling pedestrians and vehicles to safely and
efficiently move about from place to place, facilitating deliveries of goods
and services, and providing all potential customers and visitors with
convenient access to goods and services, as well as a place to recreate and
engage in free public speech in shared civic space;
   (2)   Except as provided for in this Section, sitting or lying on public
streets, sidewalks or walkways interferes with the primary purposes of the
public street, sidewalk or walkway, threatens public safety and damages the
public welfare;
   (3)   Pedestrians, particularly the elderly, disabled, and vision-impaired,
are put at increased risk when they must see and navigate around individuals
sitting or lying upon the public sidewalk;
   (4)   In some circumstances, people sitting or lying on sidewalks deter many
members of the public from frequenting those areas. This, in turn, contributes
to an erosion of the essential economic viability of those areas. Business
failures and relocations can cause vacant storefronts contributing to a spiral
of deterioration and blight which harms the public health, safety and welfare;
   (5)   There are numerous other places within the City where sitting can be
accommodated without unduly interfering with the safe flow of pedestrian
traffic, impairing commercial activity, threatening public safety or harming
the public welfare. These other places include city parks, numerous public
benches and other seating facilities, plazas, portions of sidewalks not
intensively used by pedestrians, common areas open to the public, and private
property with the permission of the property owner;
   (6)   The City recognizes that there is a fundamental need to sleep and
desires to accommodate that need while also satisfying the needs of the general
public to travel freely and safely throughout the City.
   (7)   The limited regulation of sitting or lying down on sidewalks in is
both reasonably necessary and appropriately balances the public interest and
individual rights.
   (8)   Designated Open Space contains ecologically sensitive habitats,
including many protected plant and wildlife species as well as fresh water
supplies. Except as provided for in this Section, human presence in Open Space
other than on designated trails can seriously damage or destroy these habitats
as well as increase the risk of wildfire danger and possible injuries from
threatened wildlife.
   (b)   Definitions.
   (1)   “Obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic” means to walk, stand, place
an object, sit or lie in such a manner as to block passage by another person or
a vehicle, or to require another person or a driver of a vehicle to take
evasive action to avoid physical contact.
   (2)   “Public place” means public property, including, but is not limited
to, publicly owned parking lots and driveways, highways, streets, bridges,
alleys, sidewalks, walkways, and City owned areas generally accessible to the
public.
   (c)   Prohibitions. Except as provided in this Section:
   (1)   No person shall sit or lie down upon a public place or in doorways or
entrances to buildings in such a way as to impede pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
   (2)   No person shall place any chair, stool, or other object upon any
public place or in doorways or entrances to buildings except as provided for in
this Code or permit issued by the City.
   (3)   No person shall be permitted to sleep in a public place between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
   (4)   No person shall be permitted to sleep in a public place between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. unless there are no sleeping spaces
practically available in any shelter or if there does not exist any viable
alternative to sleeping in a public place.
   (5)   No person shall be permitted to sleep in Open Space as defined in
Section 5-8.08(b)(4) at any time.
   (d)   Exceptions. The prohibitions in subsection (c) of this section shall
not apply in the following cases and to the following persons:
   (1)   Persons operating or patronizing a commercial establishment conducted
on the public sidewalk pursuant to an applicable, valid permit; or a person
participating in or attending a parade, festival, performance, rally,
demonstration, meeting or similar event conducted in a public place;
   (2)   Any conduct which is in conformity with the terms of any permit
granted pursuant to this Code; and
   (3)   Persons patronizing dining establishments with seating areas in the
public right of way which have been permitted pursuant to this Code.
   (e)   Picketing or protesting. It is not the intent of this section to
prohibit protesting, picketing, demonstrating, signature gathering, voter
registration, leafleting, or any other lawful activity permitted under the laws
of the United States of America, State of California, or by the National Labor
Relations Act in connection with a labor dispute.
(§ 1, Ord. 1300-NS, eff. October 23, 1997, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1663-NS,
eff. July 12, 2019)
Sec. 5-8.10. Aggressive begging.
   (a)   Findings.
   (1)   The public welfare is promoted by economically healthy commercial
areas which can dually function as centers of commerce and as civic centers
where people can meet and interact, and which therefore attract people to shop,
work, recreate and engage in public discourse. These areas provide easily-
accessible goods and services to local residents, workers and tourists,
employment opportunities, tax revenue necessary to support essential public and
social services, and economic productivity necessary to maintain and improve
property within these areas;
   (2)   Aggressive begging usually includes, but is not limited to, menacingly
approaching or following pedestrians, repetitive soliciting money despite
refusals, the use of abusive or profane language to cause fear and
intimidation, unwanted physical contact, or the intentional blocking of
pedestrian and vehicular traffic. In some circumstances, aggressive begging,
intentional obstruction of pedestrian or vehicle traffic, or solicitation in
certain areas where a person is captive or more vulnerable, may deter many
members of the public from frequenting those areas. This, in turn, contributes
to an erosion of the essential economic viability of those areas. Business
failures and relocations can cause vacant storefronts contributing to a spiral
of deterioration and blight which harms the public health, safety and welfare.
   (3)   The Council further finds that the presence of individuals who solicit
money from persons at or near banks, automated teller machines, in public
transportation vehicles, at outdoor cafes, or of someone waiting in line, is
especially troublesome because of the increased vulnerability and enhanced fear
of crime in those confined environments. Motorists also find themselves
confronted by persons seeking money who, without permission, wash their
automobile windows at traffic intersections, despite explicit indications by
drivers not to do so. Such activity carries with it an implicit threat to both
persons and property.
   (4)   The public should not have to endure unwanted, aggressive begging.
There are numerous places within the City where non-aggressive soliciting may
be accommodated without unduly interfering with the safe flow of pedestrian
traffic, impairing commercial activity, threatening public safety or harming
the public welfare. These other places include most city sidewalks, city parks,
common areas open to the public, and private property with the permission of
the property owner.
   (5)   The limitations on the time, place and manner of begging or soliciting
are reasonably necessary and appropriately balances the public interest and
individual rights.
   (b)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following definitions
apply:
   (1)   “Aggressive manner” means to beg with the intent to coerce, threaten,
hound or intimidate another person into giving money or goods and includes, but
is not limited to:
   (i)   Intentionally or recklessly making any physical contact with or
touching another person in the course of begging or soliciting without the
person's consent;
   (ii)   Following the person being solicited if that conduct is: (1) intended
to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or
the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession; or
(2) is intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being
solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation;
   (iii)    Continuing to beg or solicit within five (5) feet of the person
being solicited after the person has made a negative response, if continuing
the solicitation is: (1) intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person
to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property
in the person’s possession; or (2) is intended to or is reasonably likely to
intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the
solicitation;
   (iv)   Intentionally or recklessly blocking the safe or free passage of the
person being solicited or requiring the person, or the driver of a vehicle, to
take evasive action to avoid physical contact with the person making the
solicitation. Acts authorized as an exercise of one's constitutional right to
picket or legally protest shall not constitute obstruction of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic;
   (v)   Intentionally or recklessly using obscene or abusive language or
gestures: (1) intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear
imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the
person’s possession; or (2) is intended to or is reasonably likely to
intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the
solicitation; or
   (vi)   Approaching the person being solicited in a manner that: (1) is
intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily
harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person’s
possession; or (2) is intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the
person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation.
   (2)   “Beg” means to ask for, solicit or demand money or goods as a charity,
whether by words, bodily gestures, signs or other means.
   (3)   “Intimidate” means to engage in conduct which would make a reasonable
person fearful or feel compelled or threatened.
   (4)   “Public Place” means both public property and private property open to
the public and includes, but is not limited to, parks, plazas, parking lots,
highways, streets, bridges, alleys, driveways, sidewalks, walkways, and areas
generally accessible to the public.
   (5)   “Solicitation” or “Solicit” means any request made in person seeking
an immediate donation of money, food, cigarettes or other thing of value from
another person, by words, gestures, signs or other means, whether or not in
exchange for goods, services or other consideration, regardless of the
solicitor’s purpose or intended use of the money or other thing of value.
Purchase of an item for an amount far exceeding its value, under circumstances
where a reasonable person would understand that the purchase is in substance a
donation, is a donation for the purpose of this section. A person is not
soliciting for the purpose of this section when he or she passively displays a
sign or gives any other indication that he or she is seeking donations, and
where he or she does not address his or her solicitation to any specific person
other than in response to an inquiry by that person.
   (c)   Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to beg or solicit
another person:
   (1)   In an aggressive manner in a public place;
   (2)   In any public transportation vehicle;
   (3)   Within twenty-five (25) feet of any entrance or exit of any bank or
check cashing business or within twenty-five (25) feet of any automated teller
machine or check cashing business without the consent of the owner or other
person legally in possession of such facilities;
   (4)   From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public
street in exchange for cleaning the vehicle's windows, or for blocking,
occupying, or reserving a public parking space, or directing the occupant to a
public parking space; provided, however, that this paragraph shall not apply to
services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the
operator or passengers of such vehicle.
   (5)   While standing in any portion of a street or median, highway, or
driveways, to solicit from any person traveling in a vehicle along a public
right-of-way, including, but not limited to public streets, highways or
driveways.
   (d)   Notice. No person shall be cited under subsection (c) of this section
unless the person engages in conduct prohibited by said subsection after having
been notified by a law enforcement officer that the conduct violates subsection
(c) of this section.
   (e)   Penalties.
   (1)   A violation of this section may be punished by a fine not to exceed
One Hundred and no/100ths ($100.00) Dollars or by imprisonment for term not to
exceed thirty (30) days, or by both. If the person has been convicted of a
violation of this section within the previous period of one year, the person
shall be fined not more that Two Hundred Fifty and no/100ths ($250.000) Dollars
or imprisoned for not more than ninety (90) days, or both.
   (2)   In lieu of, or in addition to the penalty provided in this section, a
person in violation of this section may be required to perform community
service work as described by the court.
   (3)   Any arrest or conviction under this section shall be disclosed to
government social service agencies who request that the applicable public
official be notified of such events.
(§ 1, Ord. 1301-NS, eff. October 23, 1997)
Sec. 5-8.11. Encroachments onto public land.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to encroach, or to make or cause any encroachment
over, under, or upon any publicly owned property of the City, City of Thousand
Oaks Redevelopment Agency, Conejo Open Space Conservation Agency (COSCA), or
any other public joint powers authority of which the City is a party, unless
prior written permission is granted by the applicable chief administrative
officer, or their designee. For the purposes of this subsection, "encroachment"
shall mean any of the following:
   (1)   The alteration to any vegetation, rock(s), or other natural features;
   (2)   The placement or storage of any materials or debris on, under or over
any publicly owned land;
   (3)   The construction of any building, monument, obstruction, fencing,
structure, patio, signage, landscaping, garden, orchard, road, driveway, trail,
or any other physical improvement placed on, under or over any publicly owned
land.
   (b)   Notwithstanding the designations as set forth in subsection (a) above,
"encroachment" shall not mean the placement of hand-carried personal items for
the temporary use and in the immediate control and vicinity of the individual,
including but not limited to chairs, backpacks or other similar items.
(§ 2 Ord. 1532-NS, eff. March 11, 2010)
CHAPTER 9. REGISTRATION OF HOTEL AND MOTEL GUESTS
Sec. 5-9.01. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Establishment” shall mean and include a hotel, motel, lodging house,
guest house, boardinghouse, or other facility where sleeping accommodations are
made available to the public.
   (b)   “Guest” shall mean and include a patron, lodger, or roomer.
   (c)   “Proprietor” shall mean and include the owner, manager, operator, desk
clerk, or other employee whose duty it is to register patrons of the
establishment.
(§ 6231.1, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 5-9.02. Registers: Required.
   The proprietor of every establishment where sleeping facilities are made
available to the public shall keep a register of all guests.
(§ 6231, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 5-9.03. Registers: Contents.
   The register required by the provisions of this chapter shall contain for
each guest:
   (a)   His name and address;
   (b)   The day, month, and year when such person registered;
   (c)   The number of rooms he occupied;
   (d)   The name and address of every person over the age of twelve (12) years
who accompanied him; and
   (e)   If the registered person arrived by motor vehicle, the year, make, and
model of the vehicle, together with the license number and the state issuing
such license for the vehicle.
(§ 6231.2, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 5-9.04. Registers: Signatures of guests.
   Before renting, furnishing, or otherwise making available any room or
accommodation to any guest, the proprietor of the establishment shall require
the guest to sign the register required by the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 6231.3, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 5-9.05. Registers: Maintenance as permanent record.
   The registers required by the provisions of this chapter shall be a
permanent record which shall be kept on the premises of the establishment for
two (2) full calendar years next following the close of the establishment’s
fiscal year.
(§ 6231.4, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 5-9.06. Registers: Display.
   The registers required by the provisions of this chapter shall be available
to any peace officer, as defined in the State Penal Code, for inspection in the
normal course of the duties of such peace officers.
(§ 6231.5, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 17, Ord. 1250-NS, eff. January 9, 1996)
Sec. 5-9.07. Violations.
   The proprietor of any establishment who wilfully refuses or fails to keep a
register as required by the provisions of this chapter, or who wilfully refuses
or fails to permit a peace officer to inspect, examine, or make copies of a
register, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code pursuant to Section 1-
2.01 of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code.
(§ 6231.6, T.O.O.C., as amended by § XVI, Ord. 770-NS, eff. February 26, 1981)
CHAPTER 10. REMOVAL OF ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLES*
*   Sections 5-10.01 through 5-10.14, codified from Ordinance No. 163, repealed
by Section 1, Ordinance No. 213-NS, effective June 24, 1971.
Sec. 5-10.01. Findings and determinations.
   In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the
authority granted by the State pursuant to the provisions of Section 22660 of
the Vehicle Code of the State to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or
inoperative vehicles, or parts thereof, as public nuisances, the Council hereby
makes the following findings and declarations:
   The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or
inoperative vehicles, or parts thereof, on private or public property, not
including highways, is hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce the
value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite
plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance
creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for
rodents and insects, and to be injurious to the health, safety, and general
welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or
inoperative vehicle, or part thereof, on private or public property, not
including highways, except as expressly permitted by the provisions of this
chapter, is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated
as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 213-NS, eff. June 24, 1971)
Sec. 5-10.02. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Highway” shall mean a way or place of whatever nature, publicly
maintained and open to the use of the public for the purposes of vehicular
travel. “Highway” shall include “street.”
   (b)   “Owner of the land” shall mean the owner of the land on which the
vehicle, or part thereof, is located as shown on the last equalized assessment
roll.
   (c)   “Owner of the vehicle” shall mean the last registered owner and legal
owner of record.
   (d)   “Public property” shall not include “highway.”
   (e)   “Vehicle” shall mean a device by which any person or property may be
propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power
or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(§ 2, Ord. 213-NS, eff. June 24, 1971)
Sec. 5-10.03. Exceptions.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
   (a)   A vehicle, or part thereof, which is completely enclosed within a
building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other
public or private property; or
   (b)   A vehicle, or part thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful
manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed
dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such storage or
parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or
commercial enterprise.
   The provisions of this section shall not authorize the maintenance of a
public or private nuisance as defined pursuant to provisions of law other than
Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code
of the State and this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 213-NS, eff. June 24, 1971)
Sec. 5-10.04. Chapter provisions not exclusive remedy.
   The provisions of this chapter are not the exclusive regulation of
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles within the City. The
provisions of this chapter shall supplement and be in addition to the other
regulatory codes, statutes, and laws heretofore or hereafter enacted by the
City, the State, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction.
(§ 2, Ord. 213-NS, eff. June 24, 1971)
Sec. 5-10.05. Administration and enforcement.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter
shall be administered and enforced by the Community Development Director. In
the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, such officer and his
deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle, or
parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle and to
remove or cause the removal of a vehicle, or part thereof, declared to be a
nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 213-NS, eff. June 24, 1971)
Sec. 5-10.06. Right of entry of certain persons.
   When the Council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person,
such person shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public
property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle, or parts thereof,
declared to be a nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 213-NS, eff. June 24, 1971)
Sec. 5-10.07. Administrative costs.
   The Council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be
assessed as administrative costs, excluding the actual cost of removal of any
vehicle, or part thereof, for the purposes of this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 213-NS, eff. June 24, 1971)
Sec. 5-10.08. Community Development Director: Powers of removal.
   Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or
inoperative vehicle, or part thereof, on private property or public property
within the City, the Community Development Director shall have the authority to
cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure set
forth in this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 213-NS, eff. June 24, 1971)
Sec. 5-10.09. Public nuisances: Notices of intention to abate.
   A ten (10) day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or part
thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered mail to the owner
of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such
condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership.
The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following forms:
Form #1
CITY OF THOUSAND OAKS NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED,
WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE, OR PARTS THEREOF, AS A PUBLIC
NUISANCE
   (Name of address of owner of the land)
   As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at
(address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned, pursuant to (section
of the municipal code), has determined that there exists upon said land an (or
parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle registered
to                   license number                   , which constitutes a
public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 10, Title 5 of the
Municipal Code of the City of Thousand Oaks.
   You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said
vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within ten (10) days from the date of
mailing of this notice, and, upon your failure to do so, the same will be
abated and removed by the City of Thousand Oaks and the costs thereof, together
with administrative costs, assessed to you as owner of the land on which said
vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located.
   As owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is
located, you are hereby notified that you may, within ten (10) days after the
mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing, and, if such a
request is not received by the Community Development Director within such ten
(10) day period, the Community Development Director shall have the authority to
abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) as a public nuisance
and assess the costs as aforesaid without a public hearing. You may submit a
sworn written statement within such ten (10) day period denying responsibility
for the presence of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) on said land,
with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed as a
request for a hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in
person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the vehicle or, in lieu
thereof, may present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for
consideration at such hearing.
   DATED:                CITY OF THOUSAND OAKS
   By                                                            
   Community Development Director
   AFFIDAVIT OF SERVICE BY MAIL
STATE OF CALIFORNIA ) SS:
COUNTY OF VENTURA )
   I, the undersigned, say: I am and was at all times herein mentioned a
citizen of the United States and employed in the County of Ventura; my business
address is                                                        , Thousand
Oaks, California; that I am over the age of 18 years and not a party to the
within action or proceeding; that on the                   day of
                  ,              , I served the within (name of document)
                     on                                   , the owner of
property on which an (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or
inoperative vehicle is located, in said action, by depositing a true copy
thereof, enclosed in a sealed envelope with postage thereon fully prepaid,
certified mail, in a mailbox regularly maintained by the Government of the
United States in Thousand Oaks, California, addressed to
                               at the following address:
   I certify (or declare) under penalty of perjury that the foregoing is true
and correct.
   Executed on              ,            , at
                                                                   ,
California.
Form #2
CITY OF THOUSAND OAKS NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED,
WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE, OR PART THEREOF, AS A PUBLIC
NUISANCE
   (Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of record of
vehicle; notice should be given to both if different)
   As last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (description of vehicle
– make, model, license, etc.), you are hereby notified that the undersigned,
pursuant to (section of municipal code), has determined that said vehicle (or
parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative
vehicle at (describe location on public or private property) and constitutes a
public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 10, Title 5 of the
Municipal Code of the City of Thousand Oaks.
   You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said
vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within ten (10) days from the date of
mailing of this notice.
   As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts
of a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within ten (10) days after
the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing, and, if such
a request is not received by the Community Development Director within such ten
(10) day period, the Community Development Director shall have the authority to
abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) without a hearing.
   DATED:                                   CITY OF THOUSAND OAKS
   By                                                       
   Community Development Director
   AFFIDAVIT OF SERVICE BY MAIL
STATE OF CALIFORNIA ) SS:
COUNTY OF VENTURA )
   I, the undersigned, say: I am and was at all times herein mentioned a
citizen of the United States and employed in the County of Ventura; my business
address is                                , Thousand Oaks, California; that I
am over the age of 18 years and not a party to the within action or proceeding;
that on the              day of                       ,              , I served
the within (name of document)                        on                     ,
the owner of property on which an (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled, or inoperative vehicle is located, in said action, by depositing a
true copy thereof, enclosed in a sealed envelope with postage thereon fully
prepaid, certified mail, in a mailbox regularly maintained by the Government of
the United States in Thousand Oaks, California, addressed to
                                               at the following address:
   I certify (or declare) under penalty of perjury that the foregoing is true
and correct.
   Executed on          ,        , at                        , California.
(§ 2, Ord. 213-NS, eff. June 24, 1971)
Sec. 5-10.10. Hearings: Notices: When required.
   Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or the owner of the land received
by the Community Development Director within ten (10) days after the mailing of
the notices of intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by
the Community Development Director on the question of the abatement and removal
of the vehicle, or part thereof, as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or
inoperative vehicle and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost
of removal of the vehicle, or part thereof, against the property on which it is
located. If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying
responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land within such ten (10)
day period, such statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which
does not require his presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by
registered mail, at least ten (10) days before the hearing to the owner of the
land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition
that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a
request for a hearing is not received within ten (10) days after the mailing of
the notice of intention to abate and remove, the City shall have the authority
to abate and remove the vehicle, or part thereof, as a public nuisance without
holding a public hearing.
(§ 2, Ord. 213-NS, eff. June 24, 1971)
Sec. 5-10.11. Hearings: Procedure: Evidence: Rules: Decisions.
   All hearings held pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be held
before the Community Development Director, who shall hear all facts and
testimony he deems pertinent. Such facts and testimony may include testimony on
the condition of the vehicle, or part thereof, and the circumstances concerning
its location on the private property or public property. The Community
Development Director shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence.
The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing, or present a sworn
written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny
responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons
for such denial.
   The Community Development Director may impose such conditions and take such
other action as he deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the
provisions of this chapter. He may delay the time for the removal of the
vehicle, or part thereof, if, in his opinion, the circumstances so justify. At
the conclusion of the public hearing, the Community Development Director may
find that a vehicle, or part thereof, has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled,
or is inoperative on private or public property, and order the same removed
from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as provided in this
chapter, and determine the administrative costs and the costs of removal to be
charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall
include a description of the vehicle, or part thereof, and the correct
identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the
site.
   If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land
without the consent of the owner of the land and that he has not subsequently
acquiesced in its presence, the Community Development Director shall not assess
the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon
which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from
such owner of the land.
   If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying
responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land but does not appear,
or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the Community
Development Director but does not appear, such person shall be notified in
writing of the decision.
(§ 2, Ord. 213-NS, eff. June 24, 1971)
Sec. 5-10.12. Decisions of Community Development Director: Appeals to Council.
   Any interested person may appeal the decision of the Community Development
Director by filing a written notice of appeal with the Community Development
Director within five (5) days after his decision.
   Such appeal shall be heard by the Council, which may affirm, amend, or
reverse the order or take any other action deemed appropriate.
   The City Clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the
hearing to the appellant and those persons set forth in Section 5-10.09 of this
chapter.
   In conducting the hearing the Council shall not be limited by the technical
rules of evidence.
(§ 2, Ord. 213-NS, eff. June 24, 1971)
Sec. 5-10.13. Decisions: Orders: Abatement and removal of vehicles.
   Five (5) days after the adoption of the order declaring the vehicle, or part
thereof, to be a public nuisance, or five (5) days from the date of mailing of
the notice of the decision, if such notice is required by the provisions of
Section 5-10.11 of this chapter, or fifteen (15) days after such action of the
Council authorizing removal following an appeal the vehicles, or parts thereof,
may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard or automobile dismantler’s yard.
After a vehicle has been removed it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or
made operable.
(§ 2, Ord. 213-NS, eff. June 24, 1971)
Sec. 5-10.14. Notices to the Department of Motor Vehicles.
   Within five (5) days after the date of the removal of the vehicle, or part
thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State
identifying the vehicle, or part thereof, removed. At the same time there shall
be transmitted to said Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of
registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of
title, and license plates.
(§ 2, Ord. 213-NS, eff. June 24, 1971)
Sec. 5-10.15. Assessment of costs.
   If the administrative costs and the costs of removal which are charged
against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to the provisions of Section 5-
10.11 of this chapter are not paid within thirty (30) days after the date of
the order, or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be
assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to the provisions of Section
38773.5 of the Government Code of the State and shall be transmitted to the Tax
Collector for collection. Such assessment shall have the same priority as other
City taxes.
(§ 2, Ord. 213-NS, eff. June 24, 1971)
Sec. 5-10.16. Abandonment violations.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon, park, store, or leave, or to
permit the abandonment, parking, storing, or leaving of, any licensed or
unlicensed vehicle, or part thereof, which is an abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled, or inoperative condition upon any private property or public
property, not including highways, within the City for a period in excess of
thirty (30) days, unless such vehicle, or part thereof, is completely enclosed
within a building in a lawful manner where it is not plainly visible from the
street or other public or private property, or unless such vehicle is stored or
parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business
of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, or junk yard.
(§ 2, Ord. 213-NS, eff. June 24, 1971, as amended by § XVII, Ord. 770-NS, eff.
February 26, 1981)
Sec. 5-10.17. Refusal to remove violations.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to remove an
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, or part thereof, or to
refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the
abatement provisions of this chapter or the laws of the State where such laws
are applicable.
(§ 2, Ord. 213-NS, eff. June 24, 1971, as amended by § XVIII, Ord. 770-NS, eff.
February 26, 1981)
CHAPTER 11. WEAPONS*
*   Sections 5-11.01 through 5-11.04, recodified from Sections 5211, 5211.1,
5212, and 5212.1, T.O.O.C., and Ordinance No. 146, repealed by Ordinance No.
774-NS. effective April 9, 1981.
Sec. 5-11.01. Discharging.
   (a)   No person shall fire, shoot, or discharge within the limits of the
City any gun, rifle, pistol, or other firearm, or any air gun, air rifle, or
air pistol, or any spring gun, spring rifle, or spring pistol, or any carbon
dioxide or other gas operated gun, rifle, or pistol. The discharge of such
guns, rifles, or pistols shall include blank ammunition and/or the discharge of
a muzzle loader having a powder charge. Nothing in this section, however, shall
prevent the discharge of blank ammunition in a starting gun during an athletic
event.
   (b)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
   (1)   A peace officer in the performance of his or her duty; or
   (2)   Any person while shooting in a municipally licensed or municipally
owned or operated shooting range; or
   (3)   Any person while shooting an air gun, air rifle, or air pistol, or any
spring gun, spring rifle, or spring pistol, or any carbon dioxide or other gas
operated gun, rifle, or pistol in any private place or location constructed or
arranged such that it is not possible for the ammunition, projectiles, or other
objects expelled by such guns, rifles, or pistols to escape the place or
location; or
   (4)   Any person while lawfully defending life or property, including the
destruction of injured animals or any predatory or dangerous animals.
   (5)   The simulated discharge of weapons for the purposes of filming as
approved by a film permit issued pursuant to Chapter 8 of Title 4 of this Code.
   (c)   Any person or party wishing to put into operation or use the places or
locations described in subsection (3) of subsection (b) of this section shall
secure the written approval of the Council before putting such place or
location into operation or use.
(§ II, Ord. 774-NS, eff. April 9, 1981, as amended by § 5, Ord. 1525-NS, eff.
October 22, 2009)
Sec. 5-11.02. Discharge or possession by minors.
   (a)   If the person shooting or discharging under Section 5-11.01 of this
chapter is a minor, then he or she shall be supervised by an adult person who
is present when the minor is shooting or discharging.
   (b)   No minor shall possess in any public place any gun, rifle, or pistol
as described in Section 5-11.01 of this chapter, except as follows:
   (1)   When such minor is in the immediate charge and supervision of a
parent, guardian, or adult person having the responsibility for the conduct of
such minor, regardless of whether the gun, rifle, or pistol is capable of being
immediately discharged or whether it is unloaded or in a dismantled or “take-
down” condition or completely wrapped or in a carrying case made for the
purposes of carrying such firearm; and
   (2) When such minor is engaged in marksmanship training or firearm safety
training at an established range or shooting area, as provided and regulated in
Section 5-11.01 of this chapter, under the supervision of a competent adult
instructor.
(§ II, Ord. 774-NS, eff. April 9, 1981)
Sec. 5-11.03. Reporting lost or stolen firearms.
   (a)   Any person residing or doing business in the City, who owns or
possesses a firearm, as defined in the Penal Code, shall report the theft or
loss of the firearm to the Thousand Oaks Police Department within seventy-two
(72) hours after his or her discovery or knowledge of the theft or loss.
   (b)   Any person residing or doing business in the City, who has experienced
the loss or theft of a firearm, as defined in the Penal Code, in the City
within the five years prior to 4/19/2007, without the firearm having been
recovered during such time, shall report the theft or loss to the Thousand Oaks
Police Department within ninety (90) days of 4/19/2007.
   (c)   Any person who fails to report a lost or stolen firearm pursuant to
this Section 5-11.03, when the person knew or should have known of the theft or
loss, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as provided in Section 1-
2.01 of this code.
(§ 1, Ord. 1476-NS, eff. April 19, 2007)
CHAPTER 12. UNLAWFUL CONDUCT ON PRIVATE SCHOOL CAMPUSES
(Sections 5-12.01 through 5-12.04, codified from Ordinance No. 114-NS and
Ordinance No. 159-NS, repealed by Section 18, Ordinance No. 1250, effective
January 9, 1996)
CHAPTER 13. ALARM SYSTEMS*
*   5-13.01 through 5-13.06, codified from § 2, Ord. 136-NS, eff. January 27,
1970, repealed by § 1, Ord. 918-NS, eff. April 15, 1986.
Sec. 5-13.01. Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the responsible use of alarm
systems in a manner that enhances public safety, reduces unnecessary emergency
response costs, and ensures that law enforcement resources remain available for
true emergencies. The City recognizes that alarm systems, when properly
installed and maintained, provide a valuable service to the community, while
excessive false alarms place an undue burden on law enforcement personnel and
resources.
(§ 2, Ord. 918-NS, eff. April 15, 1986; § 2, Ord. 1736-NS, eff. June 13, 2025)
Sec. 5-13.02. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Alarm administrator” shall mean the designated City official or
entity responsible for administering, enforcing, and managing alarm system
regulations.
   (b)   “Alarm agent” shall mean an individual employed by an alarm company
operator to sell, install, monitor, maintain, service, or respond to alarm
systems, or to supervise such activities.
   (c)   “Alarm permit” shall mean a document issued by the City authorizing
the operation of an alarm system at a specific location.
   (d)   “Alarm site” shall mean a single fixed location, including a
residence, business, or other premises, where an alarm system is installed and
operated.
   (e)   “Alarm education program” shall mean a City-approved educational
program designed to inform alarm users about proper alarm system operation,
maintenance, and false alarm prevention.
   (f)   “Alarm system” shall mean any mechanical, electrical, or electronic
device designed to detect unauthorized entry, burglary, or other emergencies
and to signal law enforcement or emergency services through audible, visual, or
electronic means.
   (g)   “Alarm user” shall mean any person, entity, or organization that owns,
leases, or controls an alarm system at an alarm site.
   (h)   “Audible alarm” shall mean an alarm system that emits a sound or siren
when activated, intended to alert persons on or near the premises.
   (i)   “Business alarm” shall mean an alarm system installed at a commercial,
industrial, institutional, or governmental property, including but not limited
to offices, retail establishments, warehouses, factories, schools, hospitals,
and public buildings, where the primary purpose is to protect business assets,
employees, or the public from unauthorized entry, fire, or other emergencies.
   (j)   “Direct dial” shall mean an alarm system that automatically dials the
Thousand Oaks Police Department or emergency services when activated.
   (k)   “False alarm” shall mean an alarm activation resulting in a law
enforcement or emergency response where no criminal activity, fire, or
emergency is evident. This includes activations caused by system malfunctions,
human error, or environmental factors.
   (l)   “Monitoring company” shall mean an entity that receives alarm signals
from an alarm system and relays an alarm dispatch request to law enforcement or
emergency responders.
   (m)   “Residential alarm” shall mean an alarm system installed at a private
dwelling, including single-family homes, condominiums, townhouses, or multi-
family residential units, where the primary purpose is to protect residents and
personal property from unauthorized entry, fire, or other emergencies.
   (n)   “Responsible party” shall mean an individual designated by the alarm
user to respond to an alarm activation and assist law enforcement in securing
the premises.
(§ 2, Ord. 918-NS, eff. April 15, 1986; § 2, Ord. 1736-NS, eff. June 13, 2025)
Sec. 5-13.03. Alarm requirements.
   (a)   Alarm user responsibilities.
   (1)   Alarm users are responsible for ensuring their alarm system is
properly installed, maintained, and operated in compliance with this chapter.
   (2)   Alarm users shall provide accurate and up-to-date emergency contact
information to their monitoring company.
   (3)   Alarm users must take reasonable steps to prevent false alarms,
including training occupants and employees on proper system operation.
   (4)   Upon an activation, the alarm user or a designated responsible party
must be available to respond to the alarm site if requested by law enforcement
or emergency responders. The City may establish an optional alarm permit or
registration program through the Master Fee Resolution.
   (5)   The City may establish a permit or registration program for alarm
systems. If established, alarm users who register may be eligible for
incentives, such as reduced false alarm fines or other benefits designed to
encourage responsible alarm use.
   (b)   Audible alarm systems.
   (1)   An audible alarm must automatically cease sounding within fifteen (15)
minutes of activation and shall reset automatically within thirty (30) minutes.
   (2)   Audible alarms must not create an excessive nuisance to neighboring
properties.
   (3)   It is the responsibility of the alarm user to ensure the audible alarm
remains in proper working condition and does not result in repeated false
activations.
   (c)   Direct dial alarms prohibited. Alarm systems shall not directly dial
emergency services or the City. All automatically transmitted alarms shall be
routed through a monitoring company.
   (d)   Simulated alarms; restrictions on emergency responder sounds.
   (1)   No person shall operate or use an alarm system or other security
device that emits sounds resembling sirens, civil defense warning systems, or
any signals commonly used by law enforcement, fire, or emergency medical
services.
   (2)   Alarm users must also ensure that all external alarm sounds comply
with applicable City noise ordinances.
(§ 2, Ord. 918-NS, eff. April 15, 1986; § 2, Ord. 1736-NS, eff. June 13, 2025)
Sec. 5-13.04. Reporting requirements.
   (a)   Alarm report.
   (1)   For each alarm activation resulting in a dispatch to the Thousand Oaks
Police Department (Department), an electronic report shall be generated and
maintained within the Department’s reporting system.
   (2)   The report shall include the type of alarm site (residential alarm or
business alarm), as determined by the City, and any relevant classification
details.
   (3)   The report shall include the name, address, and telephone number of
the alarm user, as provided by the monitoring company, along with any
additional data required by the Chief of Police.
   (b)   Monitoring company responsibilities. Monitoring companies are
responsible for ensuring that accurate subscriber information is included in
all reports transmitted to law enforcement.
(§ 2, Ord. 918-NS, eff. April 15, 1986, as amended by part 15, Ord. 1437-NS,
eff. July 7, 2005; § 2, Ord. 1736-NS, eff. June 13, 2025)
Sec. 5-13.05. Alarm agents .
   (a)   State registration.
   (1)   All alarm agents operating within the City must possess a valid alarm
agent registration card issued by the State of California in compliance with
state regulations.
   (2)   Alarm agents are required to carry their state-issued registration
card at all times while performing their duties and must present it upon
request by law enforcement or authorized City officials.
   (b)   Exemptions. This section does not apply to individuals installing or
servicing alarm systems on premises they own or occupy, nor to salespersons who
do not engage in installation, maintenance, or monitoring of alarm systems.
(§ 2, Ord. 918-NS, eff. April 15, 1986; § 2, Ord. 1736-NS, eff. June 13, 2025)
Sec. 5-13.06. Alarm response, enforcement, and penalties.
   (a)   Violations. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punishable as a violation of this Code or pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter. All remedies shall be cumulative, and the use of one or more remedies
by the City shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of
enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   Fines, fees, and penalties.
   (1)   Fines in the amounts established by the City's Master Fee Resolution
shall be paid to the City by each alarm user.
   (2)   The City shall issue an invoice for false alarm fines in accordance
with the billing schedule and procedures established by the alarm administrator
and/or Chief of Police.
   (3)   Late penalty. Delinquent account penalties, interest, and/or
collections fees are established by the City's Master Fee Resolution. If an
account is referred to third-party collections, City shall not impose any
additional penalties or interest beyond the amount owed at the time of
referral.
   (4)   Fines and penalty, a civil debt. The amount of any fine and late
penalty assessed pursuant to this section shall be deemed a debt to the City,
and an action may be commenced in the name of the City in any court of
competent jurisdiction in the amount of the delinquent debt pursuant to Section
1-2.06 of this Code. Payment of any fine shall not prohibit criminal
prosecution for the violation of any other provisions of this chapter.
   (c)   Alarm education program.
   (1)   The City may, at its discretion, establish or authorize an approved
entity to establish an alarm education program to provide instruction on proper
alarm usage and maintenance.
   (2)   The Finance Director shall determine program eligibility, establish
participation requirements, and administer the waiver process in accordance
with applicable policies and procedures.
(§ 2, Ord. 918-NS, eff. April 15, 1986, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1017-NS, eff.
February 7, 1989, and Ord. 1101-NS, eff. May 7, 1991, § 5, Ord. 1478-NS, eff.
July 1, 2007; § 2, Ord. 1736-NS, eff. June 13, 2025)
Sec. 5-13.07. Public nuisance alarms .
   (a)   Maximum false alarms. Any alarm system that emits more than five (5)
false alarms in any one alarm site within a calendar year is hereby declared to
be a public nuisance.
   (b)   Notice to repair or disconnect. The Chief of Police may notify any
alarm user or person who has caused such a system to be installed that thealarm
system shall be repaired or disconnected pending repairs when the system is
found to be a public nuisance.
   (1)   If the notice is to repair only, the notice shall indicate a maximum
time period for repairs to be made, after which the system must be
disconnected.
   (2)   If the notice is to disconnect, the notice shall indicate that the
system shall not be reconnected until necessary repairs or maintenance of the
system have been made to the satisfaction of the Chief of Police.
(§ 2, Ord. 918-NS, eff. April 15, 1986; § 2, Ord. 1736-NS, eff. June 13, 2025)
Sec. 5-13.08. Nonliability.
   Nothing in this chapter shall create a duty for the City or its law
enforcement personnel to respond to an alarm activation.
(§ 2, Ord. 918-NS, eff. April 15, 1986; § 2, Ord. 1736-NS, eff. June 13, 2025)
Sec. 5-13.09. Appeals.
   (a)   An alarm user may appeal the invoice pursuant to Thousand Oaks
Municipal Code.
   (b)   Within fourteen (14) days of the date of the invoice, the alarm user
must present a preliminary review request form, a copy of the invoice and any
additional information demonstrating the reasons why there was no violation or
why the alarm user is not a responsible person for the violation to the City
Treasurer. A preliminary review is to identify improper citations due to errors
that are readily verifiable and not to resolve factual disputes.
   (c)   Within thirty-five (35) days of the date of the invoice, an
administrative hearing may be requested by submitting an administrative hearing
request form to the City of Thousand Oaks accompanied by a deposit in the
amount of the total fine. A penalty deposit may be waived if substantial
evidence is submitted that citee does not have the financial ability to pay the
deposit.
(§ 2, Ord. 1736-NS, eff. June 13, 2025)
CHAPTER 14. OAK TREE PRESERVATION AND PROTECTION*
* The regulations found in Ch. 14 were originally established by Ord. 137-NS,
adopted 2-3-1970, and further amended by Ords. 581-NS, adopted 7-13- 1976, and
776-NS, passed 3-17-1981. Ord. 937-NS, adopted 10-14-1986 completely replaced
and reorganized Ch. 14. After several amendments, as noted in the section
histories, Ch. 14 was again replaced and reorganized by Ord. 1534-NS, adopted
3-9-2010. Ch. 14 was then re-designated as Article 42 of Chapter 4 of Title 9
by Part 3 of Ord. 1610-NS, adopted December 15, 2015 and effective January 15,
2016.
CHAPTER 15. AMBULANCES
Sec. 5-15.01. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Ambulance” shall mean any privately or publicly owned motor vehicle
that is specially designed or constructed and equipped, and is intended to be
used for, and is maintained or operated for transporting patients and shall
include, but not be restricted to, emergency vehicles used for such purpose but
shall not include funeral coaches or hearses.
   (b)   “Ambulance certificate” shall mean a certificate certifying an
ambulance as having complied with the provisions of this chapter.
   (c)   “Ambulance service area” shall mean those ambulance service areas
established for the County and designated on the ambulance service area map in
the EMRM, Appendix # 1.
   (d)   “Attendant” shall mean an employee of the licensee holding a valid
ambulance attendant's permit.
   (e)   “Board” shall mean the Board of Supervisors of the County of Ventura.
   (f)   “County” shall mean the County of Ventura.
   (g)   “Driver” shall mean a person who is qualified as an attendant and a
driver.
   (h)   “EMCC” shall mean the Emergency Medical Care Committee appointed by
the Board.
   (i)   “EMRM” shall mean the Emergency Medical Response Manual adopted by the
Board and the City.
   (j)   “Emergency call” shall mean a request for the dispatch of an ambulance
to transport or provide other assistance for a person apparently having a
sudden and unforeseen need of immediate medical attention.
   (k)   “Emergency service” shall mean the service performed in response to an
emergency call.
   (l)   “License” shall mean a County ambulance company license.
   (m)   “Licensee” shall mean any person to whom a County ambulance company
license has been issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
   (n)   “Patient” shall mean a wounded, injured, sick, invalid, dead, or
incapacitated person.
(§ 1, Ord. 185-NS, eff. February 4, 1971)
Sec. 5-15.02. Emergency Medical Response Manual.
   The EMRM, 1970 Edition, Divisions III, IV, V, VI, VII, and VIII, adopted by
the Board on September 29, 1970, and subsequently adopted by the Council on
December 15, 1970, three (3) copies of which are available in the office of the
City Clerk, is hereby adopted and incorporated in this chapter by reference as
though set forth in this chapter in full.
(§ 1, Ord. 185-NS, eff. February 4, 1971)
Sec. 5-15.03. Licenses required.
   No person, either as owner, agent, or otherwise, shall operate, conduct,
advertise, or otherwise be engaged in, or profess to be engaged in, the
business or service of the transportation of patients upon the streets or
public ways or places of the City unless such person holds a current valid
license for an ambulance issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. An
ambulance operated by an agency of the United States or the State shall not be
required to be licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 185-NS, eff. February 4, 1971)
Sec. 5-15.04. Existing ambulance services.
   Every owner operating an ambulance service from a place of business within
the City for six (6) months prior to February 4, 1971, shall on or before May
5, 1971, conform to the standards of the EMRM and obtain a license as required
by the provisions of this chapter. Any violation of the ambulance operating
regulations set forth in Division IV of the EMRM during the ninety-day (90)
period set forth in this section shall be prima facie cause for refusal of a
license.
(§ 1, Ord. 185-NS, eff. February 4, 1971)
Sec. 5-15.05. Applications for licenses.
   Applications for ambulance licenses shall be submitted and processed
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter I of Title 3 of this Code and Division I
of the EMRM. If a joint Exercise of Powers Agreement is executed between the
City and the County for the County to perform the licensing services required
by this section, then such applications shall be processed by the County in
accordance with the provisions of this section and the Joint Exercise of Powers
Agreement.
(§ 1, Ord. 185-NS, eff. February 4, 1971)
Sec. 5-15.06. Filing and display of rates.
   There shall be available in each ambulance operated a schedule of rates. The
Council, on its own motion or upon the application of a licensee, may set,
establish, change, modify, or amend the schedule of rates to be charged by a
licensee. No rates shall be set, established, changed, modified, or amended
without a hearing before the Council. A notice of such hearing shall be given
to each licensee in writing by the City Clerk at least ten (10) days before
such hearing, and the Council may give such additional notice as it shall deem
necessary. If a Joint Exercise of Powers Agreement is executed between the City
and the County for the County to perform the licensing services required by
this section, then such changes shall be processed by the County in accordance
with the provisions of this section and the Joint Exercise of Powers Agreement.
(§ 1, Ord. 185-NS, eff. February 4, 1971)
Sec. 5-15.07. Ambulance certificates required.
   No person shall operate or permit the operation of any vehicle for ambulance
purposes on the streets or public ways or places of the City unless the
ambulance shall contain a valid ambulance certificate.
(§ 1, Ord. 185-NS, eff. February 4, 1971)
Sec. 5-15.08. Insurance.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner to operate an ambulance, or cause or
permit an ambulance to be driven or operated, and no certificate for such
operation shall be granted unless there is on file with the City Clerk and in
full force and effect at all times while such ambulance is being operated a
policy of insurance, approved by the City, issued by a company authorized to do
business in the State, insuring the owner of such ambulance against loss by
reason of injuries or damages which may result to persons or property from the
negligent operation or defective construction of such ambulance or from the
violation of the provisions of this chapter or of any other law of the State or
the United States. Such policy shall be in a sum of not less than One Hundred
Thousand and no/100ths ($100,000.00) Dollars for personal injuries to, or the
death of, any one person in any single accident and Five Hundred Thousand and
no/ 100ths ($500,000.00) Dollars on account of personal injuries to, or the
death of, two (2) or more persons in any one accident, and the limits on each
such vehicle shall not be less than One Hundred Thousand and no/100ths
($100,000.00) Dollars for damages to, or the destruction of, property in any
one accident. Such insurance as is afforded in such policy shall apply to the
City and to the following individuals as additional insureds:
   (a)   To the City of Thousand Oaks and to each city within the ambulance
service area; and
   (b)   To the officers and employees thereof while acting within the scope of
their duties.
   Such policy shall contain an endorsement providing that the policy of
insurance will not be canceled until notice in writing shall have been given to
the City Clerk, City of Thousand Oaks, 1429 Thousand Oaks Boulevard, Thousand
Oaks, California 91360, at least thirty (30) days prior to the time such
cancellation shall become effective.
   The owner shall forthwith replace a canceled policy with another policy as
set forth in this section. Each insurance policy shall provide that there shall
be a continuing liability notwithstanding any recovery.
(§ 1, Ord. 185-NS, eff. February 4, 1971)
Sec. 5-15.09. Applications for ambulance certificates.
   Applications for ambulance certificates shall be accepted and processed
pursuant to the regulations set forth in Division III the EMRM. If a Joint
Exercise of Powers Agreement is executed between the City and the County for
the County to perform the licensing services required by this section, then the
certificate required shall be that issued by the Board in accordance with the
provisions of this section and the Joint Exercise of Powers Agreement. (§ 1,
Ord. 185-NS, eff. February 4, 1971)
Sec. 5-15.10. Drivers and attendants with permits required.
   No vehicle shall be operated for ambulance purposes, and no person shall
drive, attend, or permit a vehicle to be operated for such purposes on the
streets or public ways or places of the City unless such vehicle shall be under
the immediate supervision and direction of a person who is holding a currently
valid State Ambulance Driver’s License and City driver’s permit and accompanied
by a person in a possession of a valid City attendant's permit.
(§ 1, Ord. 185-NS. eff. February 4. 1971)
Sec. 5-15.11. Application for driver’s and attendant’s permits.
   Applications for driver’s and attendant’s permits shall be submitted and
processed pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1 of Title 3 of this Code and
Division III of the EMRM.
(§ 1, Ord. 185-NS, eff. February 4, 1971)
Sec. 5-15.12. Exceptions.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to an ambulance or to the
driver, attendant, or driver-attendant of an ambulance which:
   (a)   Is rendering assistance to licensed ambulances in the case of a major
catastrophe or emergency with which the licensed ambulances of the City are
insufficient or unable to cope; or
   (b)   Is operated from a location or headquarters outside the City to
transport patients picked up at licensed hospitals, nursing homes or extended
care facilities within the City to locations outside the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 185-NS, eff. February 4, 1971)
Sec. 5-15.13. Suspension and revocation of licenses and permits.
   Any license or permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may
be suspended or revoked by the Chief of Police upon the grounds and following
the procedures set forth in Section 5-15.14 of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 185-NS. eff. February 4, 1971)
Sec. 5-15.14. Suspension and revocation of licenses and permits: Grounds.
   (a)   Mandatory revocation of licenses. The Chief of Police shall revoke the
license or permit of any person who:
   (1)   Is convicted of the violation of the provisions of Section 23103 of
the Vehicle Code of the State during the period when his license or permit is
valid; or
   (2)    Is required to register as a sex offender pursuant to the provisions
of Section 290 of the Penal Code of the State; or
   (3)   Habitually or excessively uses or is addicted to the use of narcotics
or dangerous drugs or has been convicted of any offense relating to the use,
sale, possession, or transportation of narcotics or habit-forming or dangerous
drugs; or
   (4)   Continuously or excessively uses intoxicating beverages; or
   (5)   Within the three (3) year period immediately preceding the
application, or under a permit, has been under suspension, revocation, or
probation by the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State for a cause
involving the safe operation of a motor vehicle or has been convicted of
failing to stop and render aid in an accident involving injury or death,
driving while intoxicated, or reckless driving involving bodily injury; or
   (6)   Within the three (3) year period immediately preceding the
application, or under a permit, has been found a negligent operator of the
motor vehicle by the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State; or
   (7)   Does not meet the minimum medical standards provided by State or local
laws; or
   (8)   Has knowingly falsified or failed to disclose a material fact in his
application; or
   (9)    Holds a license and abandons ambulance operations for a period of
thirty (30) days. Acts of God and other acts beyond the control of the licensee
shall not be an abandonment within the meaning of this subsection.
   (b)   Permissible suspension and revocation of licenses and permits. The
Chief of Police may suspend or revoke a license or permit of any person who:
   (1)   Has been convicted of any offense punishable as a felony or has been
convicted of theft during the preceding ten (10) year period; or
   (2)   Has committed any act involving moral turpitude; or
   (3)   Has been involved in any motor vehicle accident causing death or
bodily injury during the preceding two (2) year period; or
   (4)    Has been involved in three (3) or more motor vehicle accidents during
the year immediately preceding the application or the date of suspension or
revocation; or
   (5)   Has violated any provisions of the Vehicle Code of the State or any
rules and regulations promulgated by the Commissioner of the California Highway
Patrol relating to the operation of authorized emergency vehicles; or
   (6)   Has violated the standards and regulations set forth in the EMRM.
   (c)   Permissible suspension or revocation of certificates. The Chief of
Police may revoke or suspend the ambulance certificate of any vehicle which
fails to meet the mechanical and equipment requirements set forth in the EMRM.
(§ 1, Ord. 185-NS, eff. February 4, 1971)
CHAPTER 16. PROHIBITION OF THE CONDUCT OF PUBLIC NUDITY*
*   Chapter 16 entitled “Unlawful Exposure of Private Parts and Female
Breasts,” consisting of Sections 5-16.01–5-16.08, codified from Ordinance 386-
NS, repealed by Section 1, Ordinance 1371-NS, effective January 18, 2001.
Sec. 5-16.01. Purpose.
   The City Council has considered the report of the City of Garden Grove,
California (1991) and the secondary effects of adult businesses which permit
displays of public nudity as described in the cases of Barnes v. Glen Theater,
Inc., (1991) 501 U.S. 560, 111 S.Ct. 2456, City of Erie v. PAP's A. M. (2000)
529 U.S. 277 , 120 S.Ct. 1382, and City of Renton v. Playtime Theaters, Inc.
(1986) 475 U.S. 41, 106 S. Ct. 925, rehearing denied, April 21, 1986, 475 U.S.
1132, 106 S. Ct. 1663. Public indecency laws are designed to prohibit certain
conduct such as public nudity for the purpose of preserving societal order and
a community’s notion of morality.
   The City Council finds that due the described secondary effects of public
nudity in adult businesses, as well as those effects of such conduct in other
public places require that the conduct of public nudity be prohibited as set
forth in this chapter. In addition, the Council finds that the conduct or
appearance of people (other than infants or small children) in the nude in a
public place or in a place open to or visible by the public, including
children, is inimical to public safety and order, and the community’s sense of
common decency and morality.
   The City Council further finds that certain lewd, immoral activities carried
on in public places for profit are highly detrimental to the public health,
safety and welfare, and lead to the debasement of both women and men, promote
violence, public intoxication, prostitution and other serious criminal
activity.
(§ 2, Ord. 1371-NS, eff. January 18, 2001)
Sec. 5-16.02. Definitions.
   “Nudity” means the showing, exposing, displaying or exhibiting of any of the
following:
   (1)   The human male or female genitals, pubic hair or buttocks with less
than fully opaque covering;
   (2)   The female breast with less than fully opaque covering below a point
immediately above the top of the areola, except as necessary while breast
feeding an infant under two years of age;
   (3)   Any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or
simulates the genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic
hair region; or
   (4)   Any device worn as a cover over the nipples and/or areolae of the
female breast, which device simulates and gives the realistic appearance of
nipples or areolae.
   “Public place” means any outdoor place owned by a public entity or exterior
private property which is open to the general public including, but not limited
to, a park, swimming pool, playground, right-of-way, street, walkway, trail, or
any other similar open place, including the interior areas of any building or
enclosed place which is open to the general public, such as places of
entertainment, taverns, restaurants, adult or sexually oriented businesses,
juice bars, clubs, theaters, dance halls, banquet halls, party rooms or halls
even if limited to specific members (or restricted to adults or select patrons
invited to attend), whether or not there is a payment of an admission charge
required for entrance to such places.
(§ 2, Ord. 1371-NS, eff. January 18, 2001)
Sec. 5-16.03. Unlawful public nudity.
   Except as allowed under Section 5-16.05, it is unlawful for any person in
any public place to knowingly and intentionally appear in a state of nudity.
The conduct of public nudity is a violation of this section without regard to
whether or not such person is paid any compensation by another person to so
expose him or herself, or directed to so appear by the management of any
establishment in which that conduct occurs.
(§ 2, Ord. 1371-NS, eff. January 18, 2001)
Sec. 5-16.04. Other prohibitions: Public performances, counseling or assisting.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully cause or direct any person
to expose him or herself as prohibited in Section 5-16.03 of this chapter. In
addition, it shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages, controls or
operates any private place which is open to the public, to wilfully permit,
allow, or procure the conduct of any person to exposing him or herself as
prohibited in Section 5-16.03 of this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 1371-NS, eff. January 18, 2001)
Sec. 5-16.05. Exceptions.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
   (a)   Photographs, movies, videos, or any other type of non-live art or
performance;
   (b)   Any child under the age of ten (10) years old;
   (c)   Any nude modeling in an enclosed studio which modeling is part of a
bonafide art class; or
   (d)   Any act prohibited, or the prohibition of which is preempted, by any
provision of state law.
(§ 2, Ord. 1371-NS, eff. January 18, 2001)
CHAPTER 17. MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS, MASSAGE TECHNICIANS, AND THE PRACTICE OF
MASSAGE*
*   5-17.01 through 5-17.12, codified from § 2, Ord. 1467-NS, eff. August 18,
2006, repealed by Part 1, Ord. 1577-NS, eff. July 27, 2012.
Sec. 5-17.01. Declaration of purpose and intent.
   (a)   This chapter establishes permitting standards intended to comply with
California law and establish health and safety guidelines for massage
establishments. This chapter regulates persons and establishments engaged in
the practice of massage therapy in order to protect and promote public health,
safety and welfare.
   (b)   This chapter establishes a local regulatory system that allows only
CAMTC certified massage therapists and massage practitioners to operate within
the City. This chapter is also intended to allow a transitional period for
certain existing massage technicians to continue practicing while they obtain
CAMTC certification. All persons who wish to work as a massage therapist or
massage practitioner in Thousand Oaks must obtain CAMTC certification on or
before December 31, 2012.
(Part 2, Ord. 1577-NS, eff. July 27, 2012)
Sec. 5-17.02. Definitions.
   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in
this chapter. Words and phrases not defined by this chapter have the meaning
set forth elsewhere in this Code, the California Business and Professions Code,
or California Government Code.
   “California Massage Therapy Council (CAMTC)” means the California Massage
Therapy Council created pursuant to California Business and Professions Code
Section 4600.5(a).
   “Certified massage practitioner” means a person who is currently certified
as a massage practitioner by the CAMTC, and who administers massage for
compensation.
   “Certified massage therapist” means a person who is currently certified as a
massage therapist by the CAMTC, and who administers massage for compensation.
   “Certified sole proprietorship” means any massage business where the owner
is the only person employed or used by that business to provide massage
services and the owner has a current and valid CAMTC certificate.
   “City” means the City of Thousand Oaks.
   “Director” means the Finance Director or such other director designated by
the City Manager to oversee local massage regulations.
   “Massage” means any method of pressure on, or friction against, or stroking,
kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating the external
parts of the human body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or
electrical apparatus, or other appliances or devices, with or without such
supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniment, antiseptic, oil, powder,
cream, lotion, ointment or other similar preparations.
   “Massage establishment” means a parlor, room, place or institution where
massage is given or administered by a massage technician.
   “Massage technician” means any person, who gives, performs or administers to
another person a massage for any form of consideration and shall include
certified massage practitioners and therapists as respectively defined in
California Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq.
   “Person” means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships,
associations or other forms of business organization or group.
   “Specified anatomical areas” means and includes any of the following human
anatomical areas: genitals, pubic regions, anuses, or female breasts below a
point immediately above the top of the areola.
   “Specified sexual activities” means and includes all of the following:
   (a)   Fondling or other erotic touching of specified anatomical areas;
   (b)   Sex acts including, without limitation, intercourse, oral copulation,
or sodomy;
   (c)   Masturbation; or
   (d)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any specified
sexual activity listed in this definition.
(Part 2, Ord. 1577-NS, eff. July 27, 2012)
Sec. 5-17.03. Administration.
   The Director is authorized to administer this chapter and to promulgate
administrative policies and procedures required to implement the regulations
and purposes set forth in this chapter.
(Part 2, Ord. 1577-NS, eff. July 27, 2012)
Sec. 5-17.04. Certifications required.
   (a)   Massage establishment. It is unlawful for any person to own, operate
or maintain a massage establishment unless all massage technicians employed by
the massage establishment hold a current, valid certification from the CAMTC as
a massage practitioner or massage therapist.
   (b)   Massage technician. It is unlawful for any person to engage in, or
carry on the business or activities of a massage technician without a
certification from the CAMTC as a massage practitioner or massage therapist.
   (c)   Off-premises massage service. It is unlawful for any person to own,
operate, or maintain an off-premise massage service in the City unless all
massage technicians employed by the off-premises massage service hold a
current, valid certification from the CAMTC as a massage practitioner or
massage therapist.
(Part 2, Ord. 1577-NS, eff. July 27, 2012)
Sec. 5-17.05. Massage establishment: Certificate of registration required.
   Any person, association, partnership, or corporation desiring to operate a
massage establishment must make an annual application for a massage
establishment certificate of registration. An application shall be filed on
forms provided by the City, submitted under penalty of perjury and shall
contain the following information:
   (a)   CAMTC certification verification:
   1.   If a certified sole proprietorship, the applicant/owner shall produce a
valid and current CAMTC certification.
   2.   If a massage establishment other than a certified sole proprietorship,
the applicant/owners shall produce:
   i.   If applicant/owner is CAMTC certified, a valid and current CAMTC
certification; and
   ii.   A statement that the massage establishment shall employ only certified
massage practitioners along with copies of valid and current State certificates
for all massage technicians employed by or contracted with, or who will be
employed by or contracted with the massage establishment and copies of their
current and valid CAMTC issued identification cards.
   (b)   The Police Department may require the owner/applicant of a massage
establishment to produce a valid and current driver’s license and/or
identification card issued by a state or federal governmental agency or other
photographic identification bearing a bona fide seal by a foreign government;
and further may require the massage technicians whom the owner/applicant has
identified as employees to personally appear and produce valid and current
State certificates, a valid and current driver’s license and/or identification
card issued by a state or federal governmental agency or other photographic
identification bearing a bona fide seal by a foreign government.
   (c)   Any person, association, partnership, or corporation desiring to
operate a massage establishment, that will own or does own five (5%) percent or
more of the massage establishment, and that is not a certified massage
therapist or certified massage practitioner, must submit an annual application
to the City for an investigation of the applicant’s background and history. A
nonrefundable fee, in an amount set by resolution, must accompany the
submission of each application to defray the cost of investigation, inspection
and enforcement of this chapter. An annual nonrefundable renewal fee will also
be charged to defray associated costs of investigation, inspection and
enforcement.
   1.   Each person applying for a background check must submit the following
information:
   i.   The full true name and any other names used by the applicant.
   ii.   The present address and telephone number of the applicant.
   iii.   Driver’s license number and social security number.
   iv.   The proposed address of the massage establishment.
   v.   Each residence and business address of the applicant for the five (5)
years immediately preceding the date of the application, and the inclusive
dates for such address.
   vi.   Written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age.
   vii.   Applicant’s height, weight, and color of eyes and hair.
   viii.   One photograph of the applicant at least two inches by two inches
taken within four months preceding the date of the application. The business
license or permit history of the applicant, including whether such applicant
has ever had any license or permit issued by any agency or board, city, county
or state revoked or suspended, or has had any professional or vocational
license or permit revoked or suspended and the reason(s) for the revocation(s).
   ix.   All criminal arrests and statement of the dates, places, and
disposition of any convictions from said arrests.
   x.   If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation must be
set forth exactly as shown in the articles of incorporation or charter,
together with the state and date of incorporation and names and residence
addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder
holding more than five (5%) percent of the stock of the corporation. If the
applicant is a partnership, the application must set forth the names and
residence addresses of each of the partners, including the limited partners. If
the applicant is a limited partnership, it must furnish a copy of its
certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one or more
partners are a corporation, the provisions of this section pertaining to
corporate applicants will apply. The applicant corporation or partnership must
designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible
managing officer. Such person must complete and sign all application forms
required of any individual applicant under this chapter, but only one
application fee will be charged.
   xi.   The full true names and other names used, the present addresses and
telephone numbers, and state certificates from the CAMTC or transitional
licenses for all massage technicians who will be working as employees or
independent contractors at each massage establishment permit location. The
applicant must provide the Director with any changes in the massage technicians
that work at the massage establishment during the permit period within 10
working days of each change.
   xii.   The Director may require the applicant to furnish fingerprints when
needed for the purpose of verifying identification and obtaining information on
applicant’s criminal history.
   xiii.   Such other identification and information as may be required by the
Director in order to reasonably verify the information to be included in the
application.
   xiv.   The City is allowed a reasonable time, not to exceed 60 days, in
which to investigate the information on the application. During the
investigation of the background information, a City representative including,
without limitation, a member of the Police Department, Fire Department,
Building and Safety Division, Planning Division, or any authorized
representative thereof, may inspect, with or without notice during regular
business hours, the proposed place of business to determine whether it conforms
to the requirements of this chapter. Upon completion of the inspection, the
City representative must inform the Director in writing of the findings of the
inspection.
   2.   Background clearance will be issued to the applicant who has furnished
all of the information required by this section in the application, provided:
   i.   The applicant has not made a material false statement in the
application.
   ii.   The applicant confirmed in the application that all massage
technicians who will be working as employees or independent contractors at each
massage establishment permit location possesses certification from the CAMTC as
a massage practitioner or massage therapist.
   iii.   The applicant, if an individual, or in the case of an applicant which
is a corporation or partnership, any of its officers, directors, holders of
five (5%) percent or more of the corporation's stock, has not been convicted in
a court of competent jurisdiction of any of the offenses currently listed in
California Government Code Section 51032 or as said section may be amended in
the future, including the following:
   Penal Code Sections 243.4; 261; 266a through 266j; 267; 314 to 316; 318; or
647(a, b, d); any offense requiring registration under Penal Code Section
290.001 et seq. or Health and Safety Code Section 11590; or any felony offense
involving the possession, possession for sale, sale, transportation,
furnishing, or giving away of a controlled substance specified in Health and
Safety Code Sections 11054 to 11058, as amended; or any offense in another
state which, if committed in California, would have been punishable as one or
more of the heretofore mentioned offenses; or any offense involving the use of
force or violence upon the person of another; or any offense involving theft,
embezzlement or moral turpitude;
   iv.   The applicant is at least 18 years of age; and
   v.   The applicant has not had a massage technician or massage establishment
license or permit suspended within one year or revoked within three years
immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, unless the
applicant can show a material change in circumstances or that mitigating
circumstances exist since the suspension or revocation.
   3.   Appeal of denial to issue massage establishment certificate of
registration. An applicant whose massage establishment certificate of
registration application was denied due to any of the reasons set forth in
Section
5-17.05(c)(2)(i-v) above may appeal such denial by submitting a timely request
pursuant to TOMC Section
1-4.01 et seq. and as set forth in this chapter. Failure to make a timely
request to appeal the decision to deny the massage establishment certificate of
registration waives any further recourse to challenge the decision.
(Part 2, Ord. 1577-NS, eff. July 27, 2012)
Sec. 5-17.06. Issuance of massage establishment certificate of registration.
   (a)   The Director shall issue a massage establishment certificate of
registration to any certified sole proprietorship that demonstrates all of the
following:
   1.   That the operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would
comply with all
applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the City’s building, zoning,
business tax, and health regulations.
   2.   The owner is the only person employed or used by that business to
provide massage services.
   3.   The owner holds a valid and current CAMTC certificate issued pursuant
to Chapter 10.5 of the California Business and Professions Code and that the
owner/applicant is the same person to whom the CAMTC issued a valid and current
State certificate and identification card.
   4.   That the applicant has not made any material misrepresentations in the
application or with respect to any other document or information required by
the City within the last five (5) years.
   (b)   The Director shall issue a massage establishment certificate of
registration to a massage establishment other than a certified sole
proprietorship that demonstrates the following:
   1.   That the operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would
comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the City’s
building, zoning, business tax, and health regulations.
   2.   The owner holds a valid and current State certificate issued pursuant
to Chapter 10.5 of the California Business and Professions Code and that the
owner/applicant is the same person to whom the CAMTC issued a valid and current
State certificate and identification card; or
   3.   All owners/applicants not CAMTC certified have received background
clearance per Section
5-17.05 of this chapter.
   4.   The massage establishment employs or uses only massage technicians
whose CAMTC certificates are valid and current.
   5.   That the applicant has not made any material misrepresentations in the
application or with respect to any other document or information required by
the City within the last five (5) years.
(Part 2, Ord. 1577-NS, eff. July 27, 2012)
Sec. 5-17.07. Display of certificates.
   Any owner of a massage establishment or off-premise massage service must
display the CAMTC certificates for all massage technicians prominently in a
conspicuous place, capable of being viewed by customers or City
representatives, at every location where massage is performed or conducted. For
off-premise massage services, massage workers must also carry a copy of their
CAMTC certificate and display it to customers upon request.
(Part 2, Ord. 1577-NS, eff. July 27, 2012)
Sec. 5-17.08. Registration fee.
   A registration fee, if any, shall be set by resolution of the City Council
and shall be required only for background check for those applicants/owners of
a massage establishment who are not CAMTC certified and own five (5%) percent
or more of the massage establishment.
(Part 2, Ord. 1577-NS, eff. July 27, 2012)
Sec. 5-17.09. Business tax certificates.
   All persons shall obtain a business tax certificate where required by the
City’s business tax provisions. The issuance of massage establishment
certificate of registration (individual or business) is a condition precedent
to the granting of such a business tax certificate. Upon the issuance of a
certificate of registration pursuant to this chapter, the applicant shall apply
for and furnish the information necessary to obtain a business tax certificate
as required by the provisions of this Code. No business tax certificate shall
be issued until the massage establishment certificate of registration has been
issued and the business tax, as provided in this Code, has been paid. The
business tax shall be commensurate with the business tax charged to other
professionals established by this Code.
(Part 2, Ord. 1577-NS, eff. July 27, 2012)
Sec. 5-17.10. Prohibited conduct.
   It is unlawful for owners of massage establishments or off-premise massage
services, or massage technicians, to conduct or allow any of the following
activities:
   (a)   It is unlawful for any massage technician or any other employee
working in a massage establishment or for an off-premise massage service, or
customers, patrons, or guests of the establishment or service, to engage in any
specified sexual activities upon the premises of the massage establishment or
the off-premise massage location.
   (b)   It is unlawful for any massage technician or other employee of a
massage establishment to expose specified anatomical areas in the presence of
any patron, customer, or guest.
   (c)   In the course of administering the massage, it is unlawful for any
massage technician or other massage establishment employee to make intentional
physical contact with the specified anatomical areas of any customer, patron or
guest.
(Part 2, Ord. 1577-NS, eff. July 27, 2012)
Sec. 5-17.11. Facilities and operations.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any massage establishment to operate unless the
massage establishment premises and operation comply with the following minimum
requirements:
   1.   Signs. A readable sign must be posted at the main entrance identifying
the establishment as a massage establishment, provided, however, that all such
signs must otherwise comply with the sign requirements of this Code.
   2.   Lighting. Minimum lighting must be provided in accordance with the
California Building Code, as adopted by this Code, and, in addition, at least
one unobstructed artificial light of not less than sixty (60) watts must be
provided in each enclosed room or booth where massage services are being
performed on a patron.
   3.   Ventilation. Minimum ventilation must be provided in accordance with
the California Building Code, as adopted by this Code.
   4.   Disinfection of Instruments. Instruments used for massage must be
disinfected before each use. Where instruments for massage are employed,
adequate quantities of supplies for disinfection must be available during all
hours of operation.
   5.   Water. Hot and cold running water must be provided at all times.
   6.   Linen storage. Closed cabinets must be utilized for the storage of
clean towels and linen. After use, towels and linen must be removed and stored
in a separate container until laundered.
   7.   Dressing and toilet facilities. Separate dressing and separate toilet
facilities must be provided for male and female patrons. This condition does
not apply to massage establishments that offer foot massage services and
provide no other form of massage services or other type of activity regulated
by this chapter.
   8.   Sanitary conditions. All walls, ceilings, floors, steam and vapor
rooms, and all other physical facilities for the massage establishment must be
kept in good repair and be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
   9.   Clean linen. Clean and sanitary towels and linens must be provided for
patrons receiving massage services. No common use of towels or linens is
permitted.
   10.   Compliance with laws. The premises to be used must at all times comply
with all applicable State and local laws and regulations.
   11.   Any room in which a massage establishment provides massage services
may not be used for residential sleeping purposes.
   12.   A register of all individuals employed as massage technicians, and
copies of their current CAMTC certifications and massage technician business
licenses, must be maintained and available for inspection at all times during
regular business hours.
   13.   Each person present in any area of the massage establishment outside
the waiting area or other areas open to any member of the public must be a
certified massage practitioner or certified massage therapist or the massage
establishment owner.
   14.   The permits and certifications required by this chapter must be
displayed in an open and conspicuous public place on the premises.
   (b)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a massage establishment is located
in a facility that does not have private treatment rooms and where all services
are performed in a singular, open room, visible to the public, the owner or
operator is exempt from having to comply with subsections (a)(5-7) of
5-17.11.
(Part 2, Ord. 1577-NS, eff. July 27, 2012)
Sec 5-17.12.   Inspection by City officials and notices of violation.
   (a)   City officials, including the County Health Officer, shall have the
right to enter the premises from time to time during regular business hours
prior to the issuance of a permit and subsequently for the purpose of making
reasonable inspections to enforce compliance with this chapter and with
building, fire, electrical, plumbing, and/or health and safety regulations. In
the event a certificate of registration has been issued, it may be revoked or
suspended in the manner hereinafter set forth in this chapter.
   (b)   Whenever City officials make an inspection of a massage business and
find that any provision of this chapter has been violated, he or she shall give
notice of such violation by means of an inspection report or other written
notice. In any such notification, the investigating person shall:
   1.   Set forth the specific violation or violations found, and shall notify
the registered certificate holder that failure to comply with any notice issued
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter may result in the revocation
or suspension of the permit.
   2.   The registered certificate holder may be issued a warning that any
future violation of this chapter may result in suspension or revocation of the
certificate of registration, or the City officials may establish a specific and
reasonable period of time for the correction of the violation or violations. No
time to correct need be given for any violations addressed in Section
5-17.05 of this Code.
   3.   The registered certificate holder and operator shall take immediate
action to correct violations and City officials may re-inspect the business for
compliance.
(Part 2, Ord. 1577-NS, eff. July 27, 2012)
Sec. 5-17.13. Exceptions.
   This chapter does not apply to the following classes of individuals, and no
CAMTC certification is required of such persons, while engaged in the
performance of the duties of their respective professions:
   (a)   Acupuncturists who are duly certified to practice their profession in
the State of California.
   (b)   Barbers, beauticians, and cosmetologists with respect to scalp
massage, who are duly permitted pursuant to Business and Professions Code
Section 7301 et seq., in accordance with the limitations of their permits.
   (c)   Nurses, physicians, chiropractors, osteopaths, physical therapists, or
other health care professionals who are duly permitted to practice their
respective professions in the State of California, or provide professional
services in lawful compliance with Corporations Code Section 13401(a).
(Part 2, Ord. 1577-NS, eff. July 27, 2012)
Sec. 5-17.14. Public nuisance abatement.
   Any massage establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the
provisions of this chapter is unlawful and a public nuisance. The City Attorney
is authorized, in addition to or in lieu of any other legal or criminal
proceedings, to commence an action or proceeding for abatement, removal or
enjoinment of such massage establishment in any manner provided by law. The
City Attorney may seek a court order to grant specified relief, to abate or
remove such massage establishments, and restrain and enjoin any person from
operating, conducting or maintaining such an establishment contrary to the
provisions of this chapter.
(Part 2, Ord. 1577-NS, eff. July 27, 2012)
Sec. 5-17.15. Revocation.
   The Director or City Attorney may revoke approvals issued under this chapter
for one or more of the following grounds:
   (a)   Fraud or deceit. That the applicant practiced fraud or deceit in
obtaining an approval under this chapter;
   (b)   Violation of chapter. That the massage establishment owner, operator,
massage technician, or owner’s employee violated one or more provisions of this
chapter;
   (c)   Criminal conviction. That the massage establishment owner, operator,
massage technician, or its employee has been convicted in a court of competent
jurisdiction of any offense described in this chapter including those set forth
in California Government Code Section 51032;
   (d)   Improperly maintained facilities. That the facilities and operations
of the massage establishment are not kept in compliance with this chapter and
that the owner or operator has failed to promptly remedy any deficiency of
which they have been notified;
   (e)   Employment of uncertified technicians. That the massage establishment
has employed, allowed or permitted an uncertified person to perform massage in
the massage establishment;
   (f)   Error. That the approval was issued in error;
   (g)   Civil penalties. Assessment of three or more civil penalties as
provided by this chapter during any six month period; or
   (h)   Prohibited conduct. A massage establishment owner, operator, massage
technician, or the massage establishment’s employee or agent has been found to
have engaged in prohibited conduct in violation of this chapter.
(Part 2, Ord. 1577-NS, eff. 7-27-2012)
Sec. 5-17.16. Notice of revocation.
   Upon a determination on the grounds to revoke an approval under this
chapter, the Director or City Attorney must cause a notice of revocation to be
mailed by first class, postage prepaid mail, to the address designated by the
massage technician or establishment pursuant to this chapter.
(Part 2, Ord. 1577-NS, eff. 7-27-2012)
Sec. 5-17.17. Surrender of massage establishment certificate of registration.
   The holder of a massage establishment certificate of registration shall
immediately surrender his or her certificate to the Chief of Police upon its
revocation.
(Part 2, Ord. 1577-NS, eff. 7-27-2012)
Sec. 5-17.18. Criminal liability, civil liability and penalties.
   (a)   Any violation of chapter may be prosecuted as an infraction punishable
by fine, or as a misdemeanor and punishable by fine or imprisonment, or both,
in accordance with Government Code Section 36900 et seq. All violations shall
be a misdemeanor unless made an infraction by: (1) the City Attorney filing a
complaint in the Superior Court specifying that the offense is an infraction;
or (2) the issuing of a citation specifying that the violation is an
infraction; or, (3) the City Attorney making a motion in court to reduce a
misdemeanor to an infraction if such motion is made prior to the trial on the
matter.
   (b)   Each day a violation of this Code or other ordinance of the City
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
   (c)   Unless otherwise exempted by the provisions of this chapter, every
action, whether from a person acting as an individual, owner, employee of the
owner, operator, employee, participant, or helper of the operators who gives
massages or conducts a massage business, or who, in connection with the
business, gives or administers, or practices the giving or administering of,
massages or any of the services defined in this chapter, without first
obtaining CAMTC certification and/or a massage establishment certificate of
registration, or whose actions otherwise violate any provision of this chapter,
shall be and is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. In addition to
or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action for violations under this chapter,
City may commence an action or proceeding for the abatement, removal and
enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law, including any code
enforcement procedures established pursuant to the laws of the State of
California or the City of Thousand Oaks and may take such other steps,
including abatement proceedings to remove such massage establishments and
restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining a
massage establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. If an
injunction is sought, attorney's fees and costs will be assessed at the
discretion of the court against the party subject to said injunction. The City
may also seek redress through the City's administrative penalty process for
civil penalties pursuant to section
1-2.201 et seq.
   (d)   Any owner, licensee or manager in charge or in control of a massage
establishment who knowingly employs a person who is not in possession of a
valid, unrevoked CAMTC certification or who allows such persons to perform,
operate, or practice within such a place of business, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. In addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action under
this chapter, City may commence an action or actions, proceeding or
proceedings, for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the manner
provided by law, including any code enforcement procedures established pursuant
to the laws of the State of California or the City of Thousand Oaks. City may
also take such other steps and may apply to such court or courts as may have
jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such massage
establishments and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or
maintaining a massage establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
If an injunction is sought, attorney's fees and costs will be assessed at the
discretion of the court against the party subject to said injunction. The City
may also seek redress through the City's administrative penalty process for
civil penalties pursuant to Section
1-2.201 et seq.
(Part 2, Ord. 1577-NS, eff. July 27, 2012)
Sec. 5-17.19. Appeal.
   (a)   Any person denied approval of a massage establishment certificate of
registration under this chapter or a massage establishment owner or operator
whose approval has been revoked may appeal the denial or revocation. Such
appeal must be in writing and must be filed with the City Manager or designee
not more than fourteen (14) days following the mailing of the notice of denial
or revocation sent to the applicant or massage establishment owner or operator
to the address listed by the applicant or massage establishment owner or
operator pursuant to this chapter. The written appeal must contain all reasons
and documentary support why the denial or revocation should be overturned. Any
successful appeal will result in approval or reinstatement of an approval and
refund of any fines collected by the City.
   1.   The City Manager shall not accept an appeal, and no hearing shall be
held, unless the appellant has paid a filing fee, in an amount set by
resolution of the City Council, to defray the cost of such appeal. Any appeal
without the timely payment of fees shall be considered to be untimely.
   2.   The scope of the appeal hearing pursuant to this section shall be
limited to those issues raised by the appellant in the written appeal, as
submitted pursuant to division (a) of this section.
   (b)   City Manager action.
   1.   Upon receipt of a timely filed appeal, the City Manager or designee
shall set the matter for hearing which shall be held not fewer than ten
calendar days nor more than 30 calendar days from the date of the appeal
request. The hearing may be continued from time to time upon the mutual consent
of the parties.
   2.   The appellant shall be provided with notice of the time and place of
the appeal hearing, as well as a copy of all relevant materials at least seven
calendar days prior to the hearing.
   3.   At the time of such hearing, the City Manager shall review the records
and files relating to the decision.
   4.   The City Manager shall permit any interested person to present any
relevant evidence bearing on the issues involved in the matter.
   5.   In conducting the hearing, technical rules relating to evidence and
witnesses shall not apply. Any relevant evidence may be admitted if it is
material and if it is evidence customarily relied upon by responsible persons
in the conduct of their affairs regardless of the existence of any common law
or statutory rule which might make admission of such evidence improper over
objection in civil actions. Hearsay evidence may be admissible if it is the
sort upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of
serious affairs. The rules of privilege shall be applicable to the extent they
are permitted in civil actions. Irrelevant, collateral, and repetitious
testimony shall be excluded.
   6.   The appellant shall have the burden of proving that he or she meets the
requirements for issuing the certificate in the first instance; the City shall
have the burden in proving that grounds exist for revoking or failing to renew
a certificate.
   7.   Based upon the evidence presented at the hearing, the City Manager
shall determine whether the decision should be affirmed, modified or reversed.
   8.   The City Manager's decision shall be communicated in writing to the
appellant within seven calendar days after the close of the hearing and
submission of the matter to the City Manager for decision. The City Manager's
decision shall state whether the decision is affirmed, modified or reversed and
shall state the reasons therefor.
   9.   The decision of the City Manager shall include notice that the decision
is final and conclusive, that judicial review may be sought therefrom pursuant
to California Civil Procedure Code Section 1094.5, and that any action filed in
the superior court shall be filed within 90 days following the City Manager’s
notice pursuant to California Civil Procedure Code Section 1094.6.
(Part 2, Ord. 1577-NS, eff. July 27, 2012)
CHAPTER 18. DRUG PARAPHERNALIA*
*   Chapter 18, entitled “Displays of Marijuana Paraphernalia,” consisting of
Sections 5-18.01 through 5-18.04, as added by Ordinance No. 734-NS, effective
January 10, 1980, repealed by Ordinance No. 811-NS, effective August 12, 1982.
Sections 5-18.01 through 5-18.09 as added by § 2, Ord. 811-NS, eff. August 12,
1982, repealed by § 14, Ord. 907-NS, eff. February 11, 1986.
CHAPTER 19. PRICES OF EMERGENCY ITEMS AND SERVICES DURING A PROCLAIMED
DISASTER*
*   Chapter 19, entitled “Retail, Grocery Price Marking,” consisting of
Sections 5-19.01 through 5-19.02 added by Ord 745-NS, eff. April 24, 1980,
repealed by § 15, Ord. 907-NS, eff. February 11, 1986.
Sec. 5-19.01. Definitions.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   (a)   “Emergency items” shall mean and include, but are not limited to, such
goods and products as food, drink, confection or condiment for man or animal,
water, flashlights, radios, batteries, candles, blankets, soaps and diapers,
and prescription and nonprescription drugs, bandages, gauze and isopropyl
alcohol.
   (b)   “Emergency services” shall mean and include, but are not limited to,
contractor services for repairs to residential and commercial property of any
type which are damaged. Incorporated herein are the definitions contained in
Sections 7025, 7026, 7026.1 and 7026.3 of the California Business and
Professions Code. (§ 1, Ord. 1196-NS, eff. February 8, 1994)
Sec. 5-19.05. Regulation of prices.
   This chapter applies to the regulation of prices of emergency items and
services during an emergency or disaster for which a proclamation of a local
emergency has been issued by the Thousand Oaks City Council or City Manager
pursuant to Government Code Section 8630.
   (a)   Excessive price increases prohibited. Upon the proclamation of a local
emergency or disaster, it shall be unlawful for any merchant, person,
contractor, business or other entity, to increase prices and sell or offer to
sell any emergency items or services for a price which is more than ten (10%)
percent greater than the price charged by such person or business for said
emergency items or services immediately prior to the proclamation of the local
emergency, unless said person can prove that the excess was directly
attributable to additional costs imposed by the supplier of the emergency
items, or resulting from increased cost of labor and/or cost of materials used
to provide the emergency service.
   (b)   Modification; termination. The applicability of this section can be
expressly modified, reduced or eliminated by the provisions within the
proclamation of the local emergency or disaster. Any price regulation imposed
under this section terminates upon the termination of the local emergency,
unless terminated earlier by the Thousand Oaks City Council.
(§ 1, Ord. 1196-NS, eff. February 8, 1994)
Sec. 5-19.10. Penalty.
   Any person who shall be convicted of violating the provisions of this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished by a fine of not less than One Thousand and no/100ths ($1,000.00)
Dollars, or by imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than six (6)
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Any person believing that a
violation of this chapter has been committed may file a complaint with the City
Attorney or District Attorney.
   In addition, anyone affected or victimized by a violation of this chapter
may file a civil action under applicable State law to enforce this section, and
in any action, a civil penalty may be imposed as provided by law and, where
appropriate, restitution to aggrieved consumers may be ordered.
(§ 1, Ord. 1196-NS, eff. February 8, 1994)
CHAPTER 20. GRAFFITI
Sec. 5-20.01. Intent and purpose.
   Section 53069.3 of the Government Code authorizes the City to provide for
the removal of graffiti or other inscribed material. The City Council finds
that graffiti, on public and private properties, is a blighting factor on the
neighborhood, encourages other acts of malicious vandalism, and depreciates the
value of the adjacent and surrounding properties.
(§ 1, Ord. 1033-NS, eff. July 18, 1989)
Sec. 5-20.02. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have
the below ascribed meanings:
   (a)   “Defacement” shall mean the intentional altering of the physical shape
or physical appearance of property.
   (b)   “Graffiti” means the unauthorized act of defacing, painting, marking,
damaging or destroying any real or personal property of another through the use
of an aerosol or pressurized container of paint, paint, indelible marker,
chalk, ink, dye or other liquid substance capable of defacing property.
   (c)   “Indelible marker” means any marker, pen or similar implement which
contains a fluid which is not soluble in water and has a flat, pointed or
angled writing surface of a width of one-half inch or greater.
   (d)   “Responsible adult” is a parent or guardian of an individual under the
age of eighteen (18) years. A responsible adult may also include an agent of
the parent of the guardian, provided said agent is over eighteen (18) years of
age.
(§ 1, Ord. 1033-NS, eff. July 18, 1989)
Sec. 5-20.03. Prohibition of defacement/graffiti.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to apply graffiti upon any wall, rock,
street, bridge, building, fence, gate, structure, tree or other real or
personal property, either publicly or privately owned, without the permission
of the owner, lessee or operator of such property.
   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a
violation of this code pursuant to Section 1-2.01 of the Thousand Oaks
Municipal Code.
   Any individual who is found guilty of violating this section shall pay
restitution to the property owner, in addition to authorized penalties. If the
violator is a minor, the parent or guardian shall be responsible for payment of
restitution.
(§ 1, Ord. 1033-NS, eff. July 18, 1989)
Sec. 5-20.04. Sale of aerosol paint to minors.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell or cause to be
sold, any aerosol or pressurized container of paint to any person under the age
of eighteen (18) years who is not accompanied by a responsible adult.
(§ 1, Ord. 1033-NS, eff. July 18, 1989)
Sec. 5-20.05. Possession by minors.
   It is unlawful for any individual under the age of eighteen (18) years, who
is in a public place or upon private property, without the consent of the
owner, tenant or operator thereon, and who is not accompanied by responsible
adult, to possess an aerosol or pressurized container of paint.
(§ 1, Ord. 1033-NS, eff. July 18, 1989)
Sec. 5-20.06. Signs required: Secured display of paint cans and markers.
   (a)   Signs. Any person engaged in the retail sale of aerosol or pressurized
containers of paint or marker pens with tips exceed one-fourth (1/4) inch in
width, containing anything other than a solution which can be removed by water
after it dries, must display, at the location of retail sale, a sign clearly
visible and legible to employees and customers, which sign states as follows:
   It is unlawful for any person to sell, lend or give to any individual under
the age of 18 years, who is not accompanied by a responsible adult, an aerosol
or pressurized can of paint or a marker pen with a tip of 1/4 inch or greater
width.
   (b)   Secure display. Any person engaged in the retail sale of aerosol or
pressurized containers of paint or marker pens with tips exceeding one-fourth
(1/4) inch in width, containing anything other than a solution which can be
removed by water after it dries, shall store or cause such products to be
stored in an area viewable by, but not accessible to, the public during the
regular course of business without employee assistance, pending legal sale or
disposition of such marker pens or paint containers.
(§ 1, Ord. 1033-NS, eff. July 18, 1989, as amended by Ord. 1185-NS, eff. August
3, 1993)
Sec. 5-20.07. Removal.
   (a)   General. Any person applying graffiti within the City shall have the
duty to remove same in a manner approved by the City within twenty-four (24)
hours after notice by the City or the public or private owner of the property
involved. Failure of any person to so remove graffiti shall constitute an
additional violation of this chapter. Consistent with Civil Code Section
1714.1, where graffiti is applied by minors, the parent or guardian shall be
responsible for such removal or payment for the cost thereof.
   (b)   Public property. Whenever the Public Works Director or his designated
representative determines that graffiti exists upon property owned by the City,
it shall be removed as soon as possible. When property is owned by a public
entity other than the City, the removal of the graffiti may be authorized by
the Public Works Director or his representative, and removal undertaken by City
personnel or independent contractor only after securing written consent of the
public entity having jurisdiction over the property.
   (c)   Private property.
   (1)   Duty to remove. It is every property owners’ duty to remove graffiti
promptly from their property in a manner acceptable to the City. Where graffiti
is located upon private property, which is capable of being viewed by persons
utilizing any public right-of-way or sidewalk within the City, the City may
cause a written notice to be served upon the owner of the affected premises
requesting the removal of that graffiti. Unless additional time is granted by
the City, due to a hardship in complying, the property owner shall have five
(5) business/work days after the date of the City’s notice to remove the
graffiti. Failure to remove it shall be a violation for each day the graffiti
is not removed. Failure to remove the graffiti will deem to authorize the City
to remove the violation. Costs of such removal shall be assessed as a lien on
the subject property.
   (2)   Notice. The notice shall be addressed to the name and address as
appears on the last tax assessment roll, by depositing a copy of the notice in
the U.S. mail, with postage fully prepaid, or personally delivering a copy of
the notice to owner. The service is complete at the time of such deposit in the
mail or when personal service is effectuated. The failure of any person to
receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceeding.
   (3)   Enforcement. Enforcement by way of criminal prosecution is an
alternate and an additional remedy to other abatement and enforcement
procedures available to the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 1033-NS, eff. July 18, 1989, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1155-NS, eff.
July 7, 1992)
Sec. 5-20.08. Reward.
   The City may pay to any person who provides information which leads to the
arrest and conviction of any person who applies any drawing, inscription,
figure or mark of the type commonly known and referred to as “graffiti” to any
wall, rock, bridge, street, building, fence, gate, structure, tree or other
real or personal property, a reward as established by Council resolution.
(§ 1, Ord. 1033-NS, eff. July 18, 1989)
CHAPTER 21. NOISE
Sec. 5-21.01. Noise from radios, television sets and similar devices.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within any residential zone of the City
to use or operate any radio, musical instrument, phonograph, television
receiver, or other machine or device for the producing, reproducing or
amplification of the human voice, or any other sound in such a manner as to (1)
disturb, for that time of the day or night, the reasonable peace, quiet, and
comfort of the occupants of neighboring dwellings residing in the area; or (2)
create any loud or raucous noise level by such use or operation which is
audible to the human ear during the hours of 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. of the
following day, at a distance in excess of fifty (50) feet from the property
line of the noise source, or fifty (50) feet from any such device if in the
public right-of-way, within any residential zone of the City.
(§ 2, of Ord. 1085-NS, eff. October 2, 1990)
Sec. 5-21.02. Powered equipment in residential areas.
   Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day, no person
shall operate any lawn mower, backpack blower, lawn edger, riding tractor, or
any other machinery, equipment, or other mechanical or electrical device, or
any hand tool which creates a loud, raucous or impulsive sound, within any
residential zone or within any commercial zone which can be heard from any
inhabited real property in a residential zone.
(§ 2, of Ord. 1085-NS, eff. October 2, 1990)
Sec. 5-21.03. Loud, unnecessary and unusual noise.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, and in addition
thereto, it shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make or continue to
make or cause to be made or continued, or allow any animal which is kept by
that person on the property which is the source of the noise, to make any loud,
unnecessary, and unusual noise which disturbs the peace or quiet of any
neighborhood, or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person
of normal sensitiveness residing in the area.
   The standard which may be considered in determining whether a violation of
the provisions of this section exists may include, but not be limited to, the
following:
   (a)   The level of noise when standing on the property line;
   (b)   Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual for the approved
use of the property;
   (c)   Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural;
   (d)   The level and intensity of the background or ambient noise, if any;
   (e)   The proximity of the noise source to residential sleeping facilities;
   (f)   The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates;
   (g)   The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise
emanates;
   (h)   The time of the day and night the noise occurs;
   (i)   The duration of the noise;
   (j)   Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant; and
   (k)   Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial
activity.
(§ 2, of Ord. 1085-NS, eff. October 2, 1990, as amended by § 1, Ord 1111-NS,
eff. July 25, 1991)
Sec. 5-21.04. Emergency activities exempted.
   This chapter shall not apply to any public equipment, public vehicle, or
public action taken by the City needed in order to protect the public health,
safety and welfare.
(§ 2, of Ord. 1085-NS, eff. October 2, 1990)
Sec. 5-21.05. Loud parties or assemblages: Enforcement costs and response fees.
   When any loud or unruly assemblage occurs and the City's law enforcement
agency is required to respond to the scene in response to citizen complaints,
and the senior peace officer at the scene determines that there is a threat to,
or a possible violation of this chapter then that senior peace officer shall
notify the owner of the property and/or the person in charge of the property
where the assemblage exists, and/or the person responsible for said assemblage,
that such person or persons, or in the case of a minor, the parents and/or
guardians of such minor, shall be held personally liable for the cost of
providing additional law enforcement personnel over and above the normal
services provided by the law enforcement agency in initial response to such
assemblages. At that time, such person or persons shall be given a first
warning, in the form of notification by the senior peace officer, that the
first police response shall be deemed to be the normal police services
provided. The police personnel necessarily utilized within twenty-four (24)
hours after such first warning to control the threat to the public peace,
health, safety or general welfare shall be deemed to be on a special security
assignment over and above the normal services provided. The owner of the
property and/or the person in charge of the property where such assemblage
occurs, and/or the person responsible for such assemblage, shall be personally
responsible for the cost of such subsequent call back or security assignment in
an amount determined upon a cost accounting basis by the City. The cost of such
special security assignment shall include damage to City property and/or
injuries to City personnel. The fee charged will not be in excess of the civil
fine or penalty as set forth in the City's Master Fee Resolution for a single
incident. The City reserves its legal options to elect any other legal
remedies.
(§ 2, of Ord. 1085-NS, eff. October 2, 1990, as amended by part 5, Ord. 1434-
NS, eff. July 1, 2005)
CHAPTER 22. HEALTH CLUBS
Sec. 5-22.01. Intent and purpose.
   The purpose of this section is to provide consumers of health club services
with an effective and expedient method of obtaining refunds when their health
club is closed and the business fails to provide prompt and equitable refunds.
Nothing in this chapter is intended to affect or to be inconsistent with the
requirements and provisions of Civil Code Section 1812.80, et seq.
(§ 1, Ord. 1110-NS, eff. July 18, 1991)
Sec. 5-22.02. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words or phrases shall have
the following meanings:
   (a)   “Bond” shall mean a surety bond or financial guaranty bond in a form,
and from a company approved by the City Attorney, for the benefit of the City
of Thousand Oaks, assuring refunds to consumers whose health club closes and
which club fails to provide refunds within thirty (30) days of such closure.
   (b)   “Cash deposit” shall mean either (1) cash deposited with the City or
(2) a certificate of deposit or savings account with a California financial
institution wherein the City is named holder of the account as trustee for
refunds to consumers; and (3) the City's signature will be required prior to
release of any funds.
   (c)   “Health club” shall mean any corporation or business which offers or
provides to the public, on a membership basis, services, facilities,
instruction, training, or assistance in body building, exercising, reducing,
figure development, aerobics, or any other similar physical activity.
   (d)   “Health club contract” shall mean a contract in the form and manner
prescribed by California Civil Code Section 1812.80, et seq., between a health
club and consumer for health club services.
   (e)   “Health club closure” shall mean the discontinuation of health club
services pursuant to the terms and at the location specified in the health club
contract for more than fourteen (14) days. This shall not include temporary
closures for a period of up to sixty (60) days, or a longer period approved by
the City, in order to make repairs or alterations to existing facilities.
   (f)   “Refund” shall mean an amount equal to the prorated value of the
remaining time on a health club contract at the time of a health club closure.
Processing fees, if any, shall be included.
(§ 1, Ord. 1110-NS, eff. July 18, 1991)
Sec. 5-22.03. Bond or letter of credit requirements.
   Annually, on the first day of February, each year, every health club shall
provide to the City’s Finance Department, the below described cash deposit,
surety bond, letter of credit, or proof of exemption under Section 5-22.04. No
certificate of occupancy shall be issued or be renewed for a health club, and
no health club shall operate, do business, or sell memberships unless exempt
under Section 5-22.04, or the applicant first provides the City with evidence
of a cash deposit, surety bond, or letter of credit, meeting all of the
following requirements:
   (a)   The cash deposit, bond, or letter of credit is in the amount of
Seventy-five Thousand and no/100ths ($75,000.00) Dollars or five (5%) percent
of the health club's previous fiscal year’s gross, whichever is greater;
   (b)   The deposit, bond, or irrevocable letter of credit shall be called
upon or be enforceable upon the failure of the health club to provide to the
City proof that full refunds of prepaid dues or fees to all customers of that
club have been made within thirty (30) days of the date of the health club
closure;
   (c)   The cash deposit, bond, or letter of credit shall provide for payment
of administrative costs to the City of Thousand Oaks in an amount equal to ten
(10%) percent of the total monies called upon for City processing any refund to
health club consumers.
(§ 1, Ord. 1110-NS, eff. July 18, 1991)
Sec. 5-22.04. Cash deposit, bond, or letter of credit exemption.
   A cash deposit, bond, or letter of credit shall not be required if the City
determines upon written request and assurances, under penalty of perjury, that
the health club is eligible for an exemption based upon any one of the
following criteria:
   (a)   The health club is a nonprofit organization eligible for a tax
exemption pursuant to California Revenue and Taxation Code Section 23701d;
   (b)   The health club does not and will not allow prepayment of more than
one month’s service fee or membership charge and charges all members or
consumers on a monthly fee basis only. However, a one-time charge as an
initiation fee in an amount no greater than three (3) times the amount of the
monthly fee may be charged;
   (c)   The health club has (1) been in the business of providing health club
services continuously during the three (3) year period immediately prior to
that date; (2) unsecured and unencumbered assets in excess of Five Hundred
Thousand and no/100ths ($500,000.00) Dollars; and (3) warranted and obligated
to the City, on a form approved by the City Attorney:
   (i)   That any subsequent sale of the business; or
   (ii)   Any transfer (or sale) of the equipment to a new tenant or owner of
the building used by the health club, which equipment is left in place, shall
be conditioned upon the health club either providing membership prepayment fee
refunds to the consumers, or requiring the successor of such business or
transferred assets to honor, in full, the terms and conditions of all existing
health club contracts.
   An applicant qualifying for an exemption pursuant to this subsection shall
annually file, concurrent with its business license renewal, a statement
certifying that the applicant continues to maintain unsecured and unencumbered
assets in excess of Five Hundred Thousand and no/100ths ($500,000.00) Dollars,
or a cash deposit.
   (d)   The health club (1) has provided health club services within the City
continuously during the three (3) year period immediately prior to that date;
(2) at all times will offer the option of paying a membership fee on a monthly
basis with a one-time initiation fee in an amount no greater than three (3)
times that monthly fee; (3) shall, for any prepaid membership in excess of one
month, obtain a signed acknowledgment of the member as to the risks of early
closure of the health club and the possible refund benefits from other health
club providers as required under this ordinance; and (4) is obligated and
warrants to the City, on a form approved by the City Attorney:
   (i)   That any subsequent sale of the business; or
   (ii)   Any transfer (or sale) of the equipment to a new tenant or owner of
the building used by the health club, which equipment is left in place, shall
be conditioned upon the health club either providing membership prepayment fee
refunds to the consumers, or requiring the successor of such business or
transferred assets to honor in full the terms and conditions of all existing
health club contracts.
(§ 1, Ord. 1110-NS, eff. July 18, 1991, as amended by part 16, Ord. 1437-NS,
eff. July 7, 2005)
Sec. 5-22.05. Refund obligation: Cash deposit, bond or letter of credit
enforcement stayed.
   The operator shall provide refunds to consumers in an amount equal to the
prorated value of the remaining time on the consumer’s health club contract at
the time of a health club closure, including processing fees, if any. The
operator of a health club shall be afforded a period of thirty (30) days from
the date of a health club closure to provide refunds to affected consumers
prior to the City taking action to enforce the refund provisions established by
Sections 5-22.03 and 5-22.04 of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1110-NS, eff. July 18, 1991)
Sec. 5-22.06. Administration of refunds.
   Upon the City’s receipt of funds from the cash deposit, bond, letter of
credit, or other secured interest, the City shall provide refunds to the extent
such refunds are made possible given the amount of the proceeds from the
deposit, the bond, or other security, and the amount of refunds claimed by
consumers. The administration of consumer refunds shall be the responsibility
of the City, which shall:
   (a)   Establish a health club refund account for the deposit of all proceeds
from the cash deposit, bond, letter of credit, or secured interest into such
account;
   (b)   Receive and review claims for consumer refunds;
   (c)   Determine the validity of and appropriate amount for each consumer
refund; and
   (d)   Deduct the cash deposit, bond, or secured interest, as administrative
cost, an amount equal to ten (10%) percent of the amount of refunds provided to
consumers.
(§ 1, Ord. 1110-NS, eff. July 18, 1991)
Sec. 5-22.07. Deadline for refund claims.
   Unless good cause is shown, no claim for a refund shall be accepted by the
City after six (6) months from the date of the health club closure. Nothing in
this section shall affect the rights of consumers to alternatively pursue civil
remedies which may otherwise be available under State or Federal law.
(§ 1, Ord. 1110-NS, eff. July 18, 1991)
Sec. 5-22.08. Term of health club contract.
   No health club operating in the City of Thousand Oaks shall contract to
provide health club services for a period of time beyond which the health club
has an ownership or leasehold interest to operate such health club.
(§ 1, Ord. 1110-NS, eff. July 18, 1991)
Sec. 5-22.09. Disclosure statement.
   All health club contracts entered into in the City of Thousand Oaks shall
have prominently displayed in bold type upon such contract, the following
disclosure:
   NOTICE TO CONSUMERS: In the event of a health club closure, you may have
additional protection afforded by local law beyond those provided to you under
state law. For more information, contact the City of Thousand Oaks.
(§ 1, Ord. 1110-NS, eff. July 18, 1991)
Sec. 5-22.10. Phase in of compliance for bond, letter of credit, or cash
deposit requirements.
   Any health club operating and open for business within Thousand Oaks on July
18, 1991 shall have complied with subsection (d)(1) of Section 5-22.04 by July
18, 1994, however, all such clubs shall comply with the requirements of
subsections (d), (2)–(4). Any club opening after July 18, 1991 shall fully
comply with all sections and subsections of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1110-NS, eff. July 18, 1991)
CHAPTER 23. VENDING ON PUBLIC STREETS, PUBLIC PROPERTY, PRIVATE STREETS AND
RESIDENTIAL PARKING AREAS
Editor’s Note:
   Chapter 23 was reorganized by Ord. 1656-NS, effective January 1, 2019. The
original Chapter 23, comprised of Sections 5-23.01 through 5-23.05, was based
on Ords. 1188-NS, 1192-NS, and 1621-NS.
Sec. 5-23.01. Purpose and findings.
   (a)   Purpose. Sections 51036-51039 of the California Government Code
confers upon local governments the authority to adopt regulations designed to
promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. The
requirements set forth in this chapter are intended to protect the public's
health, safety, and welfare by ensuring that vendors on public property provide
safe and sanitary conditions for consumers and the general public, are
adequately insured, are properly licensed with other agencies, and employ
persons that do not pose a threat to customers and the general public. This
chapter is adopted pursuant to the City's police powers for the purpose of
regulating vending on public property.
   (b)   Findings.
      (1)   The provisions set forth in this chapter ensure that the important
goals and policies of the City Council are upheld;
      (2)   Maintaining the requirement of a background check for street
vendors and extending this requirement to sidewalk vendors allows the City to
continue to meet its commitment to public safety;
      (3)   Maintaining restrictions on street vending and operating noise-
making devices in residential zones and extending these restrictions to
sidewalk vendors protects the quality of life of City residents and minimizes
disruption to the quiet enjoyment of residential property;
      (4)   Maintaining traffic and safety conditions for street vendors and
imposing similar requirements to sidewalk vendors ensures the safety of
residents and street and sidewalk vendors and minimizes impact to public
streets and the public right-of-way; and
      (5)   Maintaining the prohibition of street vending within five hundred
(500) feet of any public school between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on
the days the public school is in session and expanding this requirement to
sidewalk vending promotes public safety and minimizes impact to the public
right-of-way and traffic.
(Part 2, Ord. 1656-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 5-23.02. Definitions.
   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in
this chapter. Words and phrases not defined by this chapter have the meaning
set forth elsewhere in this code, the California Business and Professions Code,
California Vehicle Code, or California Government Code.
   (a)   "Goods or Merchandise" shall mean items and products of every kind and
description, including all food, produce, and beverage items.
   (b)   "Human Powered Device" shall mean any device moved by human power,
including, but not limited to, a pushcart, wagon, bicycle, tricycle, pedal-
driver cart, other non-motorized conveyance, or other wheeled container or
mechanism, or from one's person.
   (c)   "Owner" shall mean any person or entity owning, or otherwise
controlling the operation of any business or activity involving vending on
public property.
   (d)   "Public Property" shall mean any real property, public easement,
public street, street median, alley, parkway, public sidewalk, or other
interest therein owned, held, leased, operated or otherwise controlled by the
City.
   (e)   "Roaming Sidewalk Vendor" shall mean a sidewalk vendor who moves from
place to place and stops only to complete a transaction.
   (f)   "Sidewalk Vendor" shall mean a person who vends goods or merchandise
upon a public sidewalk from a structure, stand, display, showcase, rack, or
human powered device.
   (g)   "Special Event" shall mean a City permitted event including, but not
limited to, carnivals, sporting events, fairs, art shows, and/or cultural
events.
   (h)   "Stationary Sidewalk Vendor" shall mean a sidewalk vendor who vends
from a fixed location.
   (i)   "Street Vendor" shall mean a person who drives a vehicle for the
purposes of vending on a public street.
   (j) "Vend" or "Vending" shall mean any act of hawking, operating noise-
making devices to attract attention to the vendor, or the displaying, selling,
or offering for sale of any displayed goods or merchandise to the public from
any carrying device, box, bag, stand, human powered device, or from a vehicle.
(Part 2, Ord. 1656-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 5-23.03. Vendor permit required; Fees.
   (a)   A street vendor that operates in the City shall obtain a valid street
vendor permit issued by the City pursuant to this chapter.
   (b)   A sidewalk vendor that operates in the City shall obtain a valid
sidewalk vendor permit issued by the City pursuant to this chapter.
   (c)   Fees for such permits shall be established by resolution of the City
Council.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful to vend on public property without a valid, City-
issued street vendor or sidewalk vendor permit unless such vending activity is
authorized under Title 9 of this code.
   (e)   The City may impose a penalty for violation of this chapter pursuant
to Section
1-2.201. The responsible person may file a request for an ability-to-pay
determination of the penalty amount.
(Part 2, Ord. 1656-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 5-23.04. Application for street vendor permit.
   (a)   The applicant for a street vendor permit shall submit to the Finance
Director a completed application form together with fees for the permit and
such licenses, certificates, and documents. This shall include an application
and fees for a business tax certificate if applicable.
   (b)   The application form for a street vendor permit shall require the
following:
      (1)   The full true name and any other names used by the applicant;
      (2)   Proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age;
      (3)   The present address and telephone number of the applicant;
      (4)   Driver's license number or identification number;
      (5)   Social security number, individual taxpayer identification number,
or municipal identification number;
      (6)   Each residence and business address of the applicant for the five
(5) years immediately preceding the date of the application, and the inclusive
dates for such address;
      (7)   Applicant's height, weight, and color of eyes and hair;
      (8)   One (1) photograph of the applicant at least two (2") inches by two
(2") inches taken within four (4) months preceding the date of the application;
      (9)   The business license or permit history of the applicant, including
whether such applicant has ever had any license or permit issued by any agency
or board, city, county or state revoked or suspended, or has had any
professional or vocational license or permit revoked or suspended, and the
reason(s) for the revocation(s);
      (10)   All criminal arrests and statement of the dates, places, and
disposition of any convictions from said arrests;
      (11)   Completed, City provided live scan request form signed by live
scan operator;
      (12)   Completed, City provided traffic and parking regulations page
signed by street vendor;
      (13)   The vehicle identification number and license number of each
vehicle operated by a street vendor;
      (14)   A valid Department of Motor Vehicles registration for each vehicle
showing that each vehicle is registered as a commercial vehicle;
   (15)   Proof of insurance as required by Section
5-23.08(b) of this code;
   (16)   Proof of a valid California Department of Tax and Fee Administration
seller's permit; and
   (17)   Proof of a valid health permit issued by the County in accordance
with Part 7 of the California Health and Safety Code, if vending food.
(Part 2, Ord. 1656-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 5-23.05. Application for sidewalk vendor permit.
   (a)   The applicant for a sidewalk vendor permit shall submit to the Finance
Director a completed application form together with fees for the permit and
such licenses, certificates, and documents. This shall include an application
and fees for a business tax certificate if applicable.
   (b)   The application form for a sidewalk vendor permit shall require the
following:
      (1)   The full true name and any other names used by the applicant;
      (2)   Proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age;
      (3)   The present address and telephone number of the applicant;
      (4)   Driver's license number or identification number;
      (5)   Social security number, individual taxpayer identification number,
or municipal identification number;
      (6)   Each residence and business address of the applicant for the five
(5) years immediately preceding the date of the application, and the inclusive
dates for such address;
      (7)   Applicant's height, weight, and color of eyes and hair;
      (8)   One (1) photograph of the applicant at least two (2") inches by two
(2") inches taken within four (4) months preceding the date of the application;
      (9)   The business license or permit history of the applicant, including
whether such applicant has ever had any license or permit issued by any agency
or board, city, county or state revoked or suspended, or has had any
professional or vocational license or permit revoked or suspended, and the
reason(s) for the revocation(s);
      (10)   All criminal arrests and statement of the dates, places, and
disposition of any convictions from said arrests;
      (11)   Completed, City provided live scan request form signed by live
scan operator;
      (12)   Completed, City provided vending location regulations page signed
by sidewalk vendor;
      (13)   Proof of insurance as required by Section
5-23.09(a)(2) of this code;
      (14)   Proof of a valid California Department of Tax and Fee
Administration seller's permit; and
      (15)   Proof of a valid health permit issued by the County in accordance
with Part 7 of the California Health and Safety Code, if vending food.
(Part 2, Ord. 1656-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 5-23.06. Grant or denial of vendor application.
   (a)   The Finance Director shall refer to the Chief of Police a completed
application for a street vendor permit or a sidewalk vendor permit.
   (b)   After receipt of a report from the Department of Justice and Federal
Bureau of Investigation, the Chief of Police shall direct the Finance Director
to grant or deny the application for a street vendor permit or sidewalk vendor
permit. The Chief of Police shall direct the Finance Director to deny the
application on any of the following grounds:
      (1)   The applicant is under the age of eighteen (18) years;
      (2)   The applicant does not submit one (1) or more of the items required
by the application form; and/or
      (3)   The applicant for a street vendor permit or sidewalk vendor permit
was convicted of any of the following crimes, or of an attempt or conspiracy to
commit any of the following crimes, as defined in the California Penal Code,
and such conviction indicates that the applicant may pose a danger to the
public if granted a permit: murder, mayhem, kidnapping, robbery, assault with
intent to commit a felony, assault, battery, rape, arson, burglary, possession
of burglarious instruments or deadly weapons, or any crime for which the
applicant is required to register as a sex offender pursuant to California
Penal Code, Section 290.
(Part 2, Ord. 1656-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 5-23.07. Notice to applicant.
   (a)   The Finance Director shall give written notice to the applicant for a
street vendor permit or a sidewalk vendor permit that the application is
granted or denied.
   (b)   A street vendor permit shall include the name of the permittee, a
photograph of the permittee, the name of the street vendor business, a
statement that the permit is subject to the conditions imposed by Section
5-23.08, and the requirement that the permittee return the permit to the
Finance Director upon termination of the permittee's employment.
   (c)   A sidewalk vendor permit shall include the name of the permittee, a
photograph of the permittee, the name of the sidewalk vendor business, a
statement that the permit is subject to the conditions imposed by Section
5-23.09, and the requirement that the permittee return the permit to the
Finance Director upon termination of the permittee's employment.
   (d)   If the application is denied, the Finance Director shall include in
such notice a statement of the grounds on which the application is denied.
(Part 2, Ord. 1656-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 5-23.08. Conditions of street vendor permit.
   Every person to whom a street vendor permit is issued shall:
   (a)   Display the City-issued decal for the current calendar year on a
conspicuous location on the vehicle for street vending visible to the general
public;
   (b)   Obtain general liability insurance and automobile insurance for each
vehicle, and keep in force during the term of the permit, public liability and
bodily injury insurance, issued by a California admitted insurance carrier or
an insurance carrier with an A.M. Best rating of A-VII or better. The insurance
policy shall be endorsed to state that coverage may not be suspended, voided,
canceled or reduced in coverage or limits without fifteen (15) days' prior
written notice to the Finance Director. The insurance policy shall insure the
street vendor and shall name the City as an additional insured of such vehicle
against loss by reason of injury or damage that may result to persons or
property from the negligent operation or defective construction of such
vehicle, or from violation of this chapter or of any other law of the state or
the United States. The insurance policy shall be in the sum as determined by
the City. The City may accept insurance that does not meet the foregoing
criteria or require insurance that exceeds the foregoing criteria if the City
determines that such insurance will provide adequate protection, based on, but
not limited to, factors such as whether the applicant belongs to a risk
retention group satisfactory to the City; whether the applicant's operating
risks are less than or more than standard risks; and whether the required
insurance is reasonably available to a qualified applicant;
   (c)   Obtain and keep in force during the term of the permit, workers'
compensation insurance, covering all employees of the business;
   (d)   Comply with the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 and
amendments thereto, and state disability rights laws;
   (e)   Comply with the following conditions, if using signs:
      (1)   Sign shall be placed on a vehicle displaying goods or merchandise
for sale. This shall not apply to signs permanently affixed to a vehicle;
      (2)   Sign shall not exceed three (3) square feet; and
      (3)   No free-standing sign shall be placed on a public street or
sidewalk.
   (f)   Notify the Finance Director immediately when any vehicle not described
in the application for the permit is placed in service for street vending;
   (g)   Possess a valid city business tax certificate if owner of the street
vendor business or self-employed;
   (h)   Immediately report a lost or stolen permit to the Finance Department;
   (i)   Return the permit to the Finance Director immediately on termination
of employment or self-employment. A street vendor permit shall become void upon
termination of employment or self-employment;
   (j)   Maintain a clean selling area and properly dispose of all trash
generated by his/her operation. Each vending area must be cleared of all
merchandise, vehicles, or other items which belong to or are used by the street
vendor when not in use by the street vendor;
   (k)   Maintain each vehicle in safe operating condition, good repair, clean,
and sanitary condition;
   (l)   Comply with Section 415 of Article 4 of Chapter 3 of Title 4 of this
code regarding vending near schools;
   (m)   Comply with the California Retail Food Code as codified in Part 7 of
California Health and Safety Code 113.700 et. seq., if vending food;
   (n)   Not vend within five hundred (500') feet of an area designated for a
special event;
   (o)   Not vend in a park owned or operated by the City if the operator of
the park has signed an agreement for concessions that exclusively permits the
sale of food or merchandise by the concessionaire;
   (p)   Not vend upon a street median;
   (q)   Not vend within one hundred (100') feet of the nearest curb on the
cross street of any intersection of two (2) or more public streets, if there is
no curb then one hundred (100') feet of the edge of the pavement of the cross
street;
   (r)   Not vend within five hundred (500') feet of any freeway on-ramp or
off-ramp as defined in the Vehicle Code;
   (s)   Not attempt to reserve any street or public parking area exclusively
for themselves or their customer parking;
   (t)   Not occupy more than thirty (30') feet of parallel parking area on a
street;
   (u)   Not vend during peak traffic hours and specified days and/or times as
determined by the Public Works Director due to traffic safety concerns, parking
shortages, repairs or needs for the street as listed on traffic and parking
regulations page;
   (v)   Not vend upon any specific street, or portion thereof, which as a
result of the limited parking, limited line of sight, traffic control impacts,
high traffic flow is designated by the Public Works Director as unsafe for
vending as listed on parking and parking regulations page;
   (w)   Not vend or operate any noise-making device in a residential zone,
except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Pacific Standard Time, and
between 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Pacific Daylight Savings Time. No vendor shall
remain in any one location for more than four (4) hours; and
   (x)   Not allow any person to use or duplicate their permit. If a permit is
found to be used by another individual, it shall be considered a violation of
this code, unless previously reported as lost or stolen as indicated in this
section.
(Part 2, Ord. 1656-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 5-23.09. Conditions of sidewalk vendor permit.
   (a)   Every person to whom a sidewalk vendor permit is issued shall:
      (1)   Display the City-issued decal for the current calendar year on a
conspicuous location on the human powered device or vending device visible to
the general public;
      (2)   Obtain general liability insurance and keep in force during the
term of the permit public liability and bodily injury insurance, issued by a
California admitted insurance carrier or an insurance carrier with an A.M. Best
rating of A-VII or better. The insurance policy shall be endorsed to state that
coverage may not be suspended, voided, canceled or reduced in coverage or
limits without fifteen (15) days' prior written notice to the Finance Director.
The insurance policy shall insure the sidewalk vendor and shall name the City
as an additional insured against loss by reason of injury or damage that may
result to persons or property from the negligent operation or defective
construction of the sidewalk vending device, or from violation of this chapter
or of any other law of the state or the United States. The insurance policy
shall be in the sum as determined by the City. The City may accept insurance
that does not meet the foregoing criteria or require insurance that exceeds the
foregoing criteria if the City determines that such insurance will provide
adequate protection, based on, but not limited to, factors such as whether the
applicant belongs to a risk retention group satisfactory to the City; whether
the applicant's operating risks are less than or more than standard risks; and
whether the required insurance is reasonably available to a qualified
applicant;
      (3)   Obtain and keep in force during the term of the permit, workers'
compensation insurance, covering all employees of the business;
      (4)   Comply with the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 and
amendments thereto, and state disability rights laws;
      (5)   Comply with the following conditions, if using signs:
         (i)   Signs shall be placed on a human powered device displaying goods
or merchandise for sale. This shall not apply to signs permanently affixed to a
vehicle;
         (ii)   Signs shall not exceed three (3) square feet; and
         (iii)   No free-standing signs shall be placed on a public street or
sidewalk.
      (6)   Notify the Finance Director immediately when any vending device not
described in the application for the permit is placed in service for sidewalk
vending;
      (7)   Possess a valid city business tax certificate if owner of the
sidewalk vendor business or self-employed;
      (8)   Immediately report a lost or stolen permit to the Finance
Department;
      (9)   Return the permit to the Finance Director immediately on
termination of employment or self-employment. A sidewalk vendor permit shall
become void upon termination of employment or self-employment;
      (10)   Maintain a clean selling area and properly dispose of all trash
generated by his/her operation. Each vending area must be cleared of all
merchandise, vehicles, or other items which belong to or are used by the
sidewalk vendor when not in use by the sidewalk vendor;
      (11)   Comply with the California Retail Food Code as codified in Part 7
of California Health and Safety Code 113.700 et. seq., if vending food;
      (12)   Not vend from any structure, stand, display, showcase, rack,
ground placed display, or human powered device which exceeds fifteen (15)
square feet, and also not exceed a linear distance greater than five (5') feet,
on any one side;
      (13)   Not occupy space on any sidewalk or path of travel in such a way
that would impede upon the required sidewalk width or path of travel
requirement pursuant to the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990
(Public Law 101336) and other disability access standards;
      (14)   Not vend within five hundred (500') feet of an area designated for
a special event;
      (15)   Not vend upon a street median;
      (16)   Not vend within one hundred (100') feet of the nearest curb on the
cross street of any intersection of two or more public streets, if there is no
curb then one hundred (100') feet of the edge of the pavement of the cross
street;
      (17)   Not vend within five hundred (500') feet of any freeway on-ramp or
off-ramp as defined in the Vehicle Code;
      (18)   Not vend within five hundred (500') feet of the property line of
any public school between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on the days the
public school is in session, unless approved by the City Engineer;
      (19)   Not allow any person to use or duplicate their permit. If a permit
is found to be used by another individual, it shall be considered a violation
of this code, unless previously reported as lost or stolen as indicated in this
section; and
      (20)   Shall not vend or operate any noise-making device in a residential
zone, except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Pacific Standard
Time, and between 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Pacific Daylight Savings Time. No
vendor shall remain in any one location for more than four (4) hours.
   (b)   In addition to the requirements imposed by this section, stationary
sidewalk vendors shall be prohibited from vending in a park owned or operated
by the City if the operator of the park has signed an agreement for concessions
that exclusively permits the sale of food or goods or merchandise by the
concessionaire.
(Part 2, Ord. 1656-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 5-23.10. Annual permit renewal.
   (a)   Street and sidewalk vendor permits shall continue in effect for the
remainder of the calendar year in which they are issued, unless revoked or
modified as provided in Section
5-23.11; provided, however, that street and sidewalk vendor permits shall
automatically become void on termination of employment or self-employment as a
vendor on public property. A street vendor or sidewalk vendor permit issued in
the last quarter of a calendar year shall continue in effect for the remainder
of the calendar year in which it is issued, and for the next calendar year,
subject to the foregoing provisions regarding revocation, modification and
automatically becoming void.
   (b)   Permittees shall submit to the Finance Director applications to renew
street vendor and sidewalk vendor permits for following calendar years,
together with fees for the renewal and any changes in the information provided
in the initial application or a previous renewal application. In addition, an
applicant shall submit a new photograph, evidence that required insurance will
be in effect for the new calendar year, and a valid health permit, if
applicable.
   (c)   The Finance Director shall refer to the Chief of Police completed
applications for renewal of street vendor and sidewalk vendor permits. The
Chief of Police and the Finance Director shall process and grant or deny the
applications for renewal as provided in Section
5-23.06. Conditions on renewed permits shall be as provided in Sections
5-23.08 and
5-23.09.
   (d)   Applications for renewal of street vendor and sidewalk vendor permits
shall be submitted by December 1 of each year to allow sufficient time for
processing before the current permit expires on December 31.
(Part 2, Ord. 1656-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 5-23.11. Revocation, suspension or modification of a vendor permit.
   (a)   A street vendor or sidewalk vendor permit may be revoked or suspended
or additional conditions imposed thereon for failure of the permittee to comply
with applicable laws, regulations and conditions, based on matters occurring
after the permit is issued or on matters not considered at the time of issuance
of the permit that would have authorized denial of the permit or the imposition
of conditions on the permit.
   (b)   The Chief of Police may file with the Finance Director a written
request for revocation, suspension or modification of a street vendor or
sidewalk vendor permit, stating facts showing that the permittee has not
complied with applicable laws, regulations, or permit conditions, has had a
subsequent arrest, or poses a danger to public safety, and recommending that
the permit be revoked or suspended or in what respect the permit should be
conditioned.
   (c)   On receiving the request, the Finance Director shall mail to the
permittee a notice that the permit is recommended for revocation, suspension,
or conditioning in a specific manner and stating the reasons for that
recommendation. The notice shall inform the permittee that the recommendation
will be adopted and the permittee will be deemed to concur with the
recommendation if the permittee does not make a written request for a hearing
in the manner provided in Section
5-23.12.
   (d)   The procedures for appealing, rendering a decision, and seeking
judicial review of the decision shall be as provided in Section
5-23.12 of this code.
(Part 2, Ord. 1656-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 5-23.12. Appeals.
   (a)   Any person denied approval or renewal of a street vendor or sidewalk
vendor permit under this chapter, or whose permit has been suspended, revoked
or conditioned may appeal. Such appeal must be in writing and must be filed
with the City Manager or designee not more than fourteen (14) days following
the mailing of the notice of denial, suspension, revocation, or conditioning
sent to the applicant to the address listed by the applicant pursuant to this
chapter. The written appeal must contain all reasons and documentary support
why the denial, revocation, suspension, or conditioning should be overturned.
Any successful appeal will result in approval or reinstatement of an approval
and refund of any fines collected by the City.
      (1)   The City Manager shall not accept an appeal, and no hearing shall
be held, unless the appellant has paid a filing fee, in an amount set by
resolution of the City Council, to defray the cost of such appeal. Any appeal
without the timely payment of fees shall be considered to be untimely.
      (2)   The scope of the appeal hearing pursuant to this section shall be
limited to those issues raised by the appellant in the written appeal, as
submitted pursuant to this section.
   (b)   City Manager action.
      (1)   Upon receipt of a timely filed appeal, the City Manager or designee
shall set the matter for hearing which shall be held not fewer than ten (10)
calendar days, nor more than thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the
appeal request. The hearing may be continued from time to time upon the mutual
consent of the parties.
      (2)   The appellant shall be provided with notice of the time and place
of the appeal hearing, as well as a copy of all relevant materials at least
seven (7) calendar days prior to the hearing.
      (3)   At the time of such hearing, the City Manager shall review the
records and files relating to the decision.
      (4)   In conducting the hearing, technical rules relating to evidence and
witnesses shall not apply. Any relevant evidence may be admitted if it is
material and if it is evidence customarily relied upon by responsible persons
in the conduct of their affairs regardless of the existence of any common law
or statutory rule which might make admission of such evidence improper over
objection in civil actions. Hearsay evidence may be admissible if it is the
sort upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of
serious affairs. The rules of privilege shall be applicable to the extent they
are permitted in civil actions. Irrelevant, collateral, and repetitious
testimony shall be excluded.
      (5)   In the case of denial of an initial permit application the
appellant shall have the burden of proving that he or she meets the
requirements for issuing the permit in the first instance; in the case of the
conditioning, revocation or denial of a permit renewal, the City shall have the
burden in proving that grounds exist for revoking or failing to renew a permit.
      (6)   Based upon the evidence presented at the hearing, the City Manager
shall determine whether the decision should be affirmed, modified or reversed.
      (7)   The City Manager's decision shall be communicated in writing to the
appellant within seven (7) calendar days after the close of the hearing and
submission of the matter to the City Manager for decision. The City Manager's
decision shall state whether the decision is affirmed, modified or reversed and
shall state the reasons therefor.
      (8)   The decision of the City Manager shall include notice that the
decision is final and conclusive, that judicial review may be sought therefrom
pursuant to California Civil Procedure Code Section 1094.5, and that any action
filed in the Superior Court shall be filed within ninety (90) days following
the City Manager's notice pursuant to California Civil Procedure Code Section
1094.6.
(Part 2, Ord. 1656-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 5-23.13. Regulations: Vending on private property.
   It is unlawful for any person to vend, or to stop and operate any vehicle or
human powered device in the act of vending, on any private property in any zone
except in accordance with all applicable provisions of this code, and in
compliance with the development conditions imposed on the subject private
property. Nothing in this chapter prohibits food catering truck vendors from
serving owners, workers, employees, of ongoing businesses or at construction
sites when such vending is conducted and occurs on private property in a
commercial or industrial zone and off of the public street, parkway or
sidewalk, or from serving construction workers on private property in an
uninhabited residential development project in a residential zone.
(Part 2, Ord. 1656-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 5-23.14. Exceptions.
   This chapter shall not be applicable to:
   (a)   Any nonprofit organization, or person acting for it, with respect to
the sale of any goods or merchandise constituting or making a statement
carrying a religious, political, philosophical or ideological message relevant
to the purpose of the organization;
   (b)   The sale of newspapers, periodicals, pamphlets, booklets, or other
constitutionally protected material;
   (c)   Farmers markets, art shows, special events, street fairs and craft
shows approved and designated by the City; and/or
   (d)   Those delivery activities of any business with a fixed place of
business which only delivers its products, services, or goods or merchandise to
a specified address in response to a customer request, order or invoice
previously made to that fixed place of business.
(Part 2, Ord. 1656-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
CHAPTER 24. LANDMARK TREE PRESERVATION AND PROTECTION*
* The regulations found in Ch. 24 were originally established by Ord. 1217 -NS,
adopted 9-27-94 and effective 10-28-94, and further amended by Ord. 1394-NS,
adopted 5-21-02 and effective 6-21-02, and Ord. 1446-NS, adopted 10-25-05 and
effective 11-25-05. Ch. 24 was then re-designated as Article 43 of Chapter 4 of
Title 9 by Part 4 of Ord. 1610-NS, adopted December 15, 2015 and effective
January 15, 2016.
CHAPTER 25. MOBILE HOME RENT STABILIZATION
Sec. 5-25.01. Findings and purpose.
   There is a shortage of vacant and available mobile home spaces in the City
of Thousand Oaks resulting in a critically low vacancy factor. Mobile home
owners, tenants, and residents have a substantial investment in their
residences and appurtenances for which space is rented or leased in a mobile
home park. Additionally, the cost of moving a mobile home may be substantial,
and the risk of damage is significant. Thus, moving a mobile home is often not
a feasible option if rent becomes expensive. Many mobile home owners, tenants,
and residents are on fixed incomes and, if displaced as a result of their
inability to pay increased rents, must relocate at a substantial loss or
expense, and, in addition, as a result of such housing shortage they may be
unable to find decent, safe and sanitary new housing at affordable rent levels.
Aware of the difficulty in finding alternative decent housing, some mobile home
owners, tenants, or residents attempt to pay requested and uncontrolled rent
increases, but as a consequence, must expend less on other necessities of life.
This situation has had a detrimental effect on substantial numbers of renters
in the City, especially creating hardships on senior citizens on fixed incomes,
and low- and moderate-income households.
   The City causes data to be collected through the annual registration
statements submitted by mobile home landlords, which confirms a mobile home
space and housing shortage continues to exist in the City, the vacancy rate in
mobile home parks remain critically low and the deregulation of rents could
lead to exorbitant rent increases and aggravation of the crisis, problems and
hardships which existed prior to the adoption of the program. This housing
shortage necessitates the continuation of the mobile home rent stabilization
program. Therefore, it is necessary and reasonable to continue to regulate
rents to safeguard mobile home owners, residents, and tenants from excessive
rent increases and at the same time provide landlords with a just and
reasonable return on their rental spaces.
(§ 2, Ord. 1254-NS, eff. January 23, 1996 as amended by Ord. 1686-NS, eff.
August 19, 2021)
Sec. 5-25.02. Definitions.
   The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter shall be
construed as defined in this section.
   "Average per space capital improvement cost" means an amount determined by
dividing the cost of the capital improvement by the total number of mobile home
unit rental spaces in the mobile home park with respect to which the cost was
incurred.
   "Average per space rehabilitation cost" means an amount determined by
dividing the cost of the rehabilitation, less any offsetting insurance
proceeds, by the total number of mobile home unit rental spaces in the mobile
home park with respect to which the cost was incurred.
   "Base year" means the figure employed when determining allowable automatic
adjustment to rent pursuant to Section
5-25.06 of this article, as follows:
      (1)   For all adjustments that occur from November 1, 2020 through
October 31, 2025, the base year shall be 2015.
      (2)   For all adjustments that occur from November 1, 2025 through
October 31, 2030, the base year shall be 2020.
      (3)   Thereafter, on November 1 at five (5)-year intervals, the base year
shall increase by five (5) years from the previous base year.
      (4)   For rental spaces vacated, as defined in Section 5-25.07, from
January 1,2005 and thereafter and eligible for decontrol/recontrol pursuant to
this chapter, the base year shall be the year in which the space is re-rented
and shall remain so until the base year is reset to a later year, as determined
by reference to subsections (1) and (2) above. The following are examples:
         (i)   Example A: Coach A is sold on June 15, 2018 and subject to
decontrol/recontrol on that same date. The base year for Coach A is 2018 from
June 15, 2018 until October 31, 2025. Starting November 1, 2025, the base year
for Coach A shall be 2020 pursuant to subsection (2) above.
         (ii)   Example B: Coach B is sold on September 1, 2021 and subject to
decontrol/recontrol on that same date. The base year for Coach B is 2021 from
September 1, 2021 until October 31, 2030. Starting November 1, 2030, the base
year for Coach B shall be 2025 pursuant to subsection (3) above.
   "Capital improvement" means the addition, replacement, or eligible major
repair, of an improvement to a rental space(s) or the common areas or amenity
of the mobile home park provided such new improvement has a useful life of
three (3) years or more, and exceeds Three Thousand and no/100ths ($3,000)
Dollars, including but not limited to, computers, televisions, and electronics,
roofing, carpeting, draperies, stuccoing the outside of a building, air
conditioning, security gates, swimming pool, sauna or hot tub, fencing, garbage
disposal, washing machine or clothes dryer, dishwasher, recreational equipment
permanently installed on the premises, streets, driveways, curbs and gutters,
sidewalks, water, wastewater, and other utility systems, and other similar
improvement, and may include the actual interest cost incurred by the landlord
to finance the improvement, so long as the terms and interest rate of such
financing are commercially reasonable and negotiated at arm's length.
   "Commission" means the Planning Commission of the City of Thousand Oaks.
   "Decontrolled space" means any space formerly subject to the Rent
Stabilization Ordinance, as amended, which was vacated on or after May 1, 1981
and remained vacant on or after June 26, 1981 by reason of the tenants'
voluntary vacation of that space or the tenants' eviction for nonpayment of
rent.
   "Housing services" means services connected with the use or occupancy of a
mobile home rental space including, but not limited to, utilities except those
utilities for which a tenant is billed directly by a utility company (including
gas, electric, water, and wastewater), ordinary repairs or replacement and
maintenance, including painting. This term shall also include the provision of
elevator service, laundry facilities and privileges, common recreational
facilities, common area landscape maintenance except for the trimming, pruning
or removal of trees, janitor service, resident manager, refuse removal,
furnishings, and parking.
   "Index" means the figure employed when determining allowable rent increases
under Section
5-25.06. The index shall be calculated as one hundred percent (100%) of the
City's then currently selected Consumer Price Index as determined by the U.S.
Department of Labor Statistics for all urban consumers for the year ending
March, rounded to the nearest tenth.
   "Landlord or Mobile home park owner" means an owner, lessor or sublessor
(including any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other entity) of a
mobile home park, who receives or is entitled to receive rent for the use of
any mobile home rental space, or the agent, representative or successor of any
of the foregoing.
   "Maximum adjusted rent" means the maximum rent plus any rent increase
subsequently imposed pursuant to Sections
5-25.06,
5-25.07, and
5-25.09. Said amount shall not include any administrative adjustment for
capital improvement and/or rehabilitation granted pursuant to Section
5-25.08.
   "Maximum base rent" means the highest legal monthly rent which was in effect
for the rental space or spaces on November 1 of the base year. Any increase
subsequently effected pursuant to Section
5-25.06 shall be computed against the maximum base rent.
   "Maximum rent" means the maximum adjusted rent plus any administrative
adjustment for capital improvements or rehabilitation granted pursuant to
Section
5-25.08 of this chapter.
   "Mobile home" means a mobile home as defined in the Mobile Home Residency
Law pursuant to Civil Code section 798.3.
   "Mobile home park" means a parcel of land where two or more mobile home
spaces are rented or leased out for mobile homes used as residences. "Mobile
home park" does not include developments which sell lots for mobile homes or
manufactured housing for individual ownership, or which provide condominium
ownership of such lots, even if one or more homes in the development are rented
or leased out.
   "Mobile home owner, tenant or resident" means any person entitled to occupy
a mobile home which is located within a mobile home park.
   "Rehabilitation work" means any rehabilitation or repair work done on or in
a rental space or common areas of the housing complex containing the rental
space and which work was done in order to comply with any validly issued
governmental order, or to repair damage resulting from fire, earthquake or
other natural disaster.
   "Rent" means the consideration, including any bonus, benefits or gratuity,
demanded or received by a landlord for, or in connection with the use or
occupancy of a rental space, or the assignment of a lease for such a space
including, but not limited to, any monies demanded or paid for parking,
furnishings, housing services of any kind, subletting or security deposits.
   "Rental space," except as provided in Section
5-25.03, includes underlying land and mobile homes thereon, whether rent is
paid for the mobile home and the land upon which the mobile home is located, or
rent is paid for the land alone.
   "Tenant" means a tenant, subtenant, lessee, sublessee, or any other person
lawfully occupying a mobile home rental space.
   "Vacancy" means either when a tenant voluntarily vacates a mobile home
rental space or when a tenant is legally evicted. A vacancy shall not exist
when the tenant sublets or assigns his interest in the rental space, including
the subletting or sale of a mobile home coach which remains on the same space
within a mobile home park. If a mobile home is removed from the space, the
space is decontrolled until re-rented to a new tenant and thereafter is subject
to all the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 1254-NS, eff. January 23, 1996 as amended by § 2, Ord. 1559-NS, eff.
September 6, 2011 as amended by Ord. 1686-NS, eff. August 19, 2021)
Sec. 5-25.03. Applicability.
   (a)   The following shall be exempt from the rent control provisions of this
Chapter:
      (1)   Spaces subject to a lease which exempts that space from rent
regulation pursuant to the California Mobile Home Residency Law codified in
California Civil Code section 798, et seq.
      (2)   New mobile home park spaces, which are exempt pursuant to Civil
Code section 798.45.
      (3)   Spaces which are not the principal residence of the mobile home
owner and which are exempt pursuant to Civil Code section 798.21.
      (4)   Mobile homes not located in a mobile home park.
      (5)   Mobile homes located in nonprofit cooperative parks owned and
controlled by a majority of the residents.
      (6)   Mobile homes owned, operated, or managed by a governmental unit,
agency, or authority and which are specifically exempt from municipal rent
regulations by state or federal law or administrative regulations.
Accommodations to which rental assistance is paid pursuant to 24 CFR 882 (HUD
Section 8 Federal Rent Subsidy Program) may be exempted wholly or partially
from the terms of this Chapter on an individual basis by written application to
the City Manager and after notice to the tenant and landlord involved.
      (7)   Newly constructed spaces in a mobile home park initially held out
for rent after January 1, 1990.
      (8)   Nonprofit mobile home park. Mobile home parks operated by an
organization exempt from federal income taxes under Section 501 (c)(3) of the
Internal Revenue Code provided that the gross income derived therefrom does not
constitute unrelated business income as defined in Section 512 of the Internal
Revenue Code.
   (b)   Landlords shall provide to City annually, at the same time as the
annual rent registration, copies of those leases for spaces in their parks for
which exemption from this ordinance is being claimed pursuant to Civil Code
section 798 et seq.
(§ 2, Ord. 1254-NS, eff. January 23, 1996 as amended by Ord. 1686-NS, eff.
August 19, 2021)
Sec. 5-25.04. Planning Commission.
   (a)   The City Council hereby designates the Planning Commission as the
entity to consider applications submitted in accordance with the provisions of
this Chapter.
   (b)   Powers and Responsibilities. The Planning Commission shall have the
power and be responsible for carrying out the provisions of this Chapter and
the provisions of any ordinance regulating rents in apartment complexes. It
shall have the authority to issue decisions, pass resolutions and establish
policies, rules, and regulations to effectuate the purposes of this Chapter.
The Planning Commission may request studies and investigations, conduct such
hearings, and obtain such information as it deems necessary to carry out these
objectives.
   (c)   Planning Commission Action and Procedure. Each of the five seated
Commissioners shall be entitled to one vote. Three members shall constitute a
quorum for purposes of conducting a meeting.
(§ 2, Ord. 1254-NS, eff. January 23, 1996 as amended by Ord. 1686-NS, eff.
August 19, 2021)
Sec. 5-25.05. Restrictions on rents.
   (a)   No landlord shall demand, accept or retain more than the maximum rent
or the maximum adjusted rent for a mobile home rental space permitted pursuant
to this chapter or to regulations or orders adopted pursuant to this chapter,
nor shall any landlord effect a prohibited rent increase through the reduction
of housing services.
   (b)   All landlords shall maintain records setting forth the maximum
adjusted rent, the maximum base rent and the current rent being charged for
each rental space. This information shall be disclosed to the City upon the
City's request. Each landlord who demands or accepts a rent higher than the
maximum adjusted rent or demands or accepts a fee or surcharge shall inform the
mobile home owner, tenant, or resident or any prospective mobile home owner,
tenant, or resident of the rental space, in writing, of the factual
justification for the fee, surcharge or difference between said maximum
adjusted rent and the rent which the landlord is currently charging or proposes
to charge.
(§ 2, Ord. 1254-NS, eff. January 23, 1996 as amended by § 3, Ord. 1559-NS, eff.
September 6, 2011 as amended by Ord. 1686-NS, eff. August 19, 2021)
Sec. 5-25.06. Automatic adjustments to rent.
   The maximum adjusted rent for any occupied rental space may be increased
without permission of the City as follows:
   (a)   For a rental space which at any time after August 1, 1980 has not had
a rent increase for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months or more, the
maximum adjusted rent may be increased in an amount, as set forth in subsection
(b) below, and as limited by subsection (c) below:
   (b)   Automatic annual adjustment. The automatic increase shall be
determined by multiplying the maximum base rent by the index.
   (c)   Notice of increases. Notice of any increase in rent pursuant to this
section shall be given in accordance with the Civil Code of the State of
California.
   (d)   Notice of index. After review of pertinent information from the U.S.
Bureau of Labor Statistics, the Finance Director or designee shall determine
the index for each year, and the Community Development Department shall notify
each landlord by mail of their determination.
(§ 2, Ord. 1254-NS, eff. January 23, 1996, as amended by § 6, Ord. 1559-NS,
eff. September 6, 2011, as amended by Ord. 1686-NS, eff. August 19, 2021)
Sec. 5-25.07. Vacancy decontrol/recontrol.
   The following provisions apply to any rental space that is vacated or to the
replacement of any coach on a rental space.
   (a)   The maximum adjusted rent may be increased by ten percent (10%) upon
re-rental of an existing coach to a new tenant. This shall be known as a "Type
A Recontrol."
   (b)   The maximum adjusted rent may be increased to any amount under the
following circumstances and shall be known as "Type B Recontrol":
      (1)   The space is re-rented to a new tenant who replaces the existing
Mobile home or brings a new mobile home to an empty space; or
      (2)   An existing tenant who has been a resident for less than one year
replaces the existing mobile home.
   (c)   No increase in rent shall be permitted for a change of coach by an
existing tenant who has been a resident of the park at least one (1) year.
   (d)   Notwithstanding subsection (a), (b), and (c) above, no increase shall
be permitted if the new tenant of an existing mobile home is an immediate
family member of the existing tenant and is not otherwise exempt from this
chapter under Section
5-25.03. For purposes of this section the term "immediate family member" shall
include a parent, grandparent, child, sibling, stepparent, stepchild, or
stepsibling only.
   (e)   Thereafter, as long as the rental space continues to be rented by one
(1) or more of the same persons, no other rent increase shall be imposed except
as provided in this chapter.
   (f)   Notice of increases. Notice of any increase in rent pursuant to this
section shall be given by the landlord in accordance with the Civil Code of the
State of California. If an increase has been noticed but not effected prior to
the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, said notice shall
be construed as a valid notice to increase rents in an amount not to exceed the
increase permitted by this section.
(§ 2, Ord. 1254-NS, eff. January 23, 1996 as amended by Ord. 1686-NS, eff.
August 19, 2021)
Sec. 5-25.08. Administrative adjustments to rent for capital improvements and
rehabilitation work.
   (a)   The Community Development Director shall have the authority to grant
rent adjustments for capital improvement and rehabilitation work subject to the
procedures set forth below for a rental space or spaces located in the same
park upon receipt of an application for adjustment filed by the park owner of
the rental space or spaces. In the City Council Resolution No. 2021-034
regarding a list of capital improvements, rehabilitation work, and useful life
categories, adopted on June 22, 2021, the City Council has defined the eligible
capital improvements and rehabilitation work and their useful life categories
that are approved for reimbursement to mobile home park owners. Rent increases
approved under this section shall be calculated on a per space per month basis
and shall be amortized over the useful life of the improvement as set forth in
such Resolution and apportioned equally among the total number of rentable
spaces in the park. An increase granted under this Section
5-25.08 shall remain in effect only during the amortization period of the
improvement. All applications for rent adjustments to reimburse the owner for
capital improvements or rehabilitation work shall be governed by the procedures
and requirements of this section.
   (b)   General requirements. A rent increase for purposes of reimbursing a
park owner for a capital improvement or rehabilitation work shall be approved,
if all of the following requirements are met, and the application for said rent
increase otherwise complies with the provisions of this Section
5-25.08:
      (1)   The expenditure has been made within five (5) years of the date of
filing the application.
      (2)   Work for which reimbursement is requested has been performed by a
licensed contractor, where required by law.
      (3)   The mobile home park owner submits copies of the contract for the
work, cancelled checks, paid invoices, and such other documentation as may be
necessary in order to verify the costs incurred for the specific work for which
reimbursement is sought.
      (4)   Required annual meeting. Mobile home park owners shall meet with
tenants at least once in each calendar year to review and discuss future
capital expenditure needs and plans, as well as upcoming potential applications
and for rent increases to reimburse for capital expenditures.
   (c)   Individual tenant space improvements. No increase shall be allowed
when the improvement was limited to the interior of a tenant's rental space and
said improvement was not necessary to safeguard the landlord's property from
deterioration or loss in value, unless the tenant has given express written
consent to said increase.
   (d)   Special requirements. If the rent increase application is for the
purpose of reimbursing a park owner for a new improvement, or for replacement
of an improvement before the end of its useful life, then the rent increase
shall not be approved unless the park owner obtains approval of a majority of
tenants voting on the matter in conformance with the following requirements,
and also submits satisfactory evidence with the application that demonstrates
compliance with said requirements:
      (1)   All of the tenants whose rent would be increased have been provided
notice of the nature of the improvement, its total cost, the rental increase
(both monthly amount and duration) that will be requested, their right to vote
on the issue of whether the improvement should be eligible for a City-approved
rent increase in order to reimburse the owner for its cost, and the time and
manner in which an election on the matter will be held;
      (2)   The notice was given at least ninety (90) days prior to submittal
of the application to the City;
      (3)   The election required by subsection (1) above has been held by
secret written ballot with each space affected by the proposed increase
entitled to cast one (1) and only one (1) ballot, and the ballot itself shall
recite the specific information required in the notice;
      (4)   A majority of ballots have been cast in favor of the improvement
being eligible for reimbursement through a rent increase, as attested jointly
by a representative of the park owner and a representative of the tenants,
based on personal inspection and count of the ballots. If the tenant
representative refuses to attest to the vote, then owner may attest and submit
all ballots cast along with said attestation as proof of the vote; and
      (5)   The mobile home park owner shall provide documentation of number of
ballots cast and the names and space numbers of those persons casting ballots
in the election.
   (e)   Special requirements exception. The special requirements set forth in
subsection
5-25.08(d)(4) shall not apply to applications for a rent increase to reimburse
a park owner for replacement or renovation work before the end of an
improvement's useful life, if it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
Community Development Director, City Manager, or designee, as applicable, that
the work was necessary due to conditions of force majeure (floods, fire,
earthquakes, or other Acts of God) or other good cause.
   (f)   Application filing procedure. Applications for rent adjustments under
this subsection shall be submitted to the Community Development Department
(Department) on forms provided for that purpose and shall be accompanied by a
filing fee of Twenty and no/100ths ($20) Dollars plus Five and no/100ths ($5)
Dollars per space affected by the proposed increase. The Department shall
notify the applicant of its determination whether the application is complete
within thirty (30) days of receipt. If the application is not complete, the
Department shall identify information that is missing and required for a
complete application. If the Department fails to so notify the applicant within
thirty (30) days of receipt, then the application shall be deemed complete.
   (g)   Notice to tenants by landlord. Upon the Community Development
Department determining an application is complete, or if the application is
deemed complete pursuant to subsection
5-25.08(f), the landlord shall provide a notice within seven (7) days to each
tenant whose rent would be increased that an application has been filed, the
nature of the work for which reimbursement is sought, and the amount and
duration of rent increase requested. The park owner shall make available to
tenants for inspection a copy of the complete application, including all
supporting information and documentation, and upon a tenant's request shall
provide a copy at a reasonable direct cost of copying.
   (h)   Tenant opportunity to object. Tenants affected by the proposed rent
increase may submit objections regarding the application to the Community
Development Department, along with supporting information that evidences
noncompliance with the provisions of this section and/or City Council
Resolution regarding a list of capital improvements, rehabilitation work, and
useful life categories (resolution number to be provided after resolution
adoption).
   (i)   Consideration by Community Development Director. If the Community
Development Director receives no objections, or no objections that are
supported by evidence of non-compliance, from any tenant within thirty (30)
days after the application is complete, and can make all of the findings
required by Section
5-25.08(m) of this chapter, the Community Development Director may approve the
application, in whole or in part, without hearing. The Community Development
Director shall notify the applicant of the decision in writing no later than
sixty (60) days after the application is accepted as complete or deemed
complete, and the decision shall state the amount and duration of the approved
increase, effective date, and recite the findings required by subsection 5-
25.08(m) of this chapter, if applicable.
   (j)   Consideration by City Manager. Except for applications or parts
thereof approved by the Community Development Director pursuant to subsection
5-25.08(i), all other appeals of applications or parts thereof that are not
approved shall be decided by the City Manager, or designee. Any appeal must be
requested in writing to the City Manager within fourteen (14) days of the
Community Development Director's decision. The hearing shall take place no
later than forty- five (45) days after the Community Development Director's
written decision. The City Manager shall consider the information provided in
the application, any information submitted by tenants affected by the requested
rent increase, the provisions of the Resolution referenced in Section 5-25.08,
and any other factors he or she deems to be relevant to the purposes of these
provisions. The City Manager may provide additional procedural rules for
consideration of applications under this subsection.
   (k)   Notice of hearing. Notice of any hearing required pursuant to this
subsection shall be given by mailing at least fourteen (14) days prior to the
hearing, to the applicant and to all tenants whose rent would be increased. The
notice shall state the date, time, and location of the hearing.
   (l)   Decision of City Manager. The City Manager or designee shall render a
decision on the application in writing to the park owner and Community
Development Director no later than thirty (30) days after the hearing date. The
City Manager's decision shall state the amount and duration of the approved
increase, effective date, and reasons for the decision, and the findings
required by subsection
5-25.08(m) of this chapter, if applicable. The park owner shall post a copy of
the decision at the Park Office in a conspicuous location.
   (m)   Findings for approval. A rent increase for purposes of reimbursing a
park owner for a capital improvement or rehabilitation work shall be approved,
if all the following findings have been made:
      (1)   The work for which a rent adjustment is requested, and the
application submitted by the landlord meet the applicable requirements of
subsections    
5-25.08(b) through
5-25.08(f), above.
      (2)   Landlord has given notice to tenants as required by subsection
5-25.08(g), above.
      (3)   The type of capital improvement or rehabilitation work and its
useful life are listed in and comply with the provisions of the Resolution
referenced in Section
5-25.08 above. If the particular capital improvement or rehabilitation work is
not listed in said Resolution, then a determination of the useful life has been
made based on similar items listed in the Resolution and/or other competent
evidence.
   (n)   Effective date. Any rent adjustment granted under this section shall
become effective after the landlord has received the decision from the
Community Development Director or City Manager, or designee, as applicable, and
upon providing such notice of the approved increase to tenants whose rent is
adjusted pursuant to the decision as may be required by the Civil Code of
California.
   (o)   Finality of decision. The decision of the Community Development
Director or City Manager, or designee, pursuant to this Section
5-25.08, shall be final, and no appeal of that decision may be taken by any
party to the Planning Commission, City Council or any other officer of the
City.
(§ 2, Ord. 1254-NS, eff. January 23, 1996 as amended by Ord. 1686-NS, eff.
August 19, 2021)
Sec. 5-25.09. Planning Commission adjustments for just and reasonable return.
   (a)   Planning Commission adjustments. The Planning Commission shall have
the authority, in accordance with such guidelines as the Planning Commission
may establish, to grant increases in the rent for a rental space or spaces
located in the same mobile home park, upon receipt of an application for
adjustment filed by the landlord and after notice and hearing. If the Planning
Commission finds that such request for increase is in keeping with the purposes
of this chapter and that the maximum rent or maximum adjusted rent otherwise
permitted pursuant to this chapter constitutes a just and reasonable rent on
the rental space or spaces, the rent increase may be granted. The following are
factors, among other relevant factors as the Commission may determine, which
may be considered in determining whether a rental space yields a just and
reasonable return:
      (1)   Property taxes.
      (2)   Reasonable operating and maintenance expenses.
      (3)   The extent of capital improvements made to the common area or
spaces as distinguished from ordinary repair, replacement, and maintenance.
      (4)   Living space, and the level of housing services.
      (5)   Substantial deterioration of the rental spaces other than as a
result of ordinary wear and tear.
      (6)   Failure to perform ordinary repair, replacement, and maintenance.
      (7)   Financing costs on the property if it contains either a balloon
payment or variable rate provision.
      (8)   Changes to the CPI index utilized by the City of Thousand Oaks.
   (b)   Anti-speculation provision. If the only justification offered for the
requested rent increase on the landlord's application is an assertion that the
maximum rents or maximum adjusted rents permitted pursuant to this chapter do
not allow the landlord a return sufficient to pay both the operating expenses
and debt service on the rental space or spaces or on the mobile home park
containing the rental space or spaces, a rent adjustment will not be permitted
pursuant to this subsection to a landlord who acquired an interest in the
rental space or spaces after January 1, 1980.
   (c)   Procedures involving applications regarding just and reasonable
return.
      (1)   All applications for rent adjustment regarding just and reasonable
return shall be submitted to the Community Development Department and shall
include, among other things specified in the application requirements or
requested by the Department, the mailing addresses and space numbers of the
space or spaces for which an adjustment is requested. Each application shall be
accompanied by a filing fee of Twenty and no/100ths ($20.00) Dollars plus Five
and no/100ths ($5.00) Dollars per space affected by the proposed increase. The
Community Development Department shall determine whether an application is
complete within thirty (30) days of submittal. The applicant shall produce at
the request of the Community Development Department, or Planning Commission at
any subsequent hearing, such records, receipts and reports as may be necessary
to make a determination on the adjustment request. Failure to produce such
requested items shall be sufficient basis for the termination of the rent
adjustment proceedings. All applications for rent adjustment, together will all
oral and written evidence presented in support thereof, shall be under oath or
penalty of perjury.
      (2)   Within ten (10) days of the determination by the Community
Development Department that the application is complete, the Community
Development Department shall set a date for a hearing and determination. The
City shall notify the tenant or tenants of the subject space or spaces by mail
of the receipt of such application, the amount of the requested increase, the
landlord's justification for the request, and the place, date and time of the
hearing on the adjustment request. The hearing shall occur no less than ten
(10) days and no more than forty-five (45) days after the date of mailing such
notice.
      (3)   The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the rules of
procedure which the Planning Commission may choose to adopt. In the event that
the Planning Commission does not adopt such rules of procedure, the hearing
shall be conducted in general accordance with the City Council Manual of
Procedure, Ordinance 488-NS. At the time of the hearing, the landlord and/or
affected tenants may offer such documents, testimony, written declarations, or
evidence as may be pertinent to the proceedings.
      (4)   A determination with written findings in support thereof shall be
made within seventy-five (75) days from the conclusion of the hearing.
      (5)   Copies of the findings and determination of the Planning Commission
shall be mailed by the City to the applicant and all affected tenants.
   (d)   Appeal. Any dispute, contention, or disagreement relative to
interpretation, application, or enforcement of this Section
5-25.09, shall be submitted to the City Council for determination in accordance
with the provisions of Section
1-4.01 through Section
1-4.05 of the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code.
(§ 2, Ord. 1254-NS, eff. January 23, 1996 as amended by Ord. 1686-NS, eff.
August 19, 2021)
Sec. 5-25.10. Remedies.
   Any person who demands, accepts or retains any payment of rent in excess of
the maximum rent or maximum adjusted rent in violation of the provisions of
this chapter, or any regulations or orders promulgated hereunder shall be
liable in a civil action to the person from whom such payment is demanded,
accepted or retained for damages of three times the amount by which the payment
or payments demanded, accepted or retained exceed the maximum rent or maximum
adjusted rent which could be lawfully demanded, accepted or retained together
with reasonable attorney's fees and costs as determined by the court, together
with a civil penalty not to exceed the sum of Two Thousand and no/100ths
($2,000) Dollars or as may be amended pursuant to State law.
(§ 2, Ord. 1254-NS, eff. January 23, 1996, as amended by § 7, Ord. 1559-NS,
eff. September 6, 2011, as amended by Ord. 1686-NS, eff. August 19, 2021)
Sec. 5-25.11. Refusal of mobile home owner, resident, or tenant to pay.
   A mobile home owner, resident, or tenant may refuse to pay any rent in
excess of the maximum rent or maximum adjusted rent permitted pursuant to this
chapter or regulations or orders adopted hereunder. The fact that such rent is
in excess of maximum rent or maximum adjusted rent shall be a defense in any
action brought to recover possession of a rental space or to collect the
illegal rent.
(§ 2, Ord. 1254-NS, eff. January 23, 1996 as amended by Ord. 1686-NS, eff.
August 19, 2021)
Sec. 5-25.12. Prior ordinances.
   This chapter is derived from Ordinances 747-NS and 755-NS as amended by
Ordinances 782-NS, 787-NS, 805-NS, 831-NS, 838-NS, 846-NS, 933-NS, 1040-NS,
1216-NS, 1254-NS, and 1559-NS. This chapter shall control to the extent a
conflict exists between it and any former ordinance to the contrary.
(§ 2, Ord. 1254-NS, eff. January 23, 1996, as amended by § 8, Ord. 1559-NS,
eff. September 6, 2011, as amended by Ord. 1686-NS, eff. August 19, 2021)
Sec. 5-25.13. Registration.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of the registration requirement is to enable the
City to monitor rents under this chapter and to provide for the assessment of
fees to assist in the financing of the reasonable and necessary expenses of the
implementation and administration of the mobile home rent stabilization program
within the City of Thousand Oaks.
   (b)   Registration. On or before January 1 of each year, a landlord shall
furnish to the Community Development Department, upon a form provided by said
Department, information indicating the maximum base rent and maximum adjusted
rent for each rental space in the complex, as of October 31 of the prior year.
In addition, pursuant to a request from the Community Development Department,
landlords shall also furnish any other rent information needed that will assist
in monitoring rents in each park. Such spaces shall be individually designated
by their space number and mailing address. Additionally, the landlord shall
indicate when the rent for each individual space was last increased pursuant to
Sections
5-25.06, and
5-25.07.
   (c)   Registration fee. By January 1 of each year, the landlord shall submit
to the Community Development Department, a registration fee in the amount of
Ten and no/100ths ($10) Dollars for each controlled rental space in landlord's
park. This section shall not apply to any space which will not receive an
increase in rent pursuant to Section 5-25.06 in any year for which the fee is
due, provided that the landlord identifies each space which will not receive
such an increase by indicating "no increase" in the "Comments" section of the
Registration Form (Section
5-25.13(b)), above.
   (d)   Landlords shall include the requirements as specified in Section
5-25.03(b), if applicable.
(Ord. 1686-NS, eff. August 19, 2021)
5-25.14. Severability.
   If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance is for any
reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed
this ordinance, and each section, clause, or phrase thereof, irrespective of
portions being declared invalid or unconstitutional.
(Ord. 1686-NS, eff. August 19, 2021)
CHAPTER 26. SOCIAL HOST LIABILITY
Sec. 5-26.01. Findings.
   (a)   Underage persons consuming alcoholic beverages, cannabis, or cannabis
products at gatherings held at private residences or at rented residential and
commercial premises is harmful to the underage persons themselves and a threat
to the peace, health, safety, quiet enjoyment of residential property and the
general welfare of the public. Underage persons, who have been consuming
alcoholic beverages or cannabis, are at greater risk to be in automobile
accidents, to commit suicide, to be assaulted, and are at greater risk of
sexual assaults.
   (b)   Persons responsible for the occurrence of these types of gatherings on
private property, over which they have possession or control, have failed to
ensure that alcoholic beverages, cannabis, or cannabis products are neither
served to nor consumed by underage persons at these parties.
   (c)   Problems associated with gatherings involving underage persons
drinking alcohol, consuming cannabis, or cannabis products are difficult to
prevent and deter. Police need an arsenal of tools to deal with these issues
and its attendant problems. If persons are held civilly responsible by having
to pay a significant fine for hosting a party where there is underage drinking
or cannabis consumption, they will be more likely to properly supervise or stop
such conduct at events held on property under their possession or control.
Because the median household income for the City of Thousand Oaks is higher
than other communities the fine needs to be significant to have such a
deterrent effect.
   (d)   In the past and present, law enforcement, fire and other emergency
response services personnel have and are required to respond, sometimes on
multiple occasions, to these types of gatherings. The repeated return of police
officers to the location of an event constitutes a drain of emergency personnel
and resources, often leaving other areas of the city without police protection
or with unreasonably limited protection. Responses to such gatherings also
result in a disproportionate expenditure of public safety resources of the City
of Thousand Oaks, which are underwritten by general municipal taxes paid to the
City by its taxpayers and residents.
   (e)   Research has documented that cannabis use during adolescence and early
adulthood results in impaired neural connectivity in several areas of the brain
associated with learning and memory. This impairment may affect numerous
developmental problems among adolescents, including lower IQ scores, poorer
school performance, higher school dropout rates, and impaired verbal cognitive
and attention performance.
   The adverse effects associated with adolescent and early adulthood use of
cannabis increase in severity with early onset and heavy use.
(§ 2, Ord. 1462-NS, eff. June 9, 2006, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1590-NS, eff.
December 6, 2013; § 6, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017)
Sec. 5-26.02. Purpose.
   (a)   To enforce laws prohibiting the service to and consumption of
alcoholic beverages or cannabis consumption by underage persons;
   (b)   To protect public health, safety, general welfare and quiet enjoyment
of residential property and properties neighboring one of these gatherings; and
   (c)   To establish standards and controls of parties, gatherings or
assemblages involving underage persons consuming alcoholic beverages or
cannabis on private property when such gatherings are determined to be a threat
to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare and require initial
police response and return calls to the location to disperse uncooperative
participants.
(§ 2, Ord. 1462-NS, eff. June 9, 2006, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1590-NS, eff.
December 6, 2013; § 6, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017)
Sec. 5-26.03. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
   “Alcoholic Beverage” shall mean alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and
every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which
contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit
for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with
other substances.
   “Cannabis” means all parts of the Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica,
or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin,
whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant,
its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether crude
or purified, obtained from cannabis. "Cannabis" does not include the mature
stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the
seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture,
or preparation of the mature stalks, except the resin extracted therefrom,
fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of
germination. For the purpose of this division, "cannabis" does not mean
"industrial hemp" as defined by Section 11018. 5 of the Health and Safety Code.
   “Cannabis product” means a product containing cannabis, including, but not
limited to, manufactured cannabis, intended to be sold for use by cannabis
patients in California pursuant to the Compassionate Use Act of 1996, found at
Section 11362.5 of the California Health and Safety Code, as the same may be
amended from time-to-time, or pursuant to the Adult Use of Cannabis Act. For
purposes of this chapter, "cannabis" does not include industrial hemp as
defined by Section 81000 of the California Food and Agricultural Code or
Section 11018.5 of the California Health and Safety Code.
   “Juvenile” means any person under eighteen years of age.
   “Residence” or “ Other Private Property” shall mean a home, yard, apartment,
condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting
room, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a
dwelling, party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or
used with or without compensation.
   “Responsible Person” shall mean a person or persons with a right of
possession of the residence or other private property at which an unruly
gathering is conducted. A responsible person need not be present at such
gathering and prior knowledge of the unruly gathering is not a prerequisite to
a finding that any specific individual is a responsible person as defined by
this section. Responsible person includes, but is not limited to:
   (1)   Owner(s) and/or lessee(s) of the property where an unruly gathering is
taking place, including the record owner of the title to property, wherever
that person or entity may currently reside;
   (2)   Person(s) hosting an unruly gathering;
   (3)   Person(s) receiving money or other consideration for granting access
to an unruly gathering;
   (4)   Parent(s) or legal guardian(s) of a Juvenile who is also a responsible
person;
   (5)   Tenant of the residence or other private property;
   (6)   Person(s) in charge of the residence or other private property.
   “Underage Person” shall mean any person under twenty-one (21) years of age
consuming alcohol, or any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age
consuming cannabis, or a cannabis product without a doctor's recommendation.
   “Unruly Gathering” shall mean a party, event or gathering where four or more
underage persons are present at a residence or other private property in which
alcoholic beverages are being consumed or possessed by any Underage Person and
upon which unruly conduct occurs. Illustrative of such unruly conduct is
excessive noise, excessive traffic, obstruction of public streets by crowds or
vehicles, public drunkenness or unlawful public consumption of alcohol or
alcoholic beverages, or cannabis, assaults, batteries, fights, domestic
violence or other disturbances of peace, vandalism, litter, and any other
conduct which constitute a threat to public health, safety, quiet enjoyment of
residential property or general welfare.
(§ 2, Ord. 1462-NS, eff. June 9, 2006, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1590-NS, eff.
December 6, 2013; § 6, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017)
Sec. 5-26.04. Public Nuisance.
   (a)   Any unruly gathering shall constitute a public nuisance, as an
immediate threat to public health and safety.
   (b)   As a public nuisance, the unruly gathering may be summarily abated by
Police by all reasonable means, singularly or in combination, including, but
not limited to:
   (1)   An order requiring the gathering to be disbanded;
   (2)   Issuance of a civil citation under this ordinance;
   (3)   Issuance of a citation and/or arrest of any law violators under any
other applicable ordinances and/or statutes.
(§ 2, Ord. 1462-NS, eff. June 9, 2006, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1590-NS, eff.
December 6, 2013)
Sec. 5-26.05. Penalties for violation of the ordinance.
   (a)   A violation of this ordinance shall only be prosecuted as a civil
penalty pursuant to the procedures in Article 2 of Chapter 2, Section
1-2.201, et seq. Notwithstanding Section
1-2.201, et seq., a violation subjects any and all responsible persons, as
defined herein, to a civil penalty as follows:
   (1)   The Civil Penalty shall be as specified in the City's Master Fee
Resolution for the first violation. Any violation occurring within twenty-four
(24) hours of the first violation shall result in an additional fine for the
same amount as the fine for the first violation; and
   (2)   The Civil Penalty shall be as specified in the City's Master Fee
Resolution for a second violation occurring within one year of the first cited
violation, but outside of the twenty-four (24) hour period provided for in
subsection
5-26.05, (a) (1), above; and
   (3)   The Civil Penalty shall be as specified in the City's Master Fee
Resolution for a third or any further violations occurring within one year of
the first cited violation, but outside of the twenty-four (24) hour period
provided for in subsections
5-26.05, (a) (1) above.
   (b)   Payment of emergency response costs as further set forth in Section
5-26.07, if a responsible person is cited for a violation of this chapter two
or more times within one year of the first violation, but outside of the
twenty-four (24) hour period provided for in subsection
5-26.05, (a) (1).
   (c)   If the owner of the private property has leased the property to
another person, such owner shall not be considered a responsible person until
said owner receives notice of at least one previous unruly gathering on his
property in the prior twelve (12) months. Notice shall be by a copy of the
citation transmitted via certified mail to the owner of the private property as
recorded by the last equalized assessment roll of the Ventura County Assessor.
   (d)   In the event that an unruly gathering is hosted by a juvenile, then
the parents or guardians of that juvenile will be jointly and severally liable
for any penalties incurred pursuant to this ordinance.
   (e)   The responsible person may perform community service and pay City
administrative fees, if any, as an alternative to paying the civil penalty with
the prior written consent and approval of the City of Thousand Oaks Police
Chief or designee. The number of community service hours required to satisfy a
civil penalty is specified in the City's Master Fee Resolution.
   (f)   The parents or guardians of a juvenile found to have hosted an unruly
gathering may also request to have that juvenile serve the required hours of
community service as described in subsection (e), above, and pay City
administrative fees, if any, as an alternative penalty to paying the applicable
civil penalty.
   (g)   The City Police Chief or designee shall retain the discretion to
approve the community service requested by the responsible person. Upon
approval of City Police Chief or designee to perform community service, the
responsible person shall complete the required hours within one year of
approval, and shall submit proof of completion to City Police Chief or
designee. Failure to receive approval to perform community service or failure
to complete the required hours of service shall result in imposition of the
applicable civil penalty, which is immediately payable. No reduction in the
penalty is authorized for completion of less than the required hours of
community service as set forth in subsection (e) unless approved by the City
Manager or his designee.
   (h)   Community service will only be approved for the first citation issued
within a one year period. Subsequent violations within one year from the first
violation, but outside of the twenty-four (24) hour period provided for in
subsection
5-26.05, (a) (1), will be subject to Civil Penalties as stated in sections
5-26.05 (a) (2) and
5-26.05 (a) (3).
(§ 2, Ord. 1462-NS, eff. June 9, 2006, § 6, Ord. 1478-NS, eff. July 1, 2007, as
amended by § 1, Ord. 1590-NS, eff. December 6, 2013)
Sec. 5-26.06. Recovery of response costs.
   (a)   When a law enforcement, fire, or other emergency response provider
makes an initial response to an unruly gathering, the official shall, in
writing, inform any responsible person(s) for the gathering at the scene that:
   (1)   The official has determined that an unruly gathering exists; and,
   (2)   That if emergency response providers make a second response to the
same location within one year of the initial response, but outside of the
twenty-four (24) hour period provided for in subsection
5-26.05, (a) (1), the responsible person(s) will be charged for any response
costs required for responding to the unruly gathering. The responsible person
(s) will continue to be charged response costs for any subsequent responses to
an unruly gathering at the same location within one year of the initial cited
violation.
   (b)   Within thirty (30) calendar days of the initial response and each
response thereafter an additional written warning shall be transmitted via
certified mail to the owner of the private property as recorded by the last
equalized assessment roll of the Ventura County Assessor.
   (c)   This section applies to the costs of abatement of the summary nuisance
described in Section 5-26.04 and costs are recovered pursuant to California
Government Code Section 38773.1 and TOMC Section 1-2.201, et seq.
(§ 2, Ord. 1462-NS, eff. June 9, 2006, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1590-NS, eff.
December 6, 2013)
Sec. 5-26.07. Billing and collection of response costs.
   (a)   The response costs shall also be deemed a civil penalty and are
collectable pursuant to the procedures in Article 2 of Chapter 2, Section
1-2.201, et seq. A person owing such costs shall be liable in an administrative
civil proceeding for recovery for such fees.
   (b)   If the responsible person is a juvenile, then the juvenile's parents
or guardians shall be liable for the response costs.
   (c)   Besides the information required in a citation issued pursuant to
Section
1-2.203(e), the citation shall contain the following information:
   (1)   The name(s) of the person(s) being held liable for the payment of such
costs;
   (2)   The address of the residence or other private property where the
unruly gathering occurred;
   (3)   The date and time of the response;
   (4)   The law enforcement, fire or emergency service provider who responded;
   (5)   The date(s) and time(s) of any previous warning(s) given pursuant to
Section
5-26.06 and/or previous responses to unruly gatherings at the residence or
other private property in question within the previous one year;
   (6)   An itemized list of the response costs for which the person(s) is
being held liable. The Police shall calculate and compile an itemized list of
the applicable response costs; and,
   (7)   The imposition of a lien on the subject property in the event of
nonpayment of response costs.
   (d)   If a timely request for an administrative hearing pursuant to Section
1-2.208 is not made, such costs, if unpaid within 35 days of notice, shall
become a lien against the property as is authorized by Government Code Section
38773.1.
   (e)   If, following an administrative hearing, appeal, or other final
determination, the owner of the property is determined to be responsible for
any costs pursuant to this section, such costs, if unpaid within thirty-five
(35) days of notice of the final determination, shall become a lien against the
property as is authorized by Government Code Section 38773.1.
   (f)   Under either subsections (c) and (d) above, a notice of a lien shall
be filed with the County Recorder's Office which states the identity of the
record owner or possessor of the property, the date upon which the citation was
issued, a description of the real property subject to the lien, and the amount
of the abatement costs incurred to date. The notice shall be served on the
record owner as required in Government Code Section 38773.1. It is the intent
of the City Council that abatement costs incurred after the filing of the
notice of an abatement lien relates back to the date upon which the lien was
recorded for purposes of priority; however, in order to preserve its rights,
after all abatement costs have been incurred and the abatement is complete, the
City shall cause a supplemental notice of an abatement lien to be recorded. The
supplemental notice shall contain all of the information required for the
original notice and shall also refer to the recordation date and recorder's
number of the original notice.
(§ 2, Ord. 1462-NS, eff. June 9, 2006, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1590-NS, eff.
December 6, 2013)
Sec. 5-26.08. Protected activities.
   This ordinance shall not apply to activities protected by Article I, section
4 of the California Constitution or the 1st or 14th Amendments of the United
States Constitution.
(§ 2, Ord. 1462-NS, eff. June 9, 2006, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1590-NS, eff.
December 6, 2013)
CHAPTER 27. ALCOHOL ENERGY DRINK
Sec. 5-27.01. Purpose.
   The purpose of this ordinance is to protect public health, safety and
general welfare by providing information to consumers when making purchases of
Alcoholic Energy Drinks or alcohol mixed with Energy Drinks. City of Thousand
Oaks does not intend to regulate the sale or purchase of alcoholic beverages or
to affect the ability of a purchaser or seller of alcoholic beverages to
complete a sales transaction.
(§ 2, Ord. 1528-NS, eff. December 17, 2009)
Sec. 5-27.02. Definitions.
   The following words and phrases, as used in this chapter shall have the
following meaning:
   (a)   Alcoholic Beverage includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and
every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which
contains one-half of one percent (1/2%) or more of alcohol by volume, which is
fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with
other substances, the sale of which requires a license from the California
Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
   (b)   Alcoholic Energy Drink (AEDs) means an alcoholic beverage to which is
added caffeine and/or other stimulants that are metabolized as caffeine, such
as guarana. Alcoholic Energy Drinks do not include coffee-based alcoholic
beverages, including Irish Coffee and Kahlua.
   (c)   Non-alcohol Energy Drink (EDs) means a beverage that contains at least
4 mg/oz concentration of caffeine and/or other stimulants and: (1) has the word
"energy" in its brand name; or (2) has the term "energy drink" on its label; or
(3) is marketed and promoted to consumers as providing extra energy or
alertness when consumed. Non-alcohol Energy Drinks do not include traditional
sodas that do not meet any of the three criteria listed above or coffee-based
beverages.
(§ 2, Ord. 1528-NS, eff. December 17, 2009)
Sec. 5-27.03. Duty to Post Warning Signs.
   (a)   Any person or entity who owns, operates, manages, leases or rents a
premises offering for sale or dispensing for consideration to the public AEDs
or Alcoholic Beverages and EDs shall cause a sign or notice to be posted or
displayed on the premises as provided in this section. The sign or notice shall
comply with the readability requirements specified herein and shall read
substantially as follows:
WARNING: Consuming energy drinks that contain or are mixed with alcohol may
mask the signs of impairment and INCREASE YOUR RISKS OF INJURY
In no event shall a sign as required herein be smaller than eight (8") inches
wide and eight (8") inches long, nor shall any lettering thereon be less than a
half (1/2") inch in height.
   (b)   Placement. A sign or notice required by subsection (a) above shall be
placed as follows:
   (1)   Where the sale or dispensing of AEDs or Alcoholic Beverages and EDs to
the public is primarily intended for consumption off the premises, at least one
(1) sign shall be placed at all locations in the store where AEDs or Alcoholic
Beverages and EDs are displayed for purchase.
   (2)   Where the sale or dispensing of AEDs or Alcoholic Beverages and EDs to
the public is primarily provided through over-the-counter service, at least one
(1) sign shall be placed to assure that it is readable from all counter
locations available to the public.
   (3)   Where the sale or dispensing of AEDs or Alcoholic Beverages and EDs to
the public is primarily provided for consumption on the premises by the public
at tables served by food or beverage service persons, at least one (1) sign
shall be placed to assure it is readable by the public entering the premises.
(§ 2, Ord. 1528-NS, eff. December 17, 2009)
CHAPTER 28. TREE PRUNING
Sec. 5-28.01. Purpose.
   This chapter provides standards for pruning of trees planted pursuant to a
City approved landscape plan, in order to protect the health and aesthetic
value of such trees. Trees that are well maintained have better structure
minimizing the potential for failure, and also enhance the aesthetic character
of the property and the City.
(§ 2, Ord. 1529-NS, eff. December 18, 2009)
Sec. 5-28.02. Definitions1.
   The following words and phrases, as used in this Chapter shall have the
following meanings:
   (a)   "Cambium" means the dividing layer of cells that forms sapwood (xylem)
to the inside and inner bark (phloem) to the outside.
   (b)   "Climbing spurs" shall mean sharp, pointed devices affixed to a
climber's boot used to assist in climbing trees (also known as gaffs, hooks,
spurs, spikes, or climbers).
   (c)   "Crown" shall mean the leaves and branches of a tree measured from the
lowest branch on the trunk to the top of the tree.
   (d)   "Lion's tailing" shall mean the removal of an excessive number of
inner, lateral branches from parent branches.
   (e)   “Throwline" shall mean a small, lightweight line with a weighted end
used to position a climber's rope in a tree.
   (f)   "Topping" shall mean the reduction of a tree's size using heading cuts
that shorten limbs or branches back to a predetermined crown limit.
(§ 2, Ord. 1529-NS, eff. December 18, 2009)
1 Excerpted from ANSI A300 (Part 1) - 2008 Pruning, Copyright Tree Care
Industry Association, Inc. Visit www.tcia.org for more information.
Sec. 5-28.03. Applicability.
   This chapter shall apply only to trees planted pursuant to a City-approved
landscape plan. The provisions of this chapter do not exempt any person or
entity from the requirements to obtain a permit for the removal, pruning, or
encroachment of any protected oak or landmark tree subject to Article 42 or 43
of Chapter 4 of Title 9.
(§ 2, Ord. 1529-NS, eff. December 18, 2009, as amended by Part 13, Ord. 1610-
NS, eff. January 15, 2016)
Sec. 5-28.04. Pruning Regulations.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to prune greater than twenty-five (25%) percent
of the foliage or crown of a tree subject to this chapter as determined by the
City's Arborist, during a calendar year.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful to prune a tree that results in topping or lion's
tailing.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful to use climbing spurs except when limbs are more
than a throwline distance apart and there is no other means of climbing the
tree, or when the bark is thick enough to prevent damage to the cambium. The
use of climbing spurs on palm trees is permitted.
   (d)   Exceptions to these regulations may be granted by the Community
Development Department for good cause and where the requested pruning does not
adversely affect the aesthetics or health of the tree(s).
(§ 2, Ord. 1529-NS, eff. December 18, 2009)
Sec. 5-28.05. Penalties.
   (a)   Any person or entity that violates any provision of this chapter shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Section
1-2.03 of this Municipal Code.
   (b)   It has been determined that trees subject to this chapter are a
valuable asset to the citizens of Thousand Oaks and as a result of the loss or
damage to any of these trees, the public should be recompensed. In addition to
any penalties provided by subsection (a), any person or entity who damages a
tree planted subject to this chapter by pruning methods prohibited by this
chapter is responsible for monetary restitution to the City equal to the
estimated value of damage to the tree(s), and may also be required to replace a
tree damaged if it is no longer viable or could potentially become a hazard, as
determined by the City's Arborist. Damage valuation shall be determined by the
City's Arborist. Tree damage appraisals shall be conducted by the City's
Arborist utilizing the Guide for Plant Appraisal, 9th Edition (Council of Tree
and Landscape Appraisers) or latest edition.
(§ 2, Ord. 1529-NS, eff. December 18, 2009)
Sec. 5-28.06. Pruning Permits.
   (a)   A pruning permit to prune greater than twenty-five (25%) percent of a
tree’s foliage or canopy within an annual growing season may be issued after
review by the Community Development Director or designee. All applications must
include justification by a certified arborist or other professional as approved
by the City, for the reason more than twenty-five (25%) percent of the tree’s
foliage or canopy must be pruned. The justification for the pruning shall be
evaluated by the City's Arborist.
   (b)   The Community Development Department is hereby authorized to collect
an application processing fee, where applicable, and appeal fee, as set by
Council resolution, to offset the cost of processing.
(§ 2, Ord. 1529-NS, eff. December 18, 2009)
CHAPTER 29. CANNABIS
Sec. 5-29.01. Purpose and intent.
   It is the purpose and intent of this Chapter to implement the provisions of
the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act ("MAUCRSA") to
accommodate the needs of medically-ill persons in need of and provide access to
cannabis for medicinal purposes as recommended by their health care provider
(s), and to provide access to same. It is also the purpose and intent of this
Chapter to provide access to adult-use cannabis for persons aged 21 and over as
authorized by the MAUCRSA while imposing sensible regulations on the use of
land to protect the City's residents, neighborhoods, and businesses from
disproportionately negative impacts.
   As such, it is the purpose and intent of this Chapter to regulate the retail
sale and testing of medicinal and adult-use cannabis and cannabis products in a
responsible manner to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents
of Thousand Oaks and to enforce rules and regulations consistent with state
law. It is the further purpose of intent of this Chapter to require all
commercial cannabis operators to obtain and renew annually a permit to operate
within Thousand Oaks. Nothing in this Chapter is intended to authorize the
possession, use, or provision of cannabis for purposes that violate state law.
The provisions of this Title are in addition to any other permits, licenses and
approvals which may be required to conduct business in the City, and are in
addition to any permits, licenses and approval required under state, county, or
other law.
   On January 16, 2019, Title 16, Section 5416(d) of the California Code of
Regulations adopted by the State of California went into effect. Section 5416
(d) permits commercial cannabis delivery of both recreational and medicinal
product from State of California-licensed retail operators to any county or
city within California even if such entity previously banned deliveries. Based
on the State's regulation requiring the City of Thousand Oaks to permit
deliveries of cannabis product to addresses within the City's jurisdiction,
this Title and Chapter of the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code is amended to remain
consistent with state law.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1662-NS,
eff. July 12, 2019, and § 2, Ord. 1703-NS, eff. August 5, 2022)
Sec. 5-29.02. Legal authority.
   Pursuant to Sections 5 and 7 of Article XI of the California Constitution,
the provisions of the Medicinal and Adult Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety
Act (hereinafter "MAUCRSA"), any subsequent state legislation and/or
regulations regarding same, the City of Thousand Oaks is authorized to adopt
ordinances that establish standards, requirements and regulations for the
licensing and permitting of commercial medicinal and adult-use cannabis
activity. Any standards, requirements, and regulations regarding health and
safety, security, and worker protections established by the State of
California, or any of its departments or divisions, shall be the minimum
standards applicable in the City of Thousand Oaks to all commercial cannabis
activity.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017)
Sec. 5-29.03. Commercial cannabis activities prohibited unless specifically
authorized.
   Except as specifically authorized in this chapter, the commercial
cultivation, manufacture, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling,
sale, delivery, distribution or transportation, other than as provided under
Business & Professions Code Section 26090(e), of cannabis or cannabis product
is expressly prohibited in the City of Thousand Oaks.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017)
Sec. 5-29.04. Compliance with laws.
   It is the responsibility of the owners and operators of the commercial
cannabis business to ensure that it is, at all times, operating in a manner
compliant with all applicable state and local laws, and any regulations
promulgated thereunder as well as any subsequently enacted state law or
regulatory, licensing, or certification requirements, and any specific,
additional operating procedures or requirements which may be imposed as
conditions of approval of the commercial cannabis business permit. Nothing in
this chapter shall be construed as authorizing any actions that violate State
law regarding the operation of a commercial cannabis business.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017)
Sec. 5-29.05. Definitions.
   The following words and phrases, as used in this chapter shall have the
following meanings:
   "A-license" means a state license issued under this chapter for cannabis or
cannabis products that are intended for adults 21 years of age and over and who
do not possess physician's recommendations.
   "A-licensee" means any person holding a license under this division for
cannabis or cannabis products that are intended for adults 21 years of age and
over and who do not possess physician's recommendations.
   "Adult-use cannabis" or "adult-use cannabis product" means cannabis or a
cannabis product, respectively, intended to be sold for use by adults 21 years
of age and over and who do not possess a physician's recommendation.
   "Applicant" means an owner applying for a state license pursuant to this
chapter.
   "Cannabis" means all parts of the Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica,
or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin,
whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant,
its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether crude
or purified, obtained from cannabis. "Cannabis" does not include the mature
stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the
seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture,
or preparation of the mature stalks, except the resin extracted therefrom,
fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of
germination. For the purpose of this division, "cannabis" does not mean
"industrial hemp" as defined by Section 11018.5 of the Health and Safety Code.
   "Cannabis accessories" has the same meaning as in Section 11018.2 of the
Health and Safety Code.
   "Cannabis concentrate" means cannabis that has undergone a process to
concentrate one or more active cannabinoids, thereby increasing the product's
potency. Resin from granular trichomes from a cannabis plant is a concentrate
for purposes of this division. A cannabis concentrate is not considered food,
as defined by Section 109935 of the Health and Safety Code, or drug, as defined
by Section 109925 of the Health and Safety Code.
   "Cannabis product" means a product containing cannabis or cannabis
concentrate, including, but not limited to, manufactured cannabis, intended to
be sold for use by cannabis patients in California pursuant to the
Compassionate Use Act of 1996, found at Section 11362.5 of the California
Health and Safety Code, as the same may be amended from time-to-time, or
pursuant to the Adult Use of Cannabis Act. For purposes of this chapter,
"cannabis" does not include industrial hemp as defined by Section 11018.5 of
the California Health and Safety Code.
   "Cannabis products" has the same meaning as in Section 11018.1 of the Health
and Safety Code.
   "Caregiver" or "primary caregiver" has the same meaning as that term is
defined in Section 11362.7 of the California Health and Safety Code.
   "Child resistant" means designed or constructed to be significantly
difficult for children under five years of age to open, and not difficult for
normal adults to use properly.
   "City" or "City of Thousand Oaks" means the City of Thousand Oaks, a
California General Law City.
   "Commercial cannabis activity" includes the cultivation, possession,
manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging,
labeling, transportation, delivery or sale of cannabis and cannabis products as
provided for in this chapter.
   "Commercial cannabis business" means any business or operation which engages
in medicinal or adult-use commercial cannabis activity.
   "Commercial cannabis business permit" means a regulatory permit issued by
the City of Thousand Oaks pursuant to this chapter to a commercial cannabis
business and is required before any commercial cannabis activity may be
conducted in the City. The initial permit and annual renewal of a commercial
cannabis business permit is made expressly contingent upon the business'
ongoing compliance with all of the requirements of this Title and any
regulations adopted by the City governing the commercial cannabis activity at
issue.
   "Customer" means a natural person of 21 years of age or over or a natural
person of 18 years of age or older who possesses a physician's recommendation.
   "Day care center" has the same meaning as in Section 1596.76 of the Health
and Safety Code.
   "Delivery" means the commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to
a customer. "Delivery" also includes the use by a retailer of any technology
platform owned and controlled by the retailer.
   "Dispensing" means any activity involving the retail sale of cannabis or
cannabis products from a retailer.
   "Distribution" means the procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and
cannabis products between licensees.
   "Distributor" means a person holding a valid commercial cannabis state
license for distribution, required by state law to engage in the business of
purchasing cannabis from a licensed cultivator, or cannabis products from a
licensed manufacturer, for sale to a licensed retailer.
   "Dried flower" means all dead cannabis that has been harvested, dried,
cured, or otherwise processed, excluding leaves and stems.
   "Edible cannabis product" means cannabis product that is intended to be
used, in whole or in part, for human consumption, including, but not limited
to, chewing gum, but excluding products set forth in Division 15, commencing
with Section 32501 of the Food and Agricultural Code. An edible cannabis
product is not considered food, as defined by Section 109935 of the Health and
Safety Code, or a drug, as defined by Section 109925 of the Health and Safety
Code.
   "Labeling" means any label or other written, printed, or graphic matter upon
a cannabis product, or upon its container.
   "Labor peace agreement" means an agreement between a licensee and any bona
fide labor organization that, at a minimum protects the State's proprietary
interests by prohibiting labor organizations and members from engaging in
picketing, work stoppages, boycotts, and any other economic interference with
the applicant's business. This agreement means that the applicant has agreed
not to disrupt efforts by the bona fide labor organization to communicate with,
and attempt to organize and represent, the applicant's employees. The agreement
shall provide a bona fide labor organization access at reasonable times to
areas in which the applicant's employees work, for the purpose of meeting with
employees to discuss their right to representation, employment rights under
State law, and terms and conditions or employment. This type of agreement shall
not mandate a particular method of election or certification of the bona fide
labor organization.
   "License" means a state license issued under this chapter, and includes both
an A-license and an M-license, as well as a testing laboratory.
   "Licensee" means any person holding a license under this chapter, regardless
of whether the license held is an A-license or an M-license, and includes the
holder of a testing laboratory license.
   "Licensing authority" means the state agency responsible for the issuance,
renewal, or reinstatement of the license, or the State agency authorized to
make disciplinary action against the licensee.
   "Live plants" means living cannabis flowers and plants, including seeds,
immature plants, and vegetative stage plants.
   "Local jurisdiction" means a city, county, or city and county.
   "M-license" means a State license issued under this chapter for commercial
cannabis activity involving medicinal cannabis.
   "M-licensee" means any person holding a license under this chapter for
commercial cannabis activity involving medicinal cannabis.
   "Manufacture" means to compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make
or prepare a cannabis product.
   "Manufactured cannabis" means raw cannabis that has undergone a process
whereby the raw agricultural product has been transformed into a concentrate,
extraction or other manufactured product intended for internal consumption
through inhalation or oral ingestion or for topical application.
   "Manufacturer" means a licensee that conducts the production, preparation,
propagation, or compounding of cannabis or cannabis products either directly or
indirectly or by extraction methods, or independently by means of chemical
synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis at a fixed
location that packages or repackages cannabis or cannabis products or labels or
container.
   "Manufacturing site" means a location that produces, prepares, propagates,
or compounds cannabis or cannabis products, directly or indirectly, by
extraction methods, independently by means of chemical synthesis, or by a
combination of extraction and chemical synthesis, and is owned and operated by
a person issued a valid commercial cannabis business permit for manufacturing
from the City of Thousand Oaks and, a valid state license as required for
manufacturing of cannabis products.
   "Medicinal cannabis" or "medicinal cannabis product" means cannabis or a
cannabis product, respectively, intended to be sold for use pursuant to the
Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Proposition 215), found at Section 11362.5 of
the Health and Safety Code, by a medicinal cannabis patient in California who
possesses a physician's recommendation.
   "Operation" means any act for which licensure is required under the
provisions of this chapter, or any commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis
products.
   "Owner" means any of the following:
   (1)   A person with an aggregate ownership interest of 20 percent or more in
the Commercial Cannabis Business, unless the interest is solely a security,
lien or encumbrance. For purposes of this section, "aggregate" means the total
ownership interest held by a single person through any combination of
individually held ownership interests in a commercial cannabis business and
ownership interests in an entity that has an ownership interest in the same
commercial cannabis business. For example, a person who owns 5 percent of the
stock in a commercial cannabis business as an individual shareholder and 100
percent of the stock in an entity that owns 5 percent of the stock in the same
commercial cannabis business has a 10 percent aggregate ownership interest in
the commercial cannabis business.
   (2)   An individual who manages, directs, or controls the operations of the
Commercial Cannabis Business, including but not limited to:
      (a)   A member of the board of directors of a nonprofit.
      (b)   A general partner of a Commercial Cannabis Business that is
organized as a partnership.
      (c)   A non-member manager or manager of a Commercial Cannabis Business
that is organized as a limited liability company.
      (d)   The trustee(s) and all persons who have control of the trust and/or
the Commercial Cannabis Business that is held in trust.
      (e)   An individual with the authority to provide strategic direction and
oversight for the overall operations of the Commercial Cannabis Business, such
as the chief executive officer, president or their equivalent, or an officer,
director, vice president, general manager or their equivalent.
      (f)   When an entity is an owner in a Commercial Cannabis Business, all
entities and individuals with a financial interest in the entity shall be
disclosed to the City and may be considered owners of the Commercial Cannabis
Business. For example, this includes all entities in a multi-layer business
structure, as well as the chief executive officer, members of the board of
directors, partners, trustees and all persons who have control of a trust and
managing members or non-member managers of the entity. Each entity disclosed as
having a financial interest must disclose the identities of persons holding
financial interests until only individuals remain.
   "Package" means any container or receptacle used for holding cannabis or
cannabis products.
   "Patient" or "qualified patient" shall have the same definition as
California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7 et seq., as it may be
amended, and which means a person who is entitled to the protections of
California Health & Safety Code Section 11362.5.
   "Person" includes any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture,
association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business
trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit,
and the plural as well as the singular.
   "Person with an identification card" shall have the meaning given that term
by California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7.
   "Physician's recommendation" means a recommendation by a physician and
surgeon that a patient use cannabis provided in accordance with the
Compassionate Use Act of 1996, found at Section 11362.5 of the Health and
Safety Code.
   "Premises" means the designated structure or structures and land specified
in the application that is owned, leased, or otherwise held under the control
of the applicant or licensee where the commercial cannabis activity will be or
is conducted. The premises shall be a contiguous area and shall only be
occupied by one licensee.
   "Purchaser" means the customer who is engaged in a transaction with a
licensee for purposes of obtaining cannabis or cannabis products.
   "Retailer" or "Cannabis Retailer" means a commercial cannabis business
facility where medicinal or adult-use cannabis, cannabis products, or devices
are offered, either individually or in any combination, for retail sale,
including an establishment (whether fixed or mobile) that delivers, pursuant to
express authorization, cannabis and cannabis products as part of a retail sale,
and where the operator holds a valid commercial cannabis business permit from
the City of Thousand Oaks authorizing the operation of a retailer, and a valid
state license as required by state law to operate a retailer.
   "Sell," "sale," and "to sell" include any transaction whereby, for any
consideration, title to cannabis or cannabis products are transferred from one
person to another, and includes the delivery of cannabis or cannabis products
pursuant to an order placed for the purchase of the same and soliciting or
receiving an order for the same, but does not include the return of cannabis or
cannabis products by a licensee to the licensee from whom the cannabis or
cannabis product was purchased.
   "State" means the State of California, or an of its departments or
divisions, having regulatory oversight over cannabis or cannabis products,
including the Department of Cannabis Control.
   "State License" means a permit or license issued by the State of California,
or one of its departments or divisions, under MAUCRSA and any subsequent State
of California legislation regarding the same to engage in commercial cannabis
activity.
   "Testing laboratory" means a laboratory, facility, or entity in the state
that offers or performs tests of cannabis or cannabis products and that is both
of the following:
   (1)   Accredited by an accrediting body that is independent from all other
persons involved in commercial cannabis.
   (2)   Licensed by the State.
   "Topical cannabis" means a product intended for external application and/or
absorption through the skin. A topical cannabis product is not considered a
drug as defined by Section 109925 of the California Health and Safety Code.
   "Transport" means the transfer of cannabis products from the permitted
business location of one licensee to the permitted business location of another
licensee, for the purposes of conducting commercial cannabis activity
authorized by MAUCRSA which may be amended or repealed by any subsequent State
of California legislation regarding the same.
   "Youth center" has the same meaning as in Section 11353.1 of the Health and
Safety Code.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1703-NS,
eff. August 5, 2022)
Sec. 5-29.06. Commercial cannabis business permit required.
   (a)   No person may engage in any commercial cannabis business or in any
commercial cannabis activity within the City including cultivation, delivery
manufacturing, processing, laboratory testing, transporting, dispensing,
distribution, or sale of cannabis or a cannabis product unless the person: (1)
has a valid commercial cannabis business permit issued by City Council; (2) has
a valid Seller's Permit; and (3) is currently in compliance with all applicable
state and local laws and regulations pertaining to the commercial cannabis
business and the commercial cannabis activities, including the duty to obtain
any required state licenses.
   (b)   Until Health & Safety Code Section 11362.775, subdivision (a), is
repealed, the City intends that eligibility to operate collectives or
cooperatives under that subdivision shall be eligible to apply for a City
conditional permit to conduct commercial cannabis activities, but only to the
degree those activities are authorized under state law for collectives and
cooperatives. When the Health & Safety Code Section 11362.775, subdivision (a),
is repealed, or as soon as collectives and cooperatives are no longer permitted
to engage in commercial cannabis activity without a state license under state
law, any conditional permit issued to a commercial cannabis business that has
not obtained a state license for the commercial cannabis activities shall
expire and shall be null and void. Such businesses shall no longer be
authorized to engage in any commercial cannabis activities in the City until
they obtain both a City issued commercial cannabis business permit and a state
license for that commercial cannabis activity.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1662-NS,
eff. July 12, 2019)
Sec. 5-29.07. Cannabis employee permit required.
   (a)   Any person who is an employee or who otherwise works within a
commercial cannabis business identified in Section 5-29.08(a), (b) or (c) must
be legally authorized to do so under applicable state law.
   (b)   Any person who is an employee or who otherwise works within a
commercial cannabis business identified in Section 5-29.08(a) or (b) must
obtain a commercial cannabis employee work permit from the City prior to
performing any work at any commercial cannabis business.
   (c)   Applications for a commercial cannabis employee work permit shall be
developed, made available, and processed by the applicable Department Head or
designee(s), and shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
   (1)   Name, address, and phone number of the applicant;
   (2)   Age and verification of applicant. A copy of a birth certificate,
driver's license, government issued identification card, passport or other
proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age must be
submitted with the application;
   (3)   Name, address of the commercial cannabis businesses where the person
will be employed, and the name of the primary manager of that business;
   (4)   A list of any crimes enumerated in California Business and Professions
Code Section 26057(b)(4) for which the applicant has been convicted;
   (5)   Name, address, and contact person for any previous employers from
which the applicant was fired, resigned, or asked to leave and the reasons for
such dismissal or firing;
   (6)   The application shall be accompanied by fingerprints and a recent
photograph of the applicant in a form and manner as required by the City
Manager or his/her designee(s).
   (7)   A signed statement under penalty of perjury that the information
provided is true and correct.
   (8)   If applicable, verification that the applicant is a qualified patient
or primary caregiver.
   (9)   A fee paid in an amount set by resolution of the City Council in an
amount necessary to cover the costs of administering the employee work permit
programs. The fee is nonrefundable and shall not be returned in the event the
employee permit is denied or revoked.
   (d)   The applicable Department Head or designee(s) shall review the
application for completeness, shall conduct a background check to determine
whether the applicant was convicted of a crime or left a previous employer for
reasons that show the applicant:
   (1)   Is dishonest; or
   (2)   Has committed a felony or misdemeanor involving fraud, deceit,
embezzlement; or
   (3)   Was convicted of a violent felony; or
   (4)   Was convicted of a crime of moral turpitude; or
   (5)   Was convicted of the illegal use, possession, transportation,
distribution or similar activities related to controlled substances, as defined
in the Federal Controlled Substances Act, except for cannabis related offenses
for which the conviction occurred after the passage of the Compassionate Use
Act of 1996.
   Discovery of these facts showing that the applicant is dishonest or has been
convicted of the preceding identified types of crimes are grounds for denial of
the permit. Where the applicant's sentence, including any term of probation,
incarceration, or supervised release for possession of, possession for sale,
sale, manufacture, transportation, or cultivation of a controlled substance is
completed, such underlying conviction shall not be the sole ground for denial
of a commercial cannabis work permit.
   (e)   The applicable Department Head or designee(s) shall issue the
commercial cannabis work permit or a written denial to the applicant within
thirty (30) days of the date the application was deemed complete. In the event
the cannabis work permit cannot be issued within this time period then the City
Manager or his/her designee(s) may issue a temporary work permit for an
employee upon completing a preliminary background check, and if the business
can demonstrate to the applicable Department Head or designee(s), that the
employee is necessary for the operation of the business. The temporary permit
may be immediately revoked by the applicable Department Head designee(s) upon
determination that the applicant has failed the background check or upon the
issuance of the permanent work permit.
   (f)   An employee permit shall be valid for a twelve (12) month period and
must be renewed on an annual basis. Renewal applications shall contain all the
information required in subsection (c) above, including the payment of a
renewal application fee in an amount to be set by resolution of the City
Council.
   (g)   In the event a person changes employment from one commercial cannabis
business in the City to another, the work permit holder shall notify the
applicable Department Head or designee(s) in writing of the change within ten
(10) days, or the work permit shall be suspended or revoked and such person
shall not be permitted to work at any commercial cannabis business in the City.
   (h)   The City may immediately revoke the commercial cannabis work permit
should the permit holder be convicted of a crime listed in subsection (c) and
(d) above, or if facts become known to the City that the permit holder has
engaged in activities showing that he or she is dishonest.
   (i)   The City Manager or his/her designee(s) is hereby authorized to
promulgate all regulations necessary to implement the work permit process and
requirements.
   (j)   The applicable Department Head or designee(s) shall issue a permit in
the form of a personal identification card that can be worn in a prominent and
visible location. The identification card shall be maintained in good and
readable condition at all times.
   (k)   The applicant may appeal the denial or revocation of a commercial
cannabis work permit by filing a notice of appeal with the City Manager not
more than ten (10) days following the mailing of the notice of denial, which
appeal shall be conducted as follows pursuant to subsection (l).
   (l)   Employee work permit appeals
   (1)   Any person denied approval of a commercial cannabis work permit under
this chapter whose permit has been suspended, revoked or conditioned may
appeal. Such appeal must be in writing and must be filed with the City Manager
or designee not more than ten (10) days following the mailing of the notice of
denial, suspension, revocation, or conditioning sent to the applicant. The
written appeal must contain all reasons and documentary support why the denial,
revocation, suspension, or conditioning should be overturned. Any successful
appeal will result in approval or reinstatement of an approval and refund of
any fines collected by the City.
      (i)   The City Manager shall not accept an appeal, and no hearing shall
be held, unless the appellant has paid a filing fee, in an amount set by
resolution of the City Council, to defray the cost of such appeal. The filing
fee must be submitted with the appeal records. Any appeal without the timely
payment of fees shall be considered to be untimely.
      (ii)   The scope of the appeal hearing pursuant to this section shall be
limited to those issues raised by the appellant in the written appeal, as
submitted pursuant to subsection (a) of this section.
   (2)   City Manager action.
      (i)   Upon receipt of a timely filed appeal, the City Manager or designee
shall set the matter for hearing which shall be held not fewer than ten (10)
calendar days nor more than thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the
appeal request. The hearing may be continued from time to time upon the mutual
consent of the parties.
      (ii)   The appellant shall be provided with notice of the time and place
of the appeal hearing, as well as a copy of all relevant materials at least
seven (7) calendar days prior to the hearing.
      (iii)   At the time of such hearing, the City Manager shall review the
records and files relating to the decision.
      (iv)   The City Manager shall permit any interested person to present any
relevant evidence bearing on the issues involved in the matter.
      (v)   In conducting the hearing, technical rules relating to evidence and
witnesses shall not apply. Any relevant evidence may be admitted if it is
material and if it is evidence customarily relied upon by responsible persons
in the conduct of their affairs regardless of the existence of any common law
or statutory rule which might make admission of such evidence improper over
objection in civil actions. Hearsay evidence may be admissible if it is the
sort upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of
serious affairs. The rules of privilege shall be applicable to the extent they
are permitted in civil actions. Irrelevant, collateral, and repetitious
testimony shall be excluded.
      (vi)   The appellant shall have the burden of proving that he or she
meets the requirements for issuing the permit in the first instance; the City
shall have the burden in proving that grounds exist for revoking or failing to
renew a certificate.
      (vii)   Based upon the evidence presented at the hearing, the City
Manager shall determine whether the decision should be affirmed, modified or
reversed.
      (viii)   The City Manager's decision shall be communicated in writing to
the appellant within seven (7) calendar days after the close of the hearing and
submission of the matter to the City Manager for decision. The City Manager's
decision shall state whether the decision is affirmed, modified or reversed and
shall state the reasons therefor.
      (ix)   The decision of the City Manager shall include notice that the
decision is final and conclusive, that judicial review may be sought therefrom
pursuant to California Civil Procedure Code Section 1094.5, and that any action
filed in the superior court shall be filed within ninety (90) days following
the City Manager's notice pursuant to California Civil Procedure Code Section
1094.6.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1662-NS,
eff. July 12, 2019)
Sec. 5-29.08. Maximum number and type of authorized commercial cannabis
businesses permitted.
   The number of each type of commercial cannabis business that shall be
permitted to operate in the City at any one given time shall be as follows:
   (a)   Cannabis Retailer: maximum of two (2).
   (b)   Cannabis Testing Laboratory: maximum of two (2).
   (c)   Delivery Service from a California-Licensed Retailer: no limit.
   Section
5-29.08 is only intended to create a maximum number of commercial cannabis
businesses that may be issued permits to operate in the City under each
category. Nothing in this Chapter creates a mandate that the City Council must
issue any or all of the commercial cannabis business permits if it is
determined that the applicants do not meet the standards which are established
in the application requirements or further amendments to the application
process.
   Each year following the City Council's initial award of permits, if any, or
at any time in the City Council's discretion, the City Council may reassess the
number of commercial cannabis business permits which are authorized for
issuance.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1662-NS,
eff. July 12, 2019, as amended by Part 2, Ord. 1673-NS, eff. February 14, 2020,
and § 4, Ord. 1703-NS, eff. August 5, 2022)
Sec. 5-29.09. Commercial cannabis business permit; Initial application
procedure.
   (a)   The City Council shall adopt by resolution the procedures for
application processing, and the manner in which the decision will ultimately be
made regarding the issuance of any commercial cannabis business permit(s) for
businesses permitted to operate in Thousand Oaks identified in Section
5-29.08. The resolution shall include or require the City Manager or designee
to provide detailed objective review criteria to be evaluated on a point system
or equivalent quantitative evaluation scale tied to each set of review criteria
("Review Criteria"). The resolution shall authorize the City Manager or his/her
designee(s) to prepare the necessary forms, adopt any necessary rules to the
application, regulations and processes, solicit applications, conduct initial
evaluations of the applicants, and to ultimately provide a final recommendation
to the City Council.
   (b)   At the time of filing, each applicant shall pay an application fee
established by resolution of the City Council, to cover all costs incurred by
the City in the application process.
   (c)   After the initial review, ranking, and scoring under the Review
Criteria, the City Manager or his/her designee(s) will make a recommendation to
the City Council, and the City Council shall make a final determination in
accordance with this Chapter.
   (d)   Preservation of Rights. The City reserves the right to reject any or
all applications. Prior to permit issuance, the City may also modify, postpone,
or cancel any request for applications, or the entire program under this
Chapter, at any time without liability, obligation, or commitment to any party,
firm, or organization, to the extent permitted under California law. Persons
submitting applications assume the risk that all or any part of the program, or
any particular category of permit potentially authorized under this Chapter,
may be cancelled at any time prior to permit issuance. The City further
reserves the right to request and obtain additional information from any
candidate submitting an application. In addition to any other reasons for
rejecting an application set forth in this chapter an application may be
rejected for any of the following reasons:
   (1)   Proposal received after designated time and date.
   (2)   Proposal not containing the required elements, exhibits, nor organized
in the required format.
   (3)   Proposal considered not fully responsive to the request for permit
application.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1662-NS,
eff. July 12, 2019)
Sec. 5-29.10. Expiration of commercial cannabis business permits.
   Each commercial cannabis business permit issued pursuant to this chapter
shall expire twelve (12) months after the date of its issuance. Commercial
cannabis permits may be renewed as provided in Section
5-29.12.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017)
Sec. 5-29.11. Revocation of permits.
   A commercial cannabis business permit may be revoked for any violation of
any law and/or any rule, regulation and/or standard adopted pursuant to
Sections
5-29.13 and
5-29.14 or any Operations Agreement entered into between City and the selected
Cannabis Retailer or Cannabis Testing Laboratory Operator. The process for
revocation shall be made part of the Operations Agreement.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017, as amended by § 5, Ord. 1703-NS,
eff. August 5, 2022)
Sec. 5-29.12. Renewal applications.
   (a)   An application for renewal of a commercial cannabis business permit
for a Cannabis Retailer or Cannabis Testing Laboratory shall be filed at least
sixty (60) calendar days prior to the expiration date of the current permit. A
permit for Delivery from licensed facilities shall be renewed before the
Delivery permit expiration date.
   (b)   The renewal application shall contain all the information required for
new applications.
   (c)   The applicant shall pay a fee in an amount to be set by City Council
Resolution, to cover the costs of processing the renewal permit application,
and any costs incurred by the City to administer the program created under this
Chapter.
   (d)   An application for renewal of a commercial cannabis business permit
shall be rejected if any of the following exists:
   (1)   The application is filed less than sixty (60) days before its
expiration unless the permit is for Delivery service from a licensed retail
facility.
   (2)   The commercial cannabis business permit is suspended or revoked at the
time of the application.
   (3)   The commercial cannabis business has not been in regular and
continuous operation in the four (4) months prior to the renewal application.
   (4)   The commercial cannabis business has failed to conform to the
requirements of this Chapter, any regulations adopted pursuant to this Chapter,
any conditions, or requirements.
   (5)   The permittee fails or is unable to renew its State of California
license.
   (6)   If the City or state has determined, based on substantial evidence,
that the permittee or applicant is in violation of the requirements of this
Chapter, or of State rules and regulations, and the City or State has
determined that the violation is grounds for termination or revocation of the
commercial cannabis business permit.
   (e)   The City Manager or his/her designee(s) is authorized to make all
decisions concerning the issuance of a renewal permit. In making the decision,
the City Manager or his/her designee(s) is authorized to impose additional
conditions to a renewal permit, if it is determined to be necessary to ensure
compliance with State or local laws and regulations, or to preserve the public
health, safety or welfare. Appeals from the decision of the City Manager or
his/her designee(s) shall be handled pursuant to Section
5-29.15.
   (f)   If a renewal application is rejected, a person may file a new
application pursuant to this Chapter no sooner than one (1) year from the date
of the rejection.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1662-NS,
eff. July 12, 2019, as amended by Part 3, Ord. 1673-NS, eff. February 14, 2020,
and § 6, Ord. 1703-NS, eff. August 5, 2022)
Sec. 5-29.13. Effect of State license suspension, revocation, or termination.
   Suspension of a license issued by the State of California, or by any of its
departments or divisions, shall immediately suspend the ability of a commercial
cannabis business to operate within the City, until the State, or its
respective department or division, reinstates or reissues the State license.
Should the State of California, or any of its departments or divisions, revoke
or terminate the license of a commercial cannabis business, such revocation or
termination shall also revoke or terminate the ability of a commercial cannabis
business to operate within the City of Thousand Oaks.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017)
Sec. 5-29.14. Effect of federal enforcement to suspend, prohibit,
revoke, terminate California or local entity licensing laws for recreational or
commercial cannabis.
   Federal government action suspending, prohibiting, revoking or otherwise
terminating State of California's or City's laws permitting recreational or
medicinal marijuana licensing as currently permitted under MAUCRSA shall
immediately result in the complete ban of all commercial licenses permitted
under this chapter. Such Federal government action shall also result in the
immediate ban of all personal or recreational use permitted under MAUCRSA or
any other State law permitting the use or possession of cannabis permitted
under this chapter or any other Title of the City's municipal code and make
null and void any City permits to a commercial Cannabis Retailer or Testing
Facility previously issued under this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017, as amended by § 7, Ord. 1703-NS,
eff. August 5, 2022)
Sec. 5-29.15. Appeals.
   Unless specifically provided elsewhere to the contrary, whenever an appeal
is provided for in this chapter from a decision of the City Manager or his/her
designee(s), the appeal shall be conducted as prescribed in Sections
5-29.16 through
5-29.17.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017)
Sec. 5-29.16. Written request for appeal.
   (a)   Within ten (10) calendar days after the date of a decision of the City
Manager or his/her designee(s) to revoke, suspend or deny a permit, or to add
conditions to a permit, an aggrieved party may appeal such action by filing a
written appeal with the City Clerk setting forth the reasons why the decision
was not proper.
   (b)   At the time of filing the appellant shall pay the designated appeal
fee, established by City Council Resolution.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017)
Sec. 5-29.17. Appeal hearing.
   (a)   Upon receipt of the written appeal, the City Clerk shall set the
matter for a hearing before the City Council. The City Council shall hear the
matter de novo, and shall conduct the hearing pursuant to the procedures set
forth by the City.
   (b)   The appeal shall be held within a reasonable time after the filing the
appeal, but in no event later than ninety (90) days from the date of such
filing. The City shall notify the appellant of the time and location at least
ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing.
   (c)   At the hearing, the appellant may present any information they deem
relevant to the decision appealed. The formal rules of evidence and procedure
applicable in a court of law shall not apply to the hearing.
   (d)   At the conclusion of the hearing the City Council may affirm, reverse
or modify the decision appealed. The decision of the City Council shall be
final.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017)
Sec. 5-29.18. Commercial cannabis business permit selection process.
   (a)   The City Council shall adopt by resolution a procedure guideline, and
review criteria by which the top applicant or applicants in each category of
each commercial cannabis business under Section
5-29.08 (a) or (b) will be presented to the City Council for a final
determination at a public hearing.
   (b)   The top final applicants for a Cannabis Retailer may be invited to
attend the City Council meeting, where they may be expected to make a public
presentation and provide an overview of their proposal.
   (c)   At least ten (10) days prior to the hearing, notice of the hearing
shall be sent to all property owners located within five hundred (500) feet of
the proposed business locations proposed of each of the finalists to be
considered by the City Council. The five hundred (500) feet shall be measured
from the property line of the property the proposed business is located.
   (d)   The City Council shall either deny or approve the final applicants,
and shall select the top applicants in each category of commercial cannabis
businesses. The City Council's decision as to the selection of the prevailing
candidates shall be final.
   (e)   Official issuance of the commercial cannabis business permit(s) is
conditional upon the prevailing applicant(s) obtaining all required approvals.
Following the City Council's selection, the prevailing candidate(s) shall apply
to the Community Development Department to obtain any required approvals for
the permittee's location, if any. Approvals shall include compliance with all
applicable provisions of CEQA. The City Manager or designee(s) shall formally
issue the commercial cannabis business permit(s) once the Community Development
Director or designee(s) affirms that all required approvals have been obtained.
   (f)   Issuance of a commercial cannabis business permit does not create a
land use entitlement. The commercial cannabis business permit shall be for a
term of twelve (12) months and shall expire at the end of the twelve (12) month
period unless it is renewed as provided herein. For the purposes of determining
the expiration date of the permit, the date shall begin on the first day of
business operation under an approval. Furthermore, no permittee may begin
operations, notwithstanding the issuance of a permit, unless all of the State
and local laws and regulations, including but not limited to the requirements
of this Chapter and of the permit, have been complied with. Until a State
license is available and obtained by the City permittee, this shall mean
compliance with all provisions of the Medical Cannabis Collective Laws as set
forth at Section
5-29.06.
   (g)   Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter to the contrary, the City
Council reserves the right to reject any or all applications if it determines
it would be in the best interest of the City, taking into account any health,
safety and welfare impacts on the community. Applicants shall have no right to
a commercial cannabis business permit until a permit is actually issued, and
then only for the duration of the permit's term. Each applicant assumes the
risk that, at any time prior to the issuance of a permit, the City Council may
terminate or delay the program created under this Chapter.
   (h)   If an application is denied, a new application by that applicant may
not be filed for one (1) year from the date of the denial.
   (i)   Each person granted a commercial cannabis business permit shall be
required to pay the permit fee established by resolution of the City Council
Resolution, to cover the costs of administering the commercial cannabis
business permit program created in this Chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1662-NS,
eff. July 12, 2019, and § 8, Ord. 1703-NS, eff. August 5, 2022)
Sec. 5-29.19. Change in location; Updated registration form.
   A proposed change to the location of a commercial cannabis permitted
business specified in the regulatory permit shall require the same process set
forth for registration in Section
5-29.09, except review shall focus on location and no new applicants shall be
allowed.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017)
Sec. 5-29.20. Transfer of commercial cannabis business permit.
   (a)   The owner of a cannabis business permit shall not transfer ownership
or control of the permit to another person or entity unless and until the
transferee obtains an amendment to the permit from the City Council stating
that the transferee is now the permittee. A change of ownership shall be
defined as a change of more than 51% of the original ownership. Failure to
comply with this provision is grounds for permit revocation. Such an amendment
may be obtained only if the transferee files an application with the City
Manager or designee in accordance with all provisions of this chapter, as
though the transferee were applying for an original cannabis business permit,
accompanied by a transfer fee in an amount set by City Council Resolution, and
the City Council determines, after hearing, in accordance with this section
that the transferee passed the background check required for permittees and
meets all other requirements of this chapter.
   (b)   Commercial cannabis business permits issued through the grant of a
transfer by the City Council shall be valid for a period of one year beginning
on the day the City Council approves the transfer of the permit. Before the
transferee's permit expires, the transferee shall apply for a renewal permit in
the manner required by this chapter.
Sec. 5-29.20   Thousand Oaks Municipal Code
   (c)   A permittee may change the form of business entity without applying to
the City Council for a transfer of permit, provided that either:
      (1)   The membership of the new business entity is substantially similar
to original permit holder business entity (at least 51% of the membership is
identical), or
      (2)   If the original permittee is an unincorporated association, mutual
or public benefit corporation, agricultural or consumer cooperative corporation
and subsequently transitions to or forms a new business entity as allowed under
the MAUCRSA and to comply with Section subdivision (b), provided that the Board
of Directors (or in the case of an unincorporated association, the individual
(s) listed on the City permit application) of the original permittee entity are
the same as the new business entity.
      Although a transfer is not required in these two circumstances, the
permit holder is required to notify the City Manager or designee in writing of
the change within ten (10) days of the change. Failure to comply with this
provision is grounds for permit revocation.
   (d)   No commercial cannabis business permit may be transferred when the
City Manager or Police Chief has notified the permittee that the permit has
been or may be suspended or revoked.
   (e)   Any attempt to transfer a commercial cannabis business permit either
directly or indirectly in violation of this section is hereby declared void,
and such a purported transfer shall be deemed a ground for revocation of the
permit.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017)
Sec. 5-29.21. City business tax certificate.
   Prior to commencing operations, a commercial cannabis business shall obtain
a Business Tax Certificate pursuant to Section 3-1.04. The Business Tax
Certificate shall be displayed pursuant to Section 3-3.22.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017)
Sec. 5-29.22. Building permits and inspection.
   Prior to commencing operations, a commercial cannabis business with a
facility permitted in the City's jurisdiction under Section
5-29.08(a) or (b) shall be subject to a mandatory building inspection and must
obtain all required permits and approvals which would otherwise be required for
any business of the same size and intensity operating in that zone. This
includes but is not limited to obtaining any required building permit(s), Fire
Department approvals, Health Department approvals and other zoning and land use
permit(s) and approvals.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1662-NS,
eff. July 12, 2019)
Sec. 5-29.23. Certification from the Community Development Director.
   Prior to submittal of a commercial cannabis business permit application, a
certification from the Community Development Director or his/her designee(s)
certifying that the business is located on a site that meets all of the
requirements of Title 9, Chapter 4, and this chapter shall be obtained. A fee
shall be established by City Council Resolution for submittal and processing of
this Certification.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017)
Sec. 5-29.24. Location and design of commercial cannabis businesses.
   Cannabis businesses permitted to engage in Retailer and Testing Laboratory
activities are subject to the following zoning and locational requirements:
   (a)   The commercial cannabis business must be located on property in a zone
pursuant to Title 9, Chapter 4, and must meet all of the requirements for
development in that zone; and
   (b)   The property on which the commercial cannabis business is located must
also meet all of the following distance requirements:
      (1)   It shall be no closer than six hundred (600) feet of any of the
following:
         (i)   Any residentially used parcel as of the date the cannabis
business permit is issued.
         (ii)   Any school providing instruction in kindergarten or any grades
1 through 12, whether public, private, or charter, including pre-school,
transitional kindergarten, and K-12;
         (iii)   Any commercial daycare center licensed by the State or County
that is in existence at the time the license is issued, unless the State
licensing authority or the City specifies a different radius.
         (iv)   Any youth center that is in existence at the time the license
is issued, unless the State licensing authority or the City specifies a
different radius.
      (2)   The distance specified in this section shall be the horizontal
distance measured in a straight line from the property line of the identified
sensitive use to the front door of the medical cannabis cooperative,
collective, dispensary, operator, establishment, or provider without regard to
intervening structures, except as modified herein.
      (3)   The distance between a sensitive use and a medical cannabis
cooperative, collective, dispensary, operator, establishment, or provider may
be closer than six hundred (600) feet in the following situation:
         (i)   The commercial cannabis business and the sensitive use are
separated by a freeway, with no direct pedestrian or vehicular access between
the two uses.
   (c)   Notwithstanding the requirements of this section, a person authorized
to make a Delivery in Thousand Oaks from a State-licensed Retailer located
inside City of Thousand Oaks' jurisdiction may conduct such deliveries subject
to a requirement that the person making the delivery maintains and controls all
product as required for deliveries under State regulations, including a
prohibition from storing any cannabis product in a dwelling, commercial office,
storage facility, hotel room, motel room or any other structure in Thousand
Oaks other than the approved Cannabis Retailer facility. Any delivery person
completing scheduled deliveries as legally permitted by the State and the City
of Thousand Oaks, must return the unsold product to the retail operator.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1644-NS,
eff. May 25, 2018, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1662-NS, eff. July 12, 2019, as
amended by Part 4, Ord. 1673-NS, eff. February 14, 2020, and § 9, Ord. 1703-NS,
eff. August 5, 2022)
Sec. 5-29.25. Right to occupy and to use property.
   As a condition precedent to the City's issuance of a commercial cannabis
business permit pursuant to this chapter, any person intending to open and to
operate a commercial cannabis business shall provide sufficient evidence of the
legal right to occupy and to use the proposed location. In the event the
proposed location will be leased from another person, the applicant shall be
required to provide a signed and notarized statement from the owner of the
property, acknowledging that the property owner has read this chapter and
consents to the operation of the commercial cannabis business on the owner's
property.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017)
Sec. 5-29.26. Limitations on City's liability.
   To the fullest extent permitted by law, the City of Thousand Oaks shall not
assume any liability whatsoever with respect to having issued a commercial
cannabis business permit pursuant to this chapter or otherwise approving the
operation of any commercial cannabis business. As a condition to the approval
of any commercial cannabis business permit, the applicant shall be required to
meet all of the following conditions before they can receive the commercial
cannabis business permit:
   (a)   They must execute an agreement, in a form approved by the city
attorney, agreeing to indemnify, defend (at applicant's sole cost and expense),
and hold the City of Thousand Oaks, and its officers, officials, employees,
agents and volunteers, harmless, from any and all claims, losses, damages,
injuries, liabilities or losses which arise out of, or which are in any way
related to, the City's issuance of the commercial cannabis business permit, the
City's decision to approve the operation of the commercial cannabis business or
activity, to process used by the City in making its decision, or the alleged
violation of any federal, state or local laws by the commercial cannabis
business or any of its officers, employees or agents.
   (b)   Maintain insurance at coverage limits, and with conditions thereon
determined necessary and appropriate from time to time by the city attorney.
   (c)   Reimburse the City of Thousand Oaks for all costs and expenses,
including but not limited to attorney fees and costs and court costs, which the
City of Thousand Oaks may be required to pay as a result of any legal challenge
related to the City's approval of the applicant's commercial cannabis business
permit, or related to the City's approval of a commercial cannabis activity.
The City of Thousand Oaks may, at its sole discretion, participate at its own
expense in the defense of any such action, but such participation shall not
relieve any of the obligations imposed hereunder.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017)
Sec. 5-29.27. Records and recordkeeping.
   (a)    Each owner and operator of a commercial cannabis business shall
maintain accurate books and records in an electronic format, detailing all of
the revenues and expenses of the business, as well as all of its assets and
liabilities. On no less than an annual basis, at or before the time of the
renewal of a commercial cannabis business permit issued pursuant to this
Chapter, or at any time upon reasonable request of the City, each commercial
cannabis business shall file a sworn statement detailing the number of sales by
the commercial cannabis business during the previous twelve-month period, or
shorter period based upon the timing of the request, provided on a per-month
basis. The statement shall also include gross sales for each month, and all
applicable taxes paid or due to be paid. On an annual basis, each owner and
operator shall submit to the City a financial audit of the business's
operations conducted by an independent certified public accountant. Each
permittee shall be subject to a regulatory compliance review and financial
audit as determined by the City Manager or his/her designee(s).
   (b)   Each owner and operator of a commercial cannabis business shall
maintain a current register of the name, address, telephone number, and email
of anyone owning or holding an interest in the commercial cannabis business and
separately of all the officers, managers, employees, agents and volunteers
currently employed or otherwise engaged by the commercial cannabis business.
The register required by this paragraph shall be provided to the City Manager
or his/her designee(s) upon a reasonable request.
   (c)   Prior to State licensing, each commercial cannabis business shall
maintain a record of all persons, patients, collectives and primary caregivers
served by the commercial cannabis business, for a period of no less than four
(4) years. Once a State license is obtained, the commercial cannabis business
must maintain such records only to the extent permitted or required by the
MAUCRSA.
   (d)   All commercial cannabis businesses shall maintain an inventory control
and reporting system that accurately documents the present location, amounts,
and descriptions of all cannabis and cannabis products for all stages of the
growing and production or manufacturing, laboratory testing and distribution
processes until purchase as set forth MAUCRSA and State regulations.
   (e)   Subject to any restrictions under the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA) regulations, each commercial cannabis business shall
allow City of Thousand Oaks officials to have access to the business's books,
records, accounts, together with any other data or documents relevant to its
permitted commercial cannabis activities, for the purpose of conducting an
audit or examination. Books, records, accounts, and any and all relevant data
or documents will be produced no later than twenty-four (24) hours after
receipt of the City's request, unless otherwise stipulated by the City. The
City may require the materials to be submitted in an electronic format that is
compatible with the City's software and hardware.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1662-NS,
eff. July 12, 2019, and § 10, Ord. 1703-NS, eff. August 5, 2022)
Sec. 5-29.28. Security measures.
   (a)   A permitted commercial cannabis business shall implement sufficient
security measures to deter and prevent the unauthorized entrance into areas
containing cannabis or cannabis products, and to deter and prevent the theft of
cannabis or cannabis products at the commercial cannabis business. Except as
may otherwise be determined by the Chief of Police or his/her designee(s),
these security measures shall include, but shall not be limited to, all of the
following:
      (1)   Preventing individuals from remaining on the premises of the
commercial cannabis business if they are not engaging in an activity directly
related to the permitted operations of the commercial cannabis business.
      (2)   Establishing limited access areas accessible only to authorized
commercial cannabis business personnel.
      (3)   All cannabis and cannabis products shall be stored in a secured and
locked room, safe, or vault. All cannabis and cannabis products shall be kept
in a manner as to prevent diversion, theft, and loss.
      (4)   Installing 24-hour security surveillance cameras of at least hi-
definition quality, on the interior and exterior of the business, to monitor
all entrances and exits to and from the premises, all interior spaces within
the commercial cannabis business which are open and accessible to the public,
all interior spaces where cannabis, cash or currency is being stored for any
period of time on a regular basis, and all interior spaces where diversion of
cannabis could reasonably occur. Camera placement shall be in locations on the
interior and exterior approved by the Police Chief or designee. Cameras shall
record at least 30 frames per second. The commercial cannabis business shall be
responsible for ensuring that the security surveillance camera's footage, both
live and stored video, is captured in a method acceptable to the Police Chief
or designee, is remotely accessible, and that it is compatible with the City's
software and hardware. In addition, remote and real-time, live access to the
video footage from the cameras shall be provided to the Chief of Police or his/
her designee(s). Video recordings shall be maintained for a minimum of forty-
five (45) days, and shall be made available to the Chief of Police or his/her
designee(s) upon request. It shall be a violation of this chapter to fail to
maintain video surveillance cameras, recording devices or other items related
to compliance with this requirement.
      (5)   Audible sensors shall be installed to detect entry and exit from
all secure areas.
      (6)   Panic buttons shall be installed in all commercial cannabis
businesses and monitored at all times by a licensed alarm company.
      (7)   Having a professionally installed, maintained, and monitored alarm
system.
      (8)   Any bars installed on the windows or the doors of the commercial
cannabis business shall be installed only on the interior of the building, and
in compliance with the California Building Code.
      (9)   Security personnel shall be on-site 24 hours a day or alternative
security as authorized by the Police Chief or his/her designee(s). Security
personnel must be licensed by the State of California Bureau of Security and
Investigative Services personnel and shall be subject to the prior review and
approval of the Chief of Police or his/her designee(s), with such approval not
to be unreasonably withheld.
      (10)   Each commercial cannabis business shall have the capability to
remain secure during a power outage and shall ensure that all access doors are
not solely controlled by an electronic access panel to ensure that locks are
not released during a power outage.
   (b)   Each commercial cannabis business shall identify a designated security
representative/liaison to the City of Thousand Oaks, who shall be reasonably
available to meet with the Chief of Police or his/her designee(s) regarding any
security related measures or and operational issues.
   (c)   As part of the application and permitting process each commercial
cannabis business shall have a storage and transportation plan, which describes
in detail the procedures for safely and securely storing and transporting all
cannabis, cannabis products, and any currency.
   (d)   The commercial cannabis business shall cooperate with the City
whenever the City Manager or his/her designee(s) makes a request, upon
reasonable notice to the commercial cannabis business, to inspect or audit the
effectiveness of any security plan or of any other requirement of this chapter.
   (e)   A commercial cannabis business shall notify the Chief of Police or
his/her designee(s) within twenty-four (24) hours after discovering any of the
following:
      (1)   Significant discrepancies identified during inventory. The level of
significance shall be determined by the regulations promulgated by the Chief of
Police or his/her designee(s).
      (2)   Diversion, theft, loss, or any criminal activity involving the
commercial cannabis business, any agent, or employee of the commercial cannabis
business.
      (3)   The loss or unauthorized alteration of records related to cannabis,
registering qualifying patients, primary caregivers, or employees or agents of
the commercial cannabis business.
      (4)   Any other breach of security.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017)
Sec. 5-29.29. Restriction on alcohol and tobacco sales.
   (a)   No person shall cause or permit the sale, dispensing, or consumption
of alcoholic beverages on or about the premises of the commercial cannabis
business.
   (b)   No person shall cause or permit the sale of tobacco products on or
about the premises of the commercial cannabis business.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017)
Sec. 5-29.30. Compliance with laws.
   It is the responsibility of the owners and operators of the commercial
cannabis business to ensure that it is, at all times, operating in a manner
compliant with all applicable state and local laws, and any regulations
promulgated thereunder. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as
authorizing any actions that violate State law or local law with respect to the
operation of a commercial cannabis business. It shall be the responsibility of
the owners and the operators of the commercial cannabis business to ensure that
the commercial cannabis business is, at all times, operating in a manner
compliant with all applicable state and local laws, any subsequently enacted
state law or regulatory, licensing, or certification requirements, and any
specific, additional operating procedures or requirements which may be imposed
as conditions of approval of the commercial cannabis business permit. Nothing
in this Title shall be construed as authorizing any actions which violate state
law with regard to the operation of a commercial cannabis business.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017)
Sec. 5-29.31. Fees and charges.
   (a)   No person may commence or continue any commercial cannabis activity in
the City, without paying in full all fees and charges required for the
operation of a commercial cannabis activity. Fees and charges associated with
the operation of a commercial cannabis activity shall be established by
resolution of the City Council which may be amended from time to time.
   (b)   All commercial cannabis businesses authorized to operate under this
Title shall pay all sales, use, business and other applicable taxes, and all
license, registration, and other fees required under Federal, State, and local
law. Each commercial cannabis business shall cooperate with City with respect
to any reasonable request to audit the commercial cannabis business books and
records for the purpose of verifying compliance with this section, including
but not limited to a verification of the amount of taxes required to be paid
during any period.
   (c)   Prior to operating in the city and as a condition of issuance of a
regulatory permit, the operator of the Retailer and Testing Laboratory shall
enter into an Operating Agreement with the city setting forth the terms and
conditions under which the Retailer and Cannabis Testing Laboratory will
operate that are in addition to the requirements of this chapter, including,
but not limited to, public outreach and education, community service, payment
of fees and other charges as mutually agreed, and such other terms and
conditions that will protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017, as amended by § 11, Ord. 1703-NS,
eff. August 5, 2022)
Sec. 5-29.32. Miscellaneous operating requirements.
   (a)   Cannabis or cannabis products shall not be consumed by any retail
customer or employee on the premises of any commercial cannabis businesses.
   (b)   No cannabis or cannabis products or graphics depicting cannabis or
cannabis products shall be visible from the exterior of any property issued a
commercial cannabis business permit, or on any vehicle(s) owned or used as part
of the commercial cannabis business. No outdoor storage of cannabis or cannabis
products is permitted at any time.
   (c)   Each commercial cannabis business shall have in place a point-of-sale
or management inventory tracking system to track and report on all aspects of
the commercial cannabis business including, but not limited to, such matters as
cannabis tracking, inventory data, gross sales by weight, and by sale, and
other information which may be deemed necessary by the City. The commercial
cannabis business shall ensure that such information is compatible with the
City's record-keeping systems. In addition, the system must have the capability
to produce historical transactional data for review. Furthermore, any system
selected must be approved and authorized by the City Manager or his/her
designee(s) prior to being used by the permittee.
   (d)   There shall not be a physician located in or around any commercial
cannabis business at any time for the purpose of evaluating patients for the
issuance of a cannabis recommendation or card where applicable.
   (e)   Prior to dispensing medicinal cannabis or medicinal cannabis products
to any person, a Retailer shall obtain verification from the recommending
physician that the person requesting medicinal cannabis or medicinal cannabis
products is a qualified patient.
   (f)   Each commercial cannabis business shall provide the Police Chief or
his/her designee(s) with the name, telephone number, both land line and mobile,
if available, of an on-site employee or owner to whom emergency notice can be
provided at any hour of the day.
   (g)   Signage and Notices.
      (1)   In addition to the requirements otherwise set forth in this
section, business identification signage for a commercial cannabis business
shall conform to the requirements of the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code,
including, but not limited to, seeking the issuance of a City sign permit,
pursuant to Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 23.
      (2)   No signs placed on the premises of a commercial cannabis business
shall obstruct any entrance or exit to the building or any window.
      (3)   Each entrance to a commercial cannabis business shall be visibly
posted with a clear and legible notice indicating that smoking, ingesting, or
otherwise consuming cannabis on the premises or in the areas adjacent to the
commercial cannabis business is prohibited.
      (4)   Business identification signage shall be limited to that needed for
identification only. Specific building signage shall be further defined in the
Operations Agreement. No commercial cannabis business shall advertise by having
a person holding a sign and advertising the business to any passersby, whether
such person is on the premises of the commercial cannabis business or elsewhere
including, but not limited to, the public right-of-way.
      (5)   Signage shall not be directly illuminated, internally or
externally. No banners, flags, billboards or other prohibited signs may be used
at any time.
      (6)   In accordance with State law and regulations or as stipulated in
the regulatory permit, holders of a commercial cannabis business permit shall
agree that, as an express and ongoing condition of permit issuance and
subsequent renewal, the holder of the permit shall be prohibited from
advertising any commercial cannabis business located in the City utilizing a
billboard, fixed or mobile, bus shelter, placard, aircraft, or other similar
forms of advertising, anywhere in the state. This paragraph is not intended to
place limitations on the ability of a commercial cannabis business to advertise
in other legally authorized forms, including on the internet, in magazines, or
in other similar ways.
   (h)   Persons under the age of eighteen (18) years shall not be allowed on
the premises of a commercial cannabis business. It shall be unlawful and a
violation of this chapter for any person to employ any person at a commercial
cannabis business who is not at least eighteen (18) years of age. A sign shall
be placed at all entrances to the commercial cannabis business stating that no
person under the age of eighteen years of age is permitted to enter the
premises.
   (i)   Odor control devices and techniques shall be incorporated in all
commercial cannabis businesses to ensure that odors from cannabis are not
detectable off-site. Commercial cannabis businesses shall provide a sufficient
odor absorbing ventilation and exhaust system so that odor generated inside the
commercial cannabis business that is distinctive to its operation is not
detected outside of the facility, anywhere on adjacent property or public
rights- of-way, on or about the exterior or interior common area walkways,
hallways, breezeways, foyers, lobby areas, or any other areas available for use
by common tenants or the visiting public, or within any other unit located
inside the same building as the commercial cannabis business. As such,
commercial cannabis businesses must install and maintain the following
equipment, or any other equipment which the Community Development Director or
his/her designee(s) determine is a more effective method or technology:
      (1)   An exhaust air filtration system with odor control that prevents
internal odors from being emitted externally;
      (2)   An air system that creates negative air pressure between the
commercial cannabis business's interior and exterior, so that the odors
generated inside the commercial cannabis business are not detectable on the
outside of the commercial cannabis business.
   (j)   Background Check. Pursuant to California Penal Code Sections 11105(b)
(11) and 13300(b)(11), which authorizes city authorities to access state and
local summary criminal history information for employment, licensing, or
certification purposes; and authorizes access to federal level criminal history
information by transmitting fingerprint images and related information to the
Department of Justice to be transmitted to the Federal Bureau of Investigation,
every person listed as an owner, manager, supervisor, employee or volunteer, of
the commercial cannabis business must submit fingerprints and other information
deemed necessary by the Chief of Police or his/her designee(s) for a background
check by the Thousand Oaks Police Department. Pursuant to California Penal Code
Sections 11105(b)(11) and 13300(b)(11), which mandates that there be a
requirement or exclusion from employment, licensing or certification based on
specific criminal conduct on the part of the subject of the record, no person
shall be issued a permit to operate a commercial cannabis business or a related
work permit unless they have first cleared the background check, as determined
by the Chief of Police or his/her designee(s), as required by this section. A
fee for the cost of the background investigation, which shall be the actual
cost to the City of Thousand Oaks to conduct the background investigation as it
deems necessary and appropriate, shall be paid at the time the application for
a commercial cannabis business permit is submitted.
   (k)   Loitering. The owner and/or operator of a commercial cannabis business
shall prohibit loitering by persons outside the facility both on the premises
and within fifty (50) feet of the premises.
   (l)   If a commercial cannabis business permittee is operating as a
collective or cooperative under Health and Safety Code Section 11362.775,
subdivision (a), members of the applicant authorized to possess cannabis shall
sign an agreement with the commercial cannabis business which states that
members shall not distribute cannabis or cannabis products to non-members or in
violation of the "Memorandum for all United States Attorneys," issued by the
United States Department of Justice, from James M. Cole, Deputy Attorney
General and any other applicable state and federal laws, regulations, or
guidelines.
   (m)   If the commercial cannabis business permittee is operating as a
collective or cooperative under Health and Safety Code Section 11362.775,
subdivision (a), the commercial cannabis business shall terminate the
membership of any member violating any of the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017, as amended by § 12, Ord. 1703-NS,
eff. August 5, 2022)
Sec. 5-29.33. Other operational requirements.
   The City Manager or his/her designee may develop other commercial cannabis
business operational requirements or regulations not already in this chapter,
that are determined to be necessary to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017)
Sec. 5-29.34. Operating requirements for retailer facilities.
   (a)    Retailer facilities.
   (1)   Retailers shall verify the age and all necessary documentation of each
customer to ensure the customer is not under the age of eighteen (18) years. If
a customer is under the age of twenty-one (21) years, Retailers shall confirm
the customer's possession of a valid doctor's recommendation and/or Health and
Safety Code Section 11362.71 identification card (Medical Cannabis Card) for
the purchase of medicinal cannabis or medicinal cannabis products. For adult-
use sales, Retailers shall verify that all customers are twenty-one (21) years
of age or older for the purchase of adult-use cannabis or adult-use cannabis
products.
   (2)   Individuals must show their government-issued identification and, in
the case of medicinal cannabis patients, their physician's recommendation or a
Medical Cannabis Card, in order to gain access into the Retailer. The
government-issued identification and, if applicable, physician's recommendation
or Medical Cannabis Card, must also be shown at the point-of-sale station at
the time of purchase. Physician's recommendations are not to be obtained or
provided at the retail location.
   (3)   Operating hours of the Retailer shall be limited between the hours of
8:00 a.m. through 9:00 p.m., seven days a week.
   (4)   Entrances into the location shall be locked at all times with entry
strictly controlled. A "buzz-in" electronic/mechanical entry system shall be
utilized to limit access to and entry to the dispensary, to separate it from
the reception/lobby area.
   (5)   Uniformed licensed security personnel shall be employed to monitor
site activity, control loitering and site access, and to serve as a visual
deterrent to unlawful activities. The Police Chief at his discretion may
authorize or approve the carrying of a firearm by licensed security personnel
which shall be specified in the terms of the regulatory permit.
   (6)   The Retailer facility may have in the retail sales area of the
licensed facility only that quantity of cannabis and cannabis products
reasonably anticipated to meet the daily demand readily available for sale.
   (7)   All restroom facilities shall remain locked and under the control of
management to ensure no product is taken into a restroom.
   (b)   Delivery services from licensed retailer. Prior to commencing
operations, a cannabis Delivery service shall comply with the following
requirements:
   (1)   Obtain from the City a permit authorizing the delivery of cannabis and
cannabis products within the City limits. A copy of this permit shall be
retained by all drivers.
   (2)   The retail business operating the delivery service shall provide the
City Manager or designee with evidence of a valid state license for a
commercial cannabis business on whose authorization the delivery service is
performing the delivery function.
   (3)   The retail business operating the delivery service shall furnish to
the City Manager the year, make, model, license plate number, and numerical
Vehicle Identification Number (VIN) for any and all vehicles that will be used
to deliver cannabis goods.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1662-NS,
eff. July 12, 2019, as amended by Part 5, Ord. 1673-NS, eff. February 14, 2020,
and § 13, Ord. 1703-NS, eff. August 5, 2022)
Sec. 5-29.35. Retailer non-store front and delivery services shall not be
permitted.
    Except as permitted in Chapter 29, it shall be unlawful for any person,
limited liability company, corporation, collective, cooperative or any other
entity to manage or operate a retailer facility or non-store front facility
which sells, exchanges, barters, transfers, and/or promotes, any cannabis or
cannabis products in the City for commercial purpose.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1662-NS,
eff. July 12, 2019)
Sec. 5-29.36. Packaging and labeling.
   (a)   Before a retailer of commercial cannabis sells any edible cannabis or
edible cannabis product to a customer, it shall be labeled and placed in
tamper- evident packaging which at least meets the requirements of the MAUCRSA
and all implementing rules and regulations.
   (b)   Labeling must include a warning if nuts or other known allergens are
used, and must include the total weight, in ounces or grams, of cannabis in the
package.
   (c)   A warning that the item is a medication and not a food must be clearly
legible on the front of the package and/or must comply with State packing
requirements.
   (d)   The package must have a label warning that the product is to be kept
away from children.
   (e)   The label must also state that the product contains cannabis and must
specify the date of manufacture.
   (f)   Any edible cannabis product that is made to resemble a typical food
product must be in a properly labeled opaque, or non-see-through package,
before it leaves the commercial cannabis retail business.
   (g)   Retail products must be in a properly labeled opaque package when
purchased.
   (h)   The City Council may impose additional packaging and labeling
requirements on cannabis or cannabis products as permitted by law.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017, as amended by § 14, Ord. 1703-NS,
eff. August 5, 2022)
Sec. 5-29.37. Operating requirements for testing laboratory.
   (a)   A Testing Laboratory shall be required to conduct all testing in a
manner pursuant to Business and Professions Code 26100 and shall be subject to
State and local law. Each Testing Laboratory shall be subject to additional
regulations as determined from time to time as more regulations are developed
under this Section, and any subsequent State legislation regarding the same.
   (b)   A Testing Laboratory shall conduct all testing in a manner consistent
with general requirements for the competence of testing and calibrations
activities, including sampling using verified methods.
   (c)   A Testing Laboratory performing testing shall obtain and maintain ISO/
IEC 17025 accreditation as required by State regulations.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017, as amended by § 15, Ord. 1703-NS,
eff. August 5, 2022)
Sec. 5-29.38. Promulgation of regulations, standards and other legal duties.
   (a)   In addition to any regulations adopted by the City Council, the City
Manager or his/her designee is authorized to establish any additional rules,
regulations and standards governing the issuance, denial or renewal of
commercial cannabis business permits, the ongoing operation of commercial
cannabis businesses and the City's oversight, or concerning any other subject
determined to be necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
   (b)   Regulations promulgated by the City Manager or designee shall become
effective upon date of publication. Commercial cannabis businesses shall be
required to comply with all State and local laws and regulations, including but
not limited to any rules, regulations or standards adopted by the City Manager
or designee.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017)
Sec. 5-29.39. Community relations.
   (a)   Each commercial cannabis business shall provide the name, telephone
number, and email address of a community relations contact to whom notice of
problems associated with the commercial cannabis business can be provided. Each
commercial cannabis business shall also provide the above information to all
businesses and residences located within one hundred (100) feet of the
commercial cannabis business, as measured from the property line of the
property the commercial cannabis business is located.
   (b)   During the first year of operation pursuant to this chapter, the
owner, manager, and community relations representative from each commercial
cannabis business holding a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall attend
a quarterly meeting with the City Manager or his/her designee(s) and other
interested parties as deemed appropriate by the City Manager, to discuss costs,
benefits, and other community issues arising as a result of implementation of
this Title. After the first year of operation, the owner, manager, and
community relations representative from each such commercial cannabis business
shall meet with the City Manager or his/her designee(s) when and as requested
by the City Manager or his/her designee(s).
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017)
Sec. 5-29.40. Fees deemed debt to City of Thousand Oaks.
   The amount of any fee, cost or charge imposed pursuant to this chapter shall
be deemed a debt to the City of Thousand Oaks that is recoverable via an
authorized administrative process as set forth in the Municipal Code, or in any
court of competent jurisdiction.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017)
Sec. 5-29.41. Permit holder responsible for violations.
   The person to whom a permit is issued pursuant to this chapter shall be
responsible for all violations of the laws of the State of California or of the
regulations and/or the ordinances of the City of Thousand Oaks, whether
committed by the permittee or any employee or agent of the permittee, which
violations occur in or about the premises of the commercial cannabis business
whether or not said violations occur within the permit holder's presence.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017)
Sec. 5-29.42. Personal cultivation.
   Personal cultivation of up to a maximum of six plants, not for commercial
purposes, shall be allowed without a permit under the following conditions:
   (a)   All cultivation of cannabis shall only occur within a secured room in
a residence or secured fully enclosed accessory building located on a
residential property. The term "secured" as used in this section shall mean
able to be fully locked.
   (b)   No cultivation activity shall be visible from a public right-of-way,
private street, or any neighboring property.
   (c)   Cannabis cultivation shall not produce any odor detectable from any
surrounding neighboring property, a public right-of-way, or private street.
   (d)   Any building, or portion thereof, utilized for personal cannabis
cultivation shall have all necessary City permits and land use approvals,
including but not limited to building, plumbing, electrical, and mechanical
permits, and all land use entitlements and zone clearances, and shall be
maintained in accordance with approvals.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017)
Sec. 5-29.43. Inspection and enforcement.
   (a)   The City Manager, Chief of Police or his/her designee(s) charged with
enforcing the provisions of the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code, or any provision
thereof, may enter the location of a commercial cannabis business at any time,
without notice, and inspect the location of any commercial cannabis business as
well as any recordings and records required to be maintained pursuant to this
chapter or under applicable provisions of State law.
   (b)   It is unlawful for any person having responsibility over the operation
of a commercial cannabis business, to impede, obstruct, interfere with, or
otherwise not to allow, the City to conduct an inspection, review or copy
records, recordings or other documents required to be maintained by a
commercial cannabis business under this chapter or under state or local law. It
is also unlawful for a person to conceal, destroy, deface, damage, or falsify
any records, recordings or other documents required to be maintained by a
commercial cannabis business under this chapter or under State or local law.
   (c)   The City Manager, Chief of Police or his/her designee(s) charged with
enforcing the provisions of this chapter may enter the location of a commercial
cannabis business at any time during the hours of operation and without notice
to obtain samples of the cannabis to test for public safety purposes. Any
samples obtained by the City shall be logged, recorded, and maintained for
evidence.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017)
Sec. 5-29.44. Compliance with State regulation.
   It is the stated intent of this chapter to regulate commercial cannabis
activity in the City of Thousand Oaks in compliance with all provisions MAUCRSA
and any subsequent state legislation.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017)
Sec. 5-29.45. Violations declared a public nuisance.
   Each and every violation of the provisions of this chapter is hereby deemed
unlawful and a public nuisance.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017)
Sec. 5-29.46. Each violation a separate offense.
   Each and every violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate
violation and shall be subject to all remedies and enforcement measures
authorized by the Municipal Code. Additionally, as a nuisance per se, any
violation of this chapter shall be subject to injunctive relief, any permit
issued pursuant to this Title being deemed null and void, disgorgement and
payment to the City of any monies unlawfully obtained, costs of abatement,
costs of investigation, attorney fees, and any other relief or remedy available
at law or in equity. The City may also pursue any and all remedies and actions
available and applicable under State and local laws for any violations
committed by the commercial cannabis business or persons related to, or
associated with, the commercial cannabis activity. Additionally, when there is
determined to be an imminent threat to public health, safety or welfare, the
City Manager, Chief of Police or his/her designee(s), may take immediate action
to temporarily suspend a commercial cannabis business permit issued by the
City, pending a hearing before the City Council.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017)
Sec. 5-29.47. Violations and penalties.
   Any person, firm, company or corporation that violates any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Section 1-
2.03 of this Municipal Code.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017)
Sec. 5-29.48. Remedies cumulative and not exclusive.
   The remedies provided herein are not to be construed as exclusive remedies.
The City is authorized to pursue any proceedings or remedies provided by law.
(§ 2, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29, 2017)
TITLE 6. SANITATION AND HEALTH
CHAPTER 1. ANIMALS
Article 1. General Provisions
      
6-1.100–Regulation of animals: Los Angeles County Code as City Code
      
6-1.101–Livestock Care and maintenance
      
6-1.102–Impounded animals: Liability
      
6-1.103–Keeping stallions
      
6-1.104–Penalties
      
6-1.105–Amendments: Section 10.40.065: Public nuisance
      
6-1.106–Amendments: Section 10.72.010: Duty to report designated diseases–Form
of report
      
6-1.107–Amendments: Chapter 10.72: Animal disease reports
      
6-1.108–Amendments: Cat license and tags not required
      
6-1.109–Amendments: Section 10.20.185: Microchipping of dogs required
      
6-1.110–Amendments: 10.90: Fees for services and activities
      
6-1.111–Fees for reclaiming livestock
      
6-1.113–Care and control of animals: Duty of owners
      
6-1.114–Animal nuisance
      
6-1.115–Animals for medical research
      
6-1.116–Inspection of animals
      
6-1.117–Privileged entry
      
6-1.118–Citations to appear
      
6-1.119–Citations to appear: Failure to appear
      
6-1.120–Release of wild animals
      
6-1.121–Livestock running at large
      
6-1.124–Complaint
      
6-1.125–Notice
      
6-1.126–Impoundment pending hearing
      
6-1.127–Hearing
      
6-1.128–Oaths
      
6-1.129–Evidence
      
6-1.130–Subpoena power
      
6-1.131–Record
      
6-1.132–Findings and order
      
6-1.133–Failure to comply with order
Article 2. Wild Animal Control
      
6-1.201–Wild animal defined
      
6-1.202–Wild animal permits: Required
      
6-1.203–Permits: Conditions
      
6-1.204–Permits: Form
      
6-1.205–Confinement
      
6-1.206–Escaped animals: Notices
      
6-1.207–Animals at large: Impoundment
      
6-1.208–Animals at large: Declaration of public nuisance
      
6-1.209–Violations
Article 3. Rabies Control (Repealed)
Article 5. Kennels (Repealed)
CHAPTER 2. SOLID WASTE, ORGANIC WASTE AND RECYCLABLE MATERIALS COLLECTION
PROCESSING AND DISPOSAL
Article 1. General Provisions
      
6-2.101–Purpose
      
6-2.102–Flow control
      
6-2.103–Anti-scavenging and materials handling
      
6-2.104–Violations
Article 2. Definitions
      
6-2.200–Definitions
      
6-2.201–AB 341
      
6-2.202–AB 827
      
6-2.203–AB 939 or “The Act”
      
6-2.204–AB 1594
      
6-2.205–AB 1826
      
6-2.206–AB 3036
      
6-2.207–Agreement
      
6-2.208–Animal waste
      
6-2.209–Applicable law
      
6-2.210–Applicant
      
6-2.211–Bin
      
6-2.212–Bulky waste
      
6-2.213–California Code of Regulations or CCR
      
6-2.214–CalRecycle
      
6-2.215–Cart
      
6-2.216–CEQA
      
6-2.217–City
      
6-2.218–City collection service
      
6-2.219–City facility
      
6-2.220–City Manager
      
6-2.221–Code
      
6-2.222–Collection
      
6-2.223–Collection container
      
6-2.224–Collection services
      
6-2.225–Combined solid waste
      
6-2.226–Commercial business or business
      
6-2.227–Commercial collection service
      
6-2.228–Commercial edible food generator
      
6-2.229–Commercial premises
      
6-2.230–Commercial recycling permit or “permit”
      
6-2.231–Commercial service recipient
      
6-2.232–Commercial service unit
      
6-2.233–Compacted waste
      
6-2.234–Compliance review
      
6-2.235–Compost
      
6-2.236–Composting
      
6-2.237–Construction and demolition waste
      
6-2.238–Contractor
      
6-2.239–Day
      
6-2.240–Delivery
      
6-2.241–Designated waste
      
6-2.242–Designated zone
      
6-2.243–Disposal or dispose
      
6-2.244–Disposal facility
      
6-2.245–Diversion or divert
      
6-2.246–Edible food
      
6-2.247–Edible food recovery
      
6-2.248–Effective date of agreement
      
6-2.249–Emergency permit
      
6-2.250–Encroachment permit
      
6-2.251–Enforcement action
      
6-2.252–Exclusive franchise
      
6-2.253–Exclusive franchisee
      
6-2.254–Facility
      
6-2.255–Food recovery
      
6-2.256–Food recovery organization
      
6-2.257–Food recovery service
      
6-2.258–Food soiled paper
      
6-2.259–Food waste
      
6-2.260–Generator
      
6-2.261–Green waste
      
6-2.262–Hauler route
      
6-2.263–Hazardous waste
      
6-2.264–Holiday
      
6-2.265–Home composting
      
6-2.266–Household hazardous waste
      
6-2.267–Industrial premises
      
6-2.268–Land clearing
      
6-2.269–Large event
      
6-2.270–Large venue
      
6-2.271–Legislation
      
6-2.272–Limited franchise
      
6-2.273–Limited franchisee
      
6-2.274–Materials recovery and processing facility (MRF)
      
6-2.275–Medical waste
      
6-2.276–Mixed use dwelling or MXD
      
6-2.277–Multi-family dwelling unit complex or MFD
      
6-2.278–Non-putrescible material
      
6-2.279–Organic waste
      
6-2.280–Organic waste generator
      
6-2.281–Organic waste processing facility
      
6-2.282–Permittee
      
6-2.283–Person
      
6-2.284–Putrescible material
      
6-2.285–Premises
      
6-2.286–Prohibited container contaminants
      
6-2.287–Recovery
      
6-2.288–Recyclable materials
      
6-2.289–Recycling
      
6-2.290–Remote monitoring
      
6-2.291–Residential collection service
      
6-2.292–Residential service recipient
      
6-2.293–Residential premises
      
6-2.294–Roll-off
      
6-2.295–Route review
      
6-2.296–SB 1383
      
6-2.297–Self-hauler
      
6-2.298–Scavenge or scavenging
      
6-2.299–Service recipient
      
6-2.299.1–Single-family/duplex residence or SFD
      
6-2.299.2–Solid waste
      
6-2.299.3–Source separated
      
6-2.299.4–Subscription
      
6-2.299.5–Term
      
6-2.299.6–Tier one commercial edible food generator
      
6-2.299.7–Tier two commercial edible food generator
      
6-2.299.8–Transfer station
      
6-2.299.9–Transformation facility
      
6-2.299.10–Waste
      
6-2.299.11–Waste diversion
      
6-2.299.12–Waste generator
      
6-2.299.13–Waste enclosure
      
6-2.299.14–White goods
      
6-2.299.15–Wood waste
Article 3. Franchise and Permit System
      
6-2.301–Authorization
      
6-2.302–Franchises or permits required for solid waste, organic waste and
recyclable materials collection
      
6-2.303–Types of franchises and permits
      
6-2.304–Approval or denial of franchise or permit
      
6-2.305–Issuance and term
      
6-2.306–Assignment or transfer of franchise or permit
      
6-2.307–Revocation
      
6-2.308–Charges for franchise or permit service
Article 4. Billings for Franchised Services
      
6-2.401–Billings for franchised service
      
6-2.402–Uniform City-wide rate
Article 5. Service Recipient Responsibilities
      
6-2.501–Payment responsibility
      
6-2.502–Collection containers
      
6-2.503–Placement and maintenance of residential collection containers
      
6-2.504–Placement and responsibility for commercial collection containers
      
6-2.505–Accumulation and duration of storage
      
6-2.506–Collection and recycling of commercial recyclable materials
      
6-2.507–Collection and recycling of commercial organic materials
      
6-2.508–Burning or incineration of waste prohibited
Article 6. Contractor and Permittee Responsibilities
      
6-2.601–Collection
      
6-2.602–Collection containers
      
6-2.603–Processing, disposal and transfer
      
6-2.604–Contractor's properties, facilities and equipment
      
6-2.605–Contractor's employees
      
6-2.606–Inquiries, complaints and complaint reimbursement
      
6-2.607–Maintenance and inspection of records
      
6-2.608–Hazardous waste notification
      
6-2.609–Privacy
      
6-2.610–Damage by contractor or permittee
Article 7. Waste Enclosure Requirements
      
6-2.701–Commercial, multi-family (MFD-C), and mixed-use dwelling enclosures
      
6-2.702–Location requirements for outdoor waste enclosures
      
6-2.703–Location requirements for parking garages and indoor waste enclosures
Article 8. Organic Waste Requirements
      
6-2.801–Requirements for single-family and MFD-I organic waste generators
      
6-2.802–Requirements for commercial service recipients
      
6-2.803–Requirements for multi-family dwellings with centralized service (MFD-
C)
      
6-2.804–Waivers for generators
      
6-2.805–Requirements for commercial edible food generators
      
6-2.806–Requirements for food recovery organizations and services
      
6-2.807–Requirements for haulers and facility operators
      
6-2.808–Self-hauler requirements
      
6-2.809–Inspections and investigations by the City
      
6-2.810–Enforcement
 
CHAPTER 3. CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE MANAGEMENT
      
6-3.101–Purpose and intent
      
6-3.102–Definitions
      
6-3.103–Application of article of covered projects
      
6-3.104–Required diversion rates
      
6-3.105–Exempt projects
      
6-3.106–C&D debris recycling plan requirements
      
6-3.107–Review of C&D debris recycling plan
      
6-3.108–C&D debris recycling report compliance
      
6-3.109–Violations
      
6-3.110–Appeal
      
6-3.111–Misdemeanor; separate offenses
      
6-3.112–Civil remedies; injunctions
CHAPTER 4. WATER WELLS (Repealed)
CHAPTER 5. SMOKING
      
6-5.101–Purpose
      
6-5.102–Definitions
      
6-5.103–Prohibition of smoking in public places
      
6-5.104–Where smoking is allowed
      
6-5.105–Disposal of smoking waste
      
6-5.106–Posting of signs in public places
      
6-5.107–Prohibition of cigarette or tobacco vending machines
      
6-5.108–Violations and penalties
      
6-5.109–Other applicable laws
      
6-5.110–Permits for smoking in outdoor customer dining areas
CHAPTER 6. PROHIBITION ON THE USE, DISTRIBUTION, AND SALE OF EXPANDED AND RIGID
POLYSTYRENE PRODUCTS, FOOD SERVICE WARE AND UTENSILS, AND RESTRICTION ON THE
DISTRIBUTION OF PLASTIC BEVERAGE STRAWS
Article 1. General Provisions
      
6-6.101–Title
      
6-6.102–Purpose and intent
Article 2. Definitions
      
6-6.201–Definitions
Article 3. Disposable Food Ware
      
6-6.301–Prohibition on polystyrene disposable food service wares
      
6-6.302–Distribution of plastic utensils (Repealed)
      
6-6.303–Distribution of plastic beverage straws (Repealed)
Article 4. Sale and Distribution of Expanded or Rigid Polystyrene Products
      
6-6.401–Prohibition on the distribution or sales of polystyrene products
Article 5. Standard Exemptions
      
6-6.501–Polystyrene products exempt from the provisions of this chapter
Article 6. Waivers
      
6-6.601–Consideration of waiver by the City Manager
      
6-6.602–Effect of waiver
      
6-6.603–Waiver fees
Article 7. Compliance
      
6-6.701–Compliance
Article 8. Enforcement
      
6-6.801–Civil liability and penalties
      
6-6.802–Other remedies
CHAPTER 7. SINGLE-USE FOODWARE ACCESSORIES AND CONDIMENTS
      
6-7.101–Definitions
      
6-7.102–Disposable foodware and standard condiments to be provided upon request
by consumer
      
6-7.103–Exceptions
      
6-7.104–Enforcement and penalties
CHAPTER 1. ANIMALS
Article 1. General Provisions
Sec. 6-1.100. Regulation of animals: Los Angeles County Code as City Code.
   (a)   Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code concerning animals, animal
control and the regulation thereof in effect as of the date of adoption of the
ordinance, and as amended from time to time by the Los Angeles County Board of
Supervisors, is hereby adopted by reference and made part of this chapter, as
though set forth in full. Whenever the "County of Los Angeles" appears in such
Title, it shall be deemed to mean the "City of Thousand Oaks" for purposes of
this section. At least one copy of the version of Title 10 as adopted shall be
kept on file in the Office of the City Clerk for public record and inspection.
   (b)   In the event a conflict arises concerning the interpretation of the
provisions of the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code and Title 10 of the Los Angeles
County Code, the language and provisions of Title 10 of the Los Angeles County
Code shall take precedence.
   (c)   Any person, firm, company or corporation violating any of the
provisions of Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code, as adopted by reference
in this section, shall be guilty of a violation of the Thousand Oaks Municipal
Code and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the penalties set forth
in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code, or is subject to
an administrative fine pursuant to Section 10.04.075 of Title 10 of the Los
Angeles County Code.
(§ 1, Ord. 1154-NS, eff. July 7, 1992, as amended by part 1, Ord. 1579-NS, eff.
August 17, 2012; as amended by part 1, Ord. 1658-NS, eff. January 18, 2019)
Sec. 6-1.101. Livestock care and maintenance.*
   No livestock shall be housed, kept, or confined within the City except under
the following conditions:
   (a)   No livestock shall be housed, kept, or confined within forty (40’)
feet of any habitable dwelling, religious facility, school, or other place of
human habitation except the dwelling of the owner thereof.
   (b)   The following minimum lot area shall be provided per animal in
addition to the area of any structure:
   (1)   Fifty (50) square feet of pen for each sheep, goat, pig, or other
small animal; and
   (2)   Two hundred (200) square feet of corral for each horse, bovine, pony,
colt, or other large animal, with a maximum of six hundred (600) square feet
required.
   (c)   Any area used to stable, harbor, or confine livestock shall be fenced
so as to prevent such livestock from ranging onto adjacent property. Stallions
over two and one-half (2-1/2) years of age and horse at stud shall be confined
to an area fenced to a minimum height of five (5’) feet and of construction
suitable to contain the animal.
   (d)   Any area used to stable, harbor, confine, or corral livestock shall be
kept reasonably free of dust, litter, and the accumulation of weeds and debris.
The stable, pen, or corral shall be periodically sprinkled with water in order
to keep dust from blowing onto adjacent property.
   (e)   No livestock shall be stabled, harbored, kept, or confined in any
stable, corral, yard, or enclosure in which the droppings and other waste
matter shall not have been removed at least once every seven (7) days, except
where such livestock is confined to an area of at least five (5) acres. If,
however, in the opinion of the enforcing authority, an area of any size is in
need of a cleaning of this type of waste matter, the owner shall remove such
waste matter within three (3) days of a notice ordering him to do so.
   (f)   Corrals, stables, and pens shall be plowed under or sprinkled with
chemicals so as to eliminate the “fly” breeding characteristics in the areas.
   (g)   Offensive odors emanating from livestock shall be controlled to the
extent that such odors will not unreasonably disturb the comfort of any
residents of the neighborhood.
   (h)   If, in the opinion of the enforcement officer, an animal is obviously
in need of medical attention, such officer shall inspect and provide for the
treatment of such animal by a veterinarian. The cost of the treatment,
regardless of the final disposition of the animal, shall be borne by the owner
thereof.
   (i)   Any animal which is found to be repeatedly mistreated by the lack of
food, water, or sanitary conditions or by beatings or other forms of cruelty
shall be impounded. The owner found to be mistreating such animal shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
(§ 4463, T.O.O.C., as amended by § II, Ord. 199-NS, eff. April 15, 1971, and §
3, Ord. 218-NS, eff. August 19, 1971, as renumbered by § 20, Ord. 1374-NS, eff.
April 26, 2001, and § 3, Ord. 1392, eff. June 7, 2002.)
*   Section 6-1.101 entitled “Definitions,” recodified from Section 4472,
T.O.O.C., as amended by Section VII, Ordinance No. 116-NS, effective November
6, 1969, Sections 1 and 2, Ordinance No. 496-NS, effective October 10, 1974,
and Sections 1 and 2, Ordinance No. 1041-NS, effective September 12, 1989,
repealed by Section 19, Ordinance No. 1374-NS, effective April 26, 2001.
Sec. 6-1.102. Impounded animals: Liability.*
   Any animal which may be impounded shall be kept at the risk of the owner,
and neither the City, nor its officers, agents, or employees, shall be liable
to the owner for the delivery in good faith of any such animal to a person
claiming to be, but not in fact being, entitled to reclaim the same. Neither
City nor its officers, agents, or employees, shall be liable for injury or
disease to any animal incurred while such animal is being captured,
transported, or impounded.
(§ 4438, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § 20, Ord. 1374-NS, eff. April 26, 2001)
*   Section 6-1.102 entitled “Animal Control Supervisor: Poundmaster,”
recodified from Section 4431, T.O.O.C., as amended by Section 3, Ordinance No.
218-NS, effective August 19, 1971, and Section 3, Ordinance No. 496-NS,
effective October 10, 1974, repealed by Section 19, Ordinance No. 1374-NS,
effective April 26, 2001.
Sec. 6-1.103. Keeping stallions.*
   Upon the approval of the Animal Control Supervisor, a stallion may be kept,
when authorized by the land use regulations, in a substantial corral of wood or
other construction six (6’) feet in height and under conditions to prevent
escape and protect people and other animals. A minimum substantial corral is
defined as being constructed of four (4”) inch by four (4”) inch posts, eight
(8’) feet on center, anchored twenty-four (24”) inches in portland cement with
two (2”) inch by six (6”) inch rails set two (2’) feet apart.
(§ 3, Ord. 218-NS, eff. August 19, 1971, as amended by § 7, Ord. 496-NS, eff.
October 10, 1974, as renumbered by § 20, Ord. 1374-NS, eff. April 26, 2001)
*   Section 6-1.103 entitled “Poundmaster: Duties: Interference,” recodified
from Section 4439, T.O.O.C., repealed by Section 19, Ordinance No. 1374-NS,
effective April 26, 2001.
Sec. 6-1.104. Penalties.*
   Any person who violates, or causes or permits to be violated, any
requirement imposed by this chapter shall be guilty of a violation of this Code
pursuant to Section 1-2.01 of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code.
(§ 8, Ord. 496-NS, eff. October 10, 1974, as amended by § XXI, Ord. 770-NS,
eff. February 26, 1981, as renumbered by § 20, Ord. 1374-NS, eff. April 26,
2001)
*   Section 6-1.104 entitled “Enforcement provisions,” recodified from Section
4466, T.O.O.C., as amended by Section 3, Ordinance No. 218-NS, effective August
19, 1971, and Section 4, Ordinance No. 496-NS, effective October 10, 1974,
repealed by Section 19, Ordinance No. 1374-NS, effective April 26, 2001.
Sec. 6-1.105. Amendments: Section 10.40.065: Public nuisance.*
(§ 21, Ord. 1374-NS, eff. April 26, 2001, as amended by part 2, Ord. 1579-NS,
eff. August 17, 2012, repealed by part 2, Ord. 1658-NS, eff. January 18, 2019)
*   Section 6-1.105 entitled “Poundmaster: Records,” recodified from Section
4471, T.O.O.C., as amended by V.C. Ordinance 1285, repealed by Section 19,
Ordinance No. 1374-NS, effective April 26, 2001.
Sec. 6-1.106. Amendments: Section 10.72.010: Duty to report designated
diseases–Form of report.*
   Section 10.72.010 of Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code concerning
animals, as adopted by Sec.
6-1.100, is hereby amended to read as follows:
      D.   In addition to the requirements of Section 10.72.010 A-C, it shall
be the duty of every physician or any other person to report to the Health
Officer the name and address of any person treated for a bite inflicted by any
animal together with such other information as will be helpful in rabies
control.
(§ 22, Ord. 1374-NS, eff. April 26, 2001, as amended by part 2, Ord. 1579-NS,
eff. August 17, 2012, as amended by part 3, Ord. 1658-NS, eff. January 18,
2019)
*   Section 6-1.106 entitled “Poundmaster: Rates and charges for services,”
recodified from Section 4478, T.O.O.C., repealed by § 19, Ordinance No. 1374-
NS, effective April 26, 2001.
Sec. 6-1.107. Amendments: Chapter 10.72: Animal disease reports.
   Section 10.72.035 is hereby added to Chapter 10.72 of Title 10 of the Los
Angeles County Code concerning animals, as adopted by Sec.
6-1.100, is hereby amended to read as follows:
   10.72.035 Isolation – Animals with Rabies Symptoms; Biting Animals
      A.   The Director shall take up and place in isolation any dog or cat,
whether licensed or not, which, in the opinion of a licensed veterinarian or
the Health Officer, displays symptoms suggestive of rabies. Such isolation
shall be at an animal shelter unless the owner of such dog or cat, with the
approval of the Health Officer, arranges with a licensed veterinarian for such
isolation in a private animal hospital or clinic. Any dog or cat placed in such
isolation shall be kept strictly confined and under such observation as may be
required by the Health Officer. Such isolation shall continue for at least ten
(10) days from the date of the symptoms suggestive of rabies were first
observed. Such isolation may be continued for a period longer than ten (10)
days if, in the opinion of any licensed veterinarian or the Health Officer,
such longer period is necessary. At the expiration of such ten (10) days or
longer period, any dog or cat confined at an animal shelter shall be released
upon payment of the fees set forth in paragraph E of this section if, in the
opinion of any licensed veterinarian or the Health Officer, such dog or cat
does not have rabies.
      B.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the Director may take
up, impound, and isolate for the period required as specified in California
Code of Regulations Title 17, Sections 2606 et seq., following the date of the
alleged bite any animal of a type subject to rabies, which animal is reported
to have bitten any person, whether or not such animal has been vaccinated with
rabies vaccine and whether or not such animal displays any symptoms suggestive
of rabies. The animal shall be impounded and isolated in the manner set forth
in paragraph A of this section for the isolation of dogs or cats suspected of
having rabies.
      Any person who is twenty-one (21) years of age or older, however, may
make a written request to the Director for the isolation of such biting animal,
either in facilities provided by a licensed veterinarian, or in a licensed
boarding kennel, or upon the private premises of the person making such
request. If such request is approved by the Director, such biting animal shall
not be taken up and impounded but shall instead be kept strictly confined and
isolated in the facilities of the veterinarian or licensed boarding kennel or
on such private premises for the isolation period. Upon the termination of the
isolation period, animals isolated in an animal shelter shall be released upon
the payment of the fees set forth in paragraph D of this section, if, in the
opinion of any licensed veterinarian of the Health Officer, the animal does not
have rabies, and animals isolated upon private property shall be released from
such isolation if, in the opinion of any licensed veterinarian or the Health
Officer, the animal does not have rabies.
      C.   Any person who, after requesting and obtaining approval for the
keeping of a biting animal confined and isolated upon his private premises as
provided in paragraph B of this section, fails for any reason whatsoever to
keep such animal continuously confined and isolated upon his premises, either
indoors or inside some enclosure, for the entire isolation period after such
written request is presented to the Director shall be guilty of a violation of
this Code pursuant to Section
1-2.01 of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code. Any such animal, whether licensed
or unlicensed, not continuously confined and isolated as set forth in this
article may be taken up forthwith by the Director and isolated at an animal
shelter.
      D.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the Director may
impound and isolate, for the period required as specified in California Code of
Regulations, Title 17, Sections 2606 et seq., following the date any animal of
a type subject to rabies, which animal is suspected to have had contact with a
wild animal of a type susceptible to rabies, whether or not such animal has
been vaccinated with rabies vaccine, and whether or not such animal displays
any symptoms suggestive of rabies. The animal may be impounded and shall be
isolated in the manner set forth in paragraph A of this section for the
isolation of dogs or cats suspected of having rabies.
      E.   Any animal isolated at the animal shelter as set forth in this
section and found not to have rabies may be redeemed by the owner thereof by
paying to the Director all applicable fees and by obtaining any necessary
license tag. Any smaller animal may be redeemed in a similar manner. Any animal
which is not so redeemed within seventy-two (72) hours after the expiration of
the isolation period shall be deemed to have been abandoned and shall be
disposed of as provided in Chapter 10.36 Impoundment of Title 10 of the Los
Angeles County Code concerning animals.
(§ 23, Ord. 1374-NS, eff. April 26, 2001, as amended by part 2, Ord. 1579-NS,
eff. August 17, 2012, as amended by part 4, Ord. 1658-NS, eff. January 18,
2019)
*   Section 6-1.107 entitled “Temporary animal pounds,” recodified from Section
4434 T.O.O.C., repealed by Section 19, Ordinance No. 1374-NS, effective April
26, 2001.
Sec. 6-1.108. Amendments: Cat license and tags not required.
   Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code concerning animals, as adopted by
Sec.
6-1.101, is hereby amended to read as follows:
   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
6-1.100(a), cat licenses and the requirement to wear licensing tags as set
forth in Sections 10.20.30 and 10.20.180 of said Los Angeles County Code, shall
not be required in the City of Thousand Oaks. The licensing of a cat will be
allowed on a voluntary basis at the discretion of its owner, upon payment of
the license fee prescribed by City Council resolution.
(Part 3, Ord. 1579-NS, eff. August 17, 2012)
Sec. 6-1.109. Amendments: Section 10.20.185: Microchipping of dogs required.*
   Section 10.20.185 of Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code concerning
animals, as adopted by Sec.
6-1.100, is hereby amended to read as follows:
   10.20.185 Microchipping of dogs.
      An owner or custodian of a dog four (4) months of age or older obtaining
a license renewal may have the dog implanted with an identifying microchip. An
owner or custodian of a dog four (4) months of age or older not previously
having a license within the City is required to have the dog implanted with an
identifying microchip in conjunction with obtaining a new dog license. The
owner or custodian is required to provide the microchip number to the
Department and to notify the Department and the applicable national microchip
registry of a change of ownership of the dog or cat, or the owner’s change of
address or telephone number.
(Part 3, Ord. 1579-NS, eff. August 17, 2012, as amended by part 5, Ord. 1658-
NS, eff. January 18, 2019)
*   Section 6-1.109 entitled “Impounding animals,” recodified from Sections
4435 and 3364 T.O.O.C., repealed by Part 3, Ordinance No. 1579-NS, effective
August 17, 2012.
Sec. 6-1.110. Amendments: 10.90: Fees for services and activities.*
   Section 10.90.10 of Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code concerning
animals, as adopted by Sec. 6-1.101, is hereby repealed in its entirety and re-
enacted to read as follows:
   10.90.010 Fees for services and activities
      All fees applicable to licenses, delinquency charges, or field
enforcement shall be as prescribed by City Council resolution.
(Part 3, Ord. 1579-NS, eff. August 17, 2012)
*   Section 6-1.110 entitled “Impounded livestock: Redemption: Disposal,”
recodified from Section 4436, T.O.O.C, repealed by Part 3, Ordinance 1579-NS,
effective August 17, 2012.
Sec. 6-1.111. Fees for reclaiming livestock.
(§ 4437, T.O.O.C., as amended by §§ III and IV, Ord. 116-NS, eff. November 6,
1969, repealed by §19, Ord. 1374-NS, eff. April 26, 2001)
Sec. 6-1.113. Care and control of animals: Duty of owners.
(§ 4470, T.O.O.C., as added by V.C. Ord. 1423, as amended by V.C. Ord. 1464;
amended by § 1, Ord. 315-NS, eff. November 2, 1972, and § 6, Ord. 496-NS, eff.
October 1, 1974, repealed by §19, Ord. 1374, eff. April 26, 2001)
Sec. 6-1.114. Animal nuisance.
(§ 4467, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 2, Ord. 893-NS, eff. June 18, 1985, and § 2,
Ord. 1111-NS, eff. July 25, 1991, repealed by § 19, Ord. 1374, eff. April 26,
2001)
Sec. 6-1.115. Animals for medical research.
(§ 4432.1, T.O.O.C., as amended by V.C. Ord. 1285, § 1, Ord. 194-NS, eff. March
25, 1971, and § 3, Ord. 218-NS, eff. August 19, 1971, repealed by § 19, Ord.
1374, eff. April 26, 2001)
Sec. 6-1.116. Inspection of animals.
(§ 4469, T.O.O.C., as amended by § XX, Ord. 770-NS, eff. February 26, 1981,
repealed by § 19, Ord. 1374-NS, eff. April 26, 2001)
Sec. 6-1.117. Privileged entry.
(§ 4465, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 1, Ord. 893-NS, eff. June 18, 1985, repealed
by § 19, Ord. 1374-NS, eff. April 26, 2001)
Sec. 6-1.118. Citations to appear.
(§ 4475, T.O.O.C., repealed by § 19, Ord. 1374-NS, eff. April 26, 2001)
Sec. 6-1.119. Citations to appear: Failure to appear.
(§ 4476, T.O.O.C., repealed by § 19, Ord. 1374-NS, eff. April 26, 2001)
Sec. 6-1.120. Release of wild animals.
(§ 3, Ord. 218-NS, eff. August 19, 1971, as amended by § 7, Ord. 496-NS, eff.
October 10, 1974, repealed by § 19, Ord. 1374-NS, eff. April 26, 2001)
Sec. 6-1.121. Livestock running at large.
(§ 3, Ord. 218-NS, eff. August 19, 1971, repealed by § 19, Ord. 1374-NS, eff.
April 26, 2001)
Sec. 6-1.124. Complaint.
(§ 3, Ord. 893-NS, eff. June 18, 1985, repealed by § 19, Ord. 1374-NS, eff.
April 26, 2001)
Sec. 6-1.125. Notice.
(§ 3, Ord. 893-NS, eff. June 18, 1985, repealed by § 19, Ord. 1374-NS, eff.
April 26, 2001)
Sec. 6-1.126. Impoundment pending hearing.
(§ 3, Ord. 893-NS, eff. June 18, 1985, repealed by § 19, Ord. 1374-NS, eff.
April 26, 2001)
Sec. 6-1.127. Hearing.
(§ 3, Ord. 893-NS, eff. June 18, 1985, repealed by § 19, Ord. 1374-NS, eff.
April 26, 2001)
Sec. 6-1.128. Oaths.
(§ 3, Ord. 893-NS, eff. June 18, 1985, repealed by § 19, Ord. 1374-NS, eff.
April 26, 2001)
Sec. 6-1.129. Evidence.
(§ 3, Ord. 893-NS, eff. June 18, 1985, repealed by § 19, Ord. 1374-NS, eff.
April 26, 2001)
Sec. 6-1.130. Subpoena power.
(§ 3, Ord. 893-NS, eff. June 18, 1985, repealed by § 19, Ord. 1374-NS, eff.
April 26, 2001)
Sec. 6-1.131. Record.
(§ 3, Ord. 893-NS, eff. June 18, 1985, repealed by § 19, Ord. 1374-NS, eff.
April 26, 2001)
Sec. 6-1.132. Findings and order.
(§ 3, Ord. 893-NS, eff. June 18, 1985, repealed by § 19, Ord. 1374-NS, eff.
April 26, 2001)
Sec. 6-1.133. Failure to comply with order.
(§ 3, Ord. 893-NS, eff. June 18, 1985, repealed by § 19, Ord. 1374-NS, eff.
April 26, 2001)
Article 2. Wild Animal Control*
* Article 2 entitled “Dogs,” consisting of Sections 6-1.201 through 6-
1.220,recodified from Sections 4411 through 4420, 4432, 4433, 4461, 4462, 4468,
4473 and 4474, T.O.O.C., as amended by VC Ordinance No. 1285, Sections I and
II, Ordinance No 116-NS, effective November 6, 1969, Section 2, Ordinance No.
194-NS, effective March 25, 1971, Section 3, Ordinance No. 218-NS, effective
August 19, 1971, Section 1, Ordinance No. 429-NS, effective March 21, 1974,
Sections 9, 10 and 11, Ordinance No. 496-NS, effective October 10, 1974,
Section XXII, 770-NS, effective February 26, 1981, Section 1,960-NS, effective
May 19, 1987 and Ordinance No. 1052-NS, effective November 1, 1988, and
repealed by Section 24, Ordinance No. 1374-NS, effective April 26, 2001.
Sec. 6-1.201. Wild animal defined.
   For the purposes of this article, “wild animal” shall mean an animal or
reptile which is wild by nature and not customarily domesticated in the City.
“Wild animal” shall not include birds, small rodents, or small, nonpoisonous
reptiles commonly used for educational or experimental purposes or for pets.
(§ 4480, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 69, as renumbered by § 25, Ord. 1374-NS,
eff. April 26, 2001)
Sec. 6-1.202. Wild animal permits: Required.
   No person shall have, keep, or maintain any wild animal without first
obtaining a permit so to do from the City Manager.
(§ 4481, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 69, as amended by § 1, Ord. 489-NS, eff.
August 22, 1974, as renumbered by § 25, Ord. 1374-NS, eft. April 26, 2001)
Sec. 6-1.203. Permits: Conditions.
   The City Manager shall not issue a permit to have, keep, or maintain a wild
animal unless adequate provisions are made and conditions are imposed for the
confinement and control of the wild animal to protect the public peace, health,
and safety and to assure humane and sanitary conditions for the animal.
(§ 4481, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 69, as amended by § 1, Ord. 489-NS, eff.
August 22, 1974, as renumbered by § 25, Ord. 1374-NS, eft. April 26, 2001)
Sec. 6-1.204. Permits: Form.
   Permits to have, keep, and maintain wild animals shall be in writing and
shall contain the following information:
   (a) The name and address of the applicant;
   (b) The particular place and type of animal for which the permit is granted;
   (c) The provisions and conditions necessary to protect the public peace,
health, and safety; and
   (d) The expiration date which shall not exceed one year from the date of the
issuance of the permit unless otherwise specified.
(§ 4481, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 69, as renumbered by § 25, Ord. 1374-NS,
eff. April 26, 2001)
Sec. 6-1.205. Confinement.
   The Department of Animal Control may make regulations regarding the size and
type of cage or other means of confinement, the distance from the place of
confinement to adjoining property, and any other regulations deemed reasonably
necessary by the Department of Animal Control or the Health Officer to carry
out the purposes of this article and to insure the maintenance of humane,
sanitary conditions and the safety of persons and property. A copy of such
regulations shall be furnished by the Department of Animal Control upon
request. The regulations shall be in addition to, but shall not supersede, any
conditions attached to a permit. In applying the regulations to a given
situation, the Department of Animal Control shall take into consideration the
type, nature, disposition, and training of the animal involved.
(§ 4482, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 69, as renumbered by § 25, Ord. 1374-NS,
eff. April 26, 2001)
Sec. 6-1.206. Escaped animals: Notices.
   Any person keeping or maintaining a wild animal which escapes from its
confinement shall immediately notify the Department of Animal Control of such
escape.
(§ 4484, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 69, as renumbered by § 25, Ord. 1574-NS,
eff. April 26, 2001)
Sec. 6-1.207. Animals at large: Impoundment.
   Wild animals found running at large may be impounded in accordance with the
provisions of Article 2 of this chapter; provided, however, neither the City
nor its officers, agents, or employees shall be liable for injury or disease to
any animal incurred while such animal is being captured, transported, or
impounded. The reclamation by an owner or keeper of any impounded wild animal
shall be permitted upon the payment to the Department of Animal Control of the
actual cost to the Department of the capture, impounding, and care of such
animal.
(§ 4485, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 69, as renumbered by § 25, Ord. 1374-NS,
eff. April 26, 2001)
Sec. 6-1.208. Animals at large: Declaration of public nuisance.
   Wild animals, when found to be at large and injuring or damaging, or
threatening to injure or damage, any person or property shall be deemed to be a
public nuisance and may be summarily destroyed without liability resulting to
the City or its officer, agents, or employees.
(§ 4485, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 69, as renumbered by § 25, Ord. 1374-NS,
eff. April 26, 2001)
Sec. 6-1.209. Violations.
   Any person failing to comply with any provision of this article, any
condition of the permit provided for in this article, or any rule or regulation
of the Department of Animal Control or the Health Officer within ten (10) days
after notice shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Code pursuant to
Section 1-2.01 of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code.
(§ 4483, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 69, as amended by § XXIV, Ord. 770-NS, eff.
February 26, 1981, as renumbered by § 25, Ord. 1374-NS, eff. April 26, 2001)
Article 3. Rabies Control
(Article 3, consisting of Sections 6-1.301 through 6-1.308, recodified from
Sections 4451 through 4458, T.O.O.C., as amended by V.C. Ordinance No. 1285,
Sections V and VI, Ordinance No. 116-NS, effective November 6, 1969, and
Section XXIII, Ordinance No. 770-NS, effective February 26, 1981, repealed by
Section 24, Ordinance No. 1374-NS, effective April 26, 2001)
Article 5. Kennels
(Article 5, consisting of Sections 6-1.501 through 6-1.506, recodified from
Sections 4441 through 4445 and 4420, T.O.O.C., as amended by V.C. Ordinance No.
1472, Section 2, Ordinance No. 315-NS, effective November 2, 1972, and Section
XXV, Ordinance No. 770-NS, effective February 26, 1981, repealed by Section 24,
Ordinance No. 1374-NS, effective April 26, 2001)
CHAPTER 2. SOLID WASTE, ORGANIC WASTE AND RECYCLABLE MATERIALS COLLECTION
PROCESSING AND DISPOSAL*
* Chapter 2, entitled “Garbage and Refuse,” consisting of Sections 6-2.01,
through 6-2.10 and 6-2.15, recodified from Sections 4700, 4701, 4703 through
4710, and 4716, T.O.O.C., and Sections 6-2.11 through 6-2.14, codified from
Ordinance No. 64, as amended by Ordinance No. 78, repealed by Section I,
Ordinance No. 361-NS, effective May 24, 1973. Chapter 2 entitled “Garbage and
Refuse Collection and Disposal” consisting of Sections 6-2.01 through 6-2.36,
added by said Ordinance No. 361-NS, repealed by Section II, Ordinance No. 584-
NS, effective August 19, 1976. Chapter 2, entitled “Garbage and Refuse
Collection and Disposal,” consisting of Sections 6-2.01 through 6-2.34, as
added by Ordinance No. 584-NS, effective August 19, 1976 as amended by
Ordinance No. 765-NS, effective December 25, 1980, Ordinance No. 780NS,
effective June 18, 1981, Ordinance No. 907, effective February 11, 1986,
Ordinance No. 939, effective October 14, 1986, Ordinance No. 1131, effective
January 7, 1992, repealed by Section 1, Ordinance No. 1200-NS, effective March
15, 1994, and Ordinance No. 1200-NS, effective March 15, 1994 and Ordinance No.
1315-NS, eff. April 2, 1998 repealed by Part 1, Ordinance No. 1677-NS,
effective February 28, 2020. Chapter 2, entitle “Solid Waste, Organic Waste and
Recyclable Materials Collection Processing and Disposal,” consisting of
Sections 6-2.101 through 6-2.104, 6-2.200 through 6-2.291, 6- 2.301 through 6-
2.310, 6-2.401, 6-2.402, 6-2.501 through 6-2.507, and 6-2.601 through 6-2.610,
as established by Ord. 1677-NS, effective February 28, 2020, was subsequently
repealed and replaced by Ord. 1688-NS, effective December 17, 2021.
Article 1. General Provisions
Sec. 6-2.101. Purpose.
   The storage, accumulation, collection, processing, and disposal of solid
waste, organic waste, and recyclable materials are matters of great public
concern. Improper control of such matters creates a public nuisance, can lead
to pollution, fire hazards, illegal dumping, pest infestation, and other
problems affecting the health, welfare, and safety of the residents of this and
surrounding cities. The establishment and regulation of waste reduction
programs are necessary for the City to avoid environmental damage, achieve the
diversion mandates of the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989
(AB 939), and ensure compliance with AB 341, AB 1826, AB 1594, and SB 1383.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.102. Flow control.
   All solid waste, organic waste, and recyclable materials, once such
materials have been placed at the curb, or, in the case of a Commercial Service
Recipient, in the Collection Container or Bin placed for collection by a
Contractor, are subject to the City's control and this Chapter.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.103. Anti-scavenging and materials handling.
   Other than the property owner or tenant of the premises, Contractor or
Permittee, it is unlawful for any person to remove, interfere, tamper with, or
otherwise disturb any recyclable materials or their containers which have been
placed for collection by the waste generator. No individual, other than the
property owner or tenant of the premises, Contractor or Permittee, may
physically enter a Commercial Collection Container located on private property.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.104. Violations.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, company or corporation to violate
any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this
Chapter. Any person, firm, company, or corporation violating any of such
provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this
Chapter shall be guilty of a violation of this Chapter, and, shall be
punishable as set forth in Chapter 2 of Title I of the Thousand Oaks Municipal
Code. Each such person, firm, company or corporation shall be guilty of a
separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any
violation of any provision of this Chapter, or the provisions of any code
adopted by reference to this Chapter, is committed, continued or permitted by
such person and shall be punishable accordingly. In addition to the penalties
provided by this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in
violation of any of the provisions of this Code, or the provisions of any code
adopted by reference by this Code, shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be
summarily abated by this City, and each day such condition continues shall be
regarded as a new and separate offense.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Article 2. Definitions
Sec. 6-2.200. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings set forth in this article, unless it is apparent from the context
that a different meaning is intended. If any words or phrases are not defined
in this article, such terms shall have the meaning applied to them in the
California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989, as amended (California
Public Resources Code).
(Ord. 188-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.201. AB 341.
   "AB 341" means State of California Assembly Bill No. 341 approved October 5,
2011. AB 341 requires businesses, defined to include commercial or public
entities that generate more than four cubic yards of commercial solid waste per
week or multifamily residential dwellings of 5 units or more, to arrange for
recycling services and requires jurisdictions to implement a commercial solid
waste recycling program.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.202. AB 827.
   "AB 827" means State of California Assembly Bill No. 827 approved October 2,
2019. AB 827 provides that as of July 1, 2020, businesses subject to AB 341
and/or AB 1826 are required to provide customers access to a recycling bin and/
or organics recycling bin to collect materials purchased on premises.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.203. AB 939 or “The Act”.
   "AB 939" or "The Act" means "The California Integrated Waste Management Act
of 1989" codified in part in Public Resources Code §§ 40000 et seq, as it may
be amended and as implemented by the regulations of the California Department
of Resources Recycling and Recovery (CalRecycle), or its successor agency.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.204. AB 1594.
   "AB 1594" means State of California Assembly Bill No. 1594 approved
September 28, 2014. AB 1594 provides that as of January 1, 2020, the use of
green material as Alternative Daily Cover does not constitute diversion through
recycling and would be considered disposal.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.205. AB 1826.
   "AB 1826" means State of California Assembly Bill No. 1826 approved
September 28, 2014. AB 1826 requires each jurisdiction, on and after January 1,
2016, to implement an organic waste recycling program to divert from the
landfill organic waste from businesses. Each business meeting specific organic
waste or solid waste generation thresholds phased in from April 1, 2016 to
January 1, 2020, is required to arrange for organic waste recycling services.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.206. AB 3036.
   "AB 3036" means State of California Assembly Bill No. 3036 approved
September 27, 2018. AB 3036 prohibits a County, City, District, or local
government agency from subjecting the hauling of certain byproducts from the
processing of food or beverages to an exclusive franchise, contract, license,
or permit.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.207. Agreement.
   "Agreement" means the written agreement between the City and the Contractor
covering the work to be performed and all contract documents attached to the
agreement and made a part thereof.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.208. Animal waste.
   "Animal Waste" means solid waste consisting of any carcass, manure,
fertilizer, or any form of solid excrement produced by any and all forms of
commercial livestock such as cattle, but not including household pet wastes.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.209. Applicable law.
   "Applicable Law" means all laws, regulations, rules, orders, judgments,
decrees, permits, approvals, or other requirement of any federal, state,
county, city, and local governmental agency having jurisdiction over the
collection and disposition of Solid Waste, including Recyclable Materials,
Organic Waste, and Construction and Demolition Waste.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.210. Applicant.
   "Applicant" means any person requesting an application for an Exclusive
Franchise, Limited Franchise, or Permit for the authorized collection of Solid
Waste, Organic Waste or Recyclable Materials, subject to the conditions of this
Chapter.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.211. Bin.
   "Bin" means a metal or plastic waste container designed or intended to be
mechanically serviced by a commercial front-end loader vehicle. It shall be
designed to hold from one (1) to six (6) cubic yards of material with the lid
properly closed.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.212. Bulky waste.
   "Bulky Waste" means Solid Waste consisting of discarded white goods,
furniture, tires, carpets, mattresses, and similar large items which do not fit
in a regular Collection Container and require special handling due to their
size but can be collected and transported without the assistance of special
loading equipment (such as forklifts or cranes) and without violating vehicle
load limits. It does not include abandoned automobiles and other vehicles.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.213. California Code of Regulations or CCR.
   "California Code of Regulations" or "CCR" means the State of California Code
of Regulations. CCR references in this ordinance are preceded with a number
that refers to the relevant Title of the CCR (e.g., "14 CCR" refers to Title 14
of CCR).
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.214. CalRecycle.
   "CalRecycle" means the California Department of Resources Recycling and
Recovery, or any successor agency that regulates solid waste management.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.215. Cart.
   "Cart" means a heavy plastic receptacle with a rated capacity of at least 20
and not more than 100 gallons, having a hinged tight-fitting lid and wheels,
that is provided by the Exclusive Franchise Solid Waste Contractor, approved by
the City, and used by Service Recipients for collection, accumulation, and
removal of solid waste from commercial, industrial, MFD, or residential
premises in connection with Exclusive Franchise Collection Services.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.216. CEQA.
   "CEQA" means the California Environmental Quality Act, codified as Cal. Pub.
Res. Code §§ 21000 et seq. as amended or superseded, and the regulations
promulgated thereunder and as set forth in the California Code of Regulations,
Title 14.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.217. City.
   "City" means the City of Thousand Oaks.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.218. City collection service.
   "City Collection Service" means ongoing regularly scheduled collection and
unscheduled collection of Commercial Solid Waste, Organic Waste, and Recyclable
Materials by an Exclusive Franchise from a City Facility and the delivery of
that Commercial Solid Waste to a Disposal Facility, Recycling Facility, and/or
Organics Processing Facility.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.219. City facility.
   "City Facility" means any building or other site owned, leased or used
regularly and significantly and the space therein occupied by employees or
Contractors of the City, and excludes those portions of such facilities used by
others.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.220. City Manager.
   "City Manager" means the City Manager of the City, or his or her designated
representative, or any employee of the City who succeeds to the duties and
responsibilities of the City Manager.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.221. Code.
   "Code" means the City of Thousand Oaks Municipal Code.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.222. Collection.
   "Collection" means the process whereby Residential, Commercial, and City
Solid Waste are removed and transported to a Disposal Facility, Organic Waste
Processing Facility, or Materials Recycling (or Recovery) Facility as
appropriate.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.223. Collection container.
   "Collection Container" means a Bin, Cart, or Roll-Off Container that is
provided by the Exclusive or Limited Franchise Contractor and approved by the
City for use by Service Recipients for Collection Services.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.224. Collection services.
   "Collection Services" means Residential Collection Service, Commercial
Collection Service, and City Collection Service.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.225. Combined solid waste.
   "Combined Solid Waste" means putrescible and non-putrescible material placed
in a single Collection Container.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.226. Commercial business or business.
   "Commercial Business" or "Business" means a firm, partnership,
proprietorship, joint-stock company, corporation, or association, whether for-
profit or nonprofit, strip mall, industrial facility, Multi-Family dwelling
with centralized bin service (MFD-C), Mixed-use Dwelling Unit complex, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(6).
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.227. Commercial collection service.
   "Commercial Collection Service" means ongoing regularly scheduled collection
of Commercial Solid Waste, Organic Waste, and Recyclable Materials by an
Exclusive Franchise from Commercial Service Units and the delivery of that
Commercial Solid Waste to a Disposal Facility, Recycling Facility, and/or
Organics Processing Facility.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.228. Commercial edible food generator.
   "Commercial Edible Food Generator" means a Tier 1 or Tier 2 Commercial
Edible Food Generator as defined in 14 CCR Sections 18982(a)(73) and (a)(74).
For the purposes of this definition, Food Recovery Organizations and Food
Recovery Services are not Commercial Edible Food Generators pursuant to 14 CCR
Section 18982(a)(7).
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.229. Commercial premises.
   "Commercial Premises" means any Premises used for commercial purposes.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.230. Commercial recycling permit or “Permit”.
   "Commercial Recycling Permit" or "Permit" means authorization granted to a
collector for the sole purpose of the Collection and processing of Organic
Waste and/or Recyclable Materials from Commercial Premises.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.231. Commercial service recipient.
   "Commercial Service Recipient" means every owner of, and every tenant or
person who is in possession of or has the care and control of, a place of
business or service, including Multi-Family dwellings with centralized bin
service (MFD-C) and Mixed-use Dwelling Unit complexes receiving Collection
Service, stores, business offices, commercial warehouses, industrial premises,
hospitals, educational, health care, military, and correctional institutions,
nonprofit research organizations, and government offices.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.232. Commercial service unit.
   "Commercial Service Unit" means all retail, professional, wholesale,
industrial facilities, Multi-Family dwellings with centralized bin service
(MFD-C), and Mixed-use Dwelling Unit complexes, and other commercial
enterprises offering goods or services to the public that utilize a Collection
Container, Bin, Cart, compactor, or Roll-Off Container for the accumulation and
set-out of Commercial Solid Waste, Organic Waste, and Recyclable Materials.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.233. Compacted waste.
   "Compacted Waste" means any waste that has been baled or compacted by a
mechanical device prior to placement into a Collection Container, as well as
waste that has been compressed in size by any means, so that it does not fall
freely by its own weight from a commercial or industrial Collection Container
designed for loose collection into a collection vehicle, thereby interfering
with the normal and usual collection and disposal process.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.234. Compliance review.
   "Compliance Review" means a review of records by the City to determine
compliance with this Chapter.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.235. Compost.
   "Compost" means the product resulting from the controlled biological
decomposition of Organic Wastes that are source separated from the municipal
waste stream, or which are separated at a centralized facility. Compost may
also include the product of anaerobic digestion or other conversion
technologies.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.236. Composting.
   "Composting" means the controlled and monitored process of converting
Organic Waste into Compost.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.237. Construction and demolition waste.
   "Construction and Demolition waste" or "C & D" means Solid Waste consisting
of building materials, packaging and rubble resulting from construction,
remodeling, repair, and demolition operations on pavement, residential,
commercial or industrial premises, buildings, and other structures, and land
clearing operations.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.238. Contractor.
   "Contractor" means collector authorized by the City through Exclusive or
Limited Franchise to collect, process, and/or dispose of Solid Waste, Organic
Waste, and Recyclable Materials from commercial, industrial, and residential
premises in the City.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.239. Day.
   "Day" means a calendar day of twenty-four (24) hours, measured from midnight
to the next midnight.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.240. Delivery.
   "Delivery" means the moment at which Solid Waste is deposited in a
Collection Container or at a location that is designated for collection
pursuant to the City's Municipal Code or is otherwise discarded.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.241. Designated waste.
   "Designated Waste" means those substances classified as designated wastes by
the State of California in the most current version of the California Code of
Regulations.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.242. Designated zone.
   "Designated Zone" means a geographical area describing the extent of
collection by an Exclusive or Limited Franchise Contractor for the collection
and disposal of Solid Waste, and the collection and processing of source-
separated Organic Waste and Recyclable Materials.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.243. Disposal or dispose.
   "Disposal" or "Dispose" means the final disposition of Solid Waste at a
permitted Landfill or other permitted Solid Waste disposal facility, as defined
in California Public Resources Code 40192.
Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.244. Disposal facility.
   "Disposal Facility" means the facility or such place or places specifically
designated by the City for the disposal, or processing as appropriate, of
Residential Waste and Commercial Waste and other materials as appropriate and
acceptable.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.245. Diversion or divert.
   "Diversion" or "Divert" means the reduction or elimination of Solid Waste
from Solid Waste Disposal in accordance with California Public Resources Code
41024.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.246. Edible food.
   "Edible Food" means food intended for human consumption, or as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(18). Edible Food is not Solid Waste if it is
recovered and not discarded.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.247. Edible food recovery.
   "Edible Food Recovery" means the practice of gleaning or recovering Edible
Food that would otherwise be disposed from places such as restaurants, grocery
stores, produce markets, or dining facilities and distributing it to local
emergency food programs.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.248. Effective date of agreement.
   "Effective Date of Agreement" means the date designated in the Agreement as
the effective date. If no such date is indicated, it shall mean the date on
which the Agreement is signed and delivered by the last of the parties to sign
and deliver.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.249. Emergency permit.
   "Emergency Permit" means authorization granted for the sole purpose of the
collection and processing of Solid Waste, Organic Waste, and Recyclable
Materials from Commercial and Residential Premises in emergencies, such as the
breakdown of equipment, or other unforeseen or unpreventable circumstances
where, in the judgment of the City Manager or designee, the particular
situation justifies such action.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.250. Encroachment permit.
   "Encroachment Permit" means a permit issued by the City for placement of
Collection Containers, Bins, or Drop Boxes, within the City's right-of-way or
easements so as to prevent, obstruct or interfere with the normal use of the
right-of-way.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.251. Enforcement action.
   "Enforcement Action" means an action of the City to address non-compliance
with this Chapter including, but not limited to, issuing administrative
citations, fines, penalties, or using other remedies available under the law.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.252. Exclusive franchise.
   "Exclusive Franchise" means a residential or commercial franchise issued to
a Contractor for ongoing regularly scheduled weekly collection service of Solid
Waste, Organic Waste, and Recyclable Materials within a designated zone of the
City, on an exclusive basis and pursuant to Article 3 of this Chapter.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.253. Exclusive franchisee.
   "Exclusive Franchisee" means the Contractor who holds the Exclusive
Franchise.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.254. Facility.
   "Facility" means any plant or site, owned, used, or leased and maintained
and/or operated by the Contractor for purposes of performing under an agreement
or permit.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.255. Food recovery.
   "Food Recovery" means actions to collect and distribute food for human
consumption that otherwise would be disposed, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR
Section 18982(a)(24).
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.256. Food recovery organization.
   "Food Recovery Organization" means an entity that engages in the collection
or receipt of Edible Food from Commercial Edible Food Generators and
distributes that Edible Food to the public for Food Recovery either directly or
through other entities or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(25),
including, but not limited to:
   (1)   A food bank as defined in Section 113783 of the Health and Safety
Code;
   (2)   A nonprofit charitable organization as defined in Section 113841 of
the Health and Safety code; and,
   (3)   A nonprofit charitable temporary food facility as defined in Section
113842 of the Health and Safety Code.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.257. Food recovery service.
   "Food Recovery Service" means a person or entity that collects and
transports Edible Food from a Commercial Edible Food Generator to a Food
Recovery Organization or other entities for Food Recovery, or as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(26). A Food Recovery Service is not a
Commercial Edible Food Generator for the purposes of this Chapter and
implementation of 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12 pursuant to 14 CCR Section
18982(a)(7).
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.258. Food soiled paper.
   "Food Soiled Paper" means compostable paper material that has come in
contact with food or liquid, such as, but not limited to, compostable paper
plates, paper coffee cups, napkins, pizza boxes, and milk cartons with no
petroleum plastic, wax, or bio-plastic coating, liner, or laminate.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.259. Food waste.
   "Food Waste" means all putrescible solid, semisolid, and liquid food, such
as, fruit, vegetables, cheese, meat, bones, poultry, seafood, bread, rice,
pasta, and oils; coffee grounds and filters and tea bags; and any putrescible
matter produced from human or animal food production, preparation, and
consumption activities.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.260. Generator.
   "Generator" means a person or entity that is responsible for the creation of
Solid Waste and/or Edible Food.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.261. Green waste.
   "Green Waste" means Solid Waste consisting of any vegetative waste generated
from the maintenance or alteration of residential, commercial, or industrial
premises including, but not limited to, grass clippings, leaves, tree
trimmings, prunings, brush, weeds, flowers, herbs, and holiday trees.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.262. Hauler route.
   "Hauler Route" means the designated itinerary or sequence of stops for each
segment of the Jurisdiction's collection service area, or as otherwise defined
in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(31.5).
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.263. Hazardous waste.
   "Hazardous Waste" means a waste, or combination of wastes as defined under
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.264. Holiday.
   "Holiday" means a day of the year designated by Contractor on which waste
Collection Service will be delayed one day, excluding Sunday.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.265. Home composting.
   "Home Composting" means the on-site Composting of Organic Waste at the
Residential Premises at which the waste is generated.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.266. Household hazardous waste.
   "Household Hazardous Waste" means that waste resulting from products
purchased by the general public for household use which, because of its
quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics,
may pose a substantial known or potential hazard to human health or the
environment when improperly treated, disposed or otherwise managed, or, in
combination with other Solid Waste, may be infectious, explosive, poisonous,
caustic, toxic, or exhibit any of the characteristics of ignitability,
corrosivity, reactivity, or toxicity as per California Code of Regulations
Title 22, Division 4.5, Chapter 11, Section 66261.3.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.267. Industrial premises.
   "Industrial Premises" means any site for mechanized manufacturing activities
including factories, food processing, mineral extraction, power generation,
fuel storage facilities, refineries and treatment works.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.268. Land clearing.
   "Land Clearing" means an activity performed by a licensed contractor that
involves clearing of land and removal of dirt and mixed Green Waste but does
not include removal of Solid Waste or Construction and Demolition material.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.269. Large event.
   "Large Event" means an event, including, but not limited to, a sporting
event, a flea market or a festival, that charges an admission price, or is
operated by a local agency, and serves an average of more than 2,000
individuals per day of operation of the event, at a location that includes, but
is not limited to, a public, nonprofit, or privately owned park, parking lot,
golf course, street system, or other open space when being used for an event,
or as defined in Section 42648 (b) of the Public Resources Code.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.270. Large venue.
   "Large Venue" means a permanent venue facility that annually seats or serves
an average of more than 2,000 individuals within the grounds of the facility
per day of operation, or as defined in Section 42648 (c) of the Public
Resources Code.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.271. Legislation.
   "Legislation" means any code, ordinance, resolution, or any other formal
enactment of the governing body of an authorized Federal, State, or local
entity which now exists, or which may hereafter be adopted, which constitutes
law or regulations governing the operation of the contractor.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.272. Limited franchise.
   "Limited Franchise" means a residential or commercial franchise issued for
temporary, non-regularly scheduled waste collection service.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.273. Limited franchisee.
   "Limited Franchisee" means the Contractor who holds a Limited Franchise.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.274. Material recovery and processing facility (MRF).
   "Materials Recovery and Processing Facility (MRF)" means a facility to which
commingled Recyclable Materials are brought for separation into marketable
Recyclables.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.275. Medical waste.
   "Medical Waste" means those materials defined in the most current version of
the State of California Health and Safety Code.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.276. Mixed use dwelling or MXD.
   "Mixed Use Dwelling" or "MXD" means a building or structure which contains
at least one (1) Commercial Service Unit and at least one (1) Dwelling Unit and
utilizes a common Collection Container for the accumulation and collection of
Solid Waste.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.277. Multi-family dwelling unit complex or MFD.
   "Multi-Family Dwelling Unit Complex" or "MFD" means any structure containing
more than two residential dwelling units with shared walls, including, but not
limited to, an apartment building, triplex, multiple condominium building or
townhome complex, with one of the following collection services provided:
   (1)   Multi-Family Dwelling - Centralized (MFD-C) Collection Service. MFD-
C Solid Waste Collection Service that is centralized for the MFD complex using
shared Collection Containers and includes Garbage, Recyclable Materials, and
Organics collection service, as well as Large Item collection service.
   (2)   Multi-Family Dwelling - Individual (MFD-I) Collection Service. MFD-
I Solid Waste Collection Service where individual units within the MFD complex
utilize individual carts and includes Garbage, Recyclable Materials, and
Organics collection service, as well as Large Item collection service.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.278. Non-putrescible material.
   "Non-putrescible Material" means Solid Waste consisting of waste which is
not organic and not subject to decomposition by microorganisms.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.279. Organic waste.
   "Organic Waste" means Solid Waste containing material originated from living
organisms and their metabolic waste products, including but not limited to Food
Waste, Green Waste, nonhazardous wood waste, and food-soiled paper waste that
is mixed in with Food Waste.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.280. Organic waste generator.
   "Organic Waste Generator" means a person or entity that is responsible for
the creation of Organic Waste.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.281. Organic waste processing facility.
   "Organic Waste Processing Facility" means a State permitted commercial Solid
Waste facility which accepts and processes Organic Waste.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.282. Permittee.
   "Permittee" means the holder of a Commercial Recycling Permit.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.283. Person.
   "Person" means any individual, firm, association, organization, partnership,
corporation, business trust, joint venture, the United States, the State of
California, the County of Ventura, and special purpose districts.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.284. Putrescible material.
   "Putrescible Material" means Solid Waste consisting of waste which is
organic and subject to decomposition by microorganisms.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.285. Premises.
   "Premises" means any land or building in the City where waste is generated
or accumulated.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.286. Prohibited container contaminants.
   "Prohibited Container Contaminants" means the following: (i) discarded
materials placed in the Recycling Container that are not identified as
acceptable Source Separated Recyclable Materials for the City's Recycling
Container; (ii) discarded materials placed in the Organics Container that are
not identified as acceptable Source Separated Organic Waste for the City's
Organics Container; (iii) discarded materials placed in the Solid Waste
Container that are acceptable Source Separated Recyclable Materials and/or
Source Separated Organic Wastes to be placed in City's Organics Container and/
or Recycling Container; and, (iv) Excluded Waste placed in any container.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.287. Recovery.
   "Recovery" means any activity or process described in 14 CCR Section 18983.1
(b), or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(49).
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.288. Recyclable material.
   "Recyclable Materials" means Solid Waste consisting of any material which
retains useful properties and can be reclaimed after the production or
consumption process.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.289. Recycling.
   "Recycling" means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating
and/or marketing Recyclable Materials that would otherwise be disposed of in a
landfill. The collection, transportation or disposal of Solid Waste not
intended for, or capable of, reuse is not Recycling.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.290. Remote monitoring.
   "Remote Monitoring" means the use of the internet of things (IoT) and/or
wireless electronic devices to see or detect the contents of Recycling
Containers, Organics Containers, and Solid Waste Containers for purposes of
identifying the quantity of materials in containers (level of fill) and/or
presence of Prohibited Container Contaminants.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.291. Residential collection service.
   "Residential Collection Service" means ongoing regularly scheduled
collection of Solid Waste by an Exclusive Franchise from Residential Premises
and the delivery of that Solid Waste to a Disposal Facility, MRF, and/or
Organic Waste Processing Facility.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.292. Residential service recipient.
   "Residential Service Recipient" means every owner of, and every tenant or
person who is in possession of, or has the care and control of, a Residential
Premises.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.293. Residential premises.
   "Residential Premises" means a Premises used for residential purposes.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.294. Roll-off.
   "Roll-Off" means a portable metal Collection Container with a capacity of 10
or more cubic yards and normally supported on casters and loaded onto
specialized collection trucks.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.295. Route review.
   "Route Review" means a visual Inspection of containers along a Hauler Route
for the purpose of determining Container Contamination, and may include
mechanical Inspection methods such as the use of cameras, or as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(65).
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.296. SB 1383.
   "SB 1383" means State of California Senate Bill 1383, which establishes
targets of a 50 percent reduction in disposal of Organic Materials from the
2014 levels by 2020 and 75 percent reduction by 2025.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.297. Self-hauler.
   "Self-Hauler" means a person who hauls Solid Waste, Organic Waste or
Recyclable Material he or she has generated to another person or waste
facility. Self-hauler also includes a person who back-hauls waste, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(66). Back-haul means generating
and transporting Organic Waste or Recyclable Material to a destination owned
and operated by the generator using the generator's own employees and
equipment, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(66)(A).
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.298. Scavenge or Scavenging.
   "Scavenge" or "Scavenging" means the unauthorized removal of Recyclables
from a Collection Container or other collection location on a Premises, as
prohibited by Public Resources Code section 41950.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.299. Service recipient.
   "Service Recipient" means an individual or company receiving Residential
Collection Service or Commercial Collection Service from an Exclusive
Franchisee, or Limited Franchisee, or a Commercial Recycling Permit holder.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.299.1. Single-family/duplex residence or SFD.
   "Single-family/duplex Residence" or "SFD" means a single detached dwelling
unit, and/or a duplex structure of two (2) single attached dwelling units, each
designed for use by one bona fide housekeeping group.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.299.2. Solid waste.
   "Solid Waste" means all putrescible and non-putrescible solid, semisolid,
and liquid wastes, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes,
industrial wastes, demolition and construction wastes, abandoned vehicles and
parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances, dewatered, treated, or
chemically fixed sewage sludge which is not hazardous waste, manure, vegetable
or animal solid and semisolid wastes, and other discarded solid and semisolid
wastes, as set forth in California Public Resources Code Section 40191(a)(b),
as amended from time to time.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.299.3. Source separated.
   "Source separated" means the segregation or separation, by the waste
generator, of materials into different containers for the purpose of additional
sorting or processing those materials for recycling, recovery, or reuse in
order to return them to economic markets.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.299.4. Subscription.
   "Subscription" means an arrangement or agreement between a waste generator
and a Contractor for Collection Service of Solid Waste, Organic Waste, and
Recyclable Materials.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.299.5. Term.
   "Term" means the time period or duration of an Exclusive Franchise or
Limited Franchise or Permit.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.299.6. Tier one commercial edible food generator.
   "Tier One Commercial Edible Food Generator" means a Commercial Edible Food
Generator that is one of the following:
   (1)   Supermarket.
   (2)   Grocery Store with a total facility size equal to or greater than
10,000 square feet.
   (3)   Food Service Provider.
   (4)   Food Distributor.
   (5)   Wholesale Food Vendor.
   If the definition in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(73) of Tier One Commercial
Edible Food Generator differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR
Section 18982(a)(73) shall apply to this Chapter.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.299.7. Tier two commercial edible food generator.
   "Tier Two Commercial Edible Food Generator" means a Commercial Edible Food
Generator that is one of the following:
   (1)   Restaurant with 250 or more seats, or a total facility size equal to
or greater than 5,000 square feet.
   (2)   Hotel with an on-site Food Facility and 200 or more rooms.
   (3)   Health facility with an on-site Food Facility and 100 or more beds.
   (4)   Large Venue.
   (5)   Large Event.
   (6)   A State agency with a cafeteria with 250 or more seats or total
cafeteria facility size equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet.
   (7)   A Local Education Agency facility with an on-site Food Facility.
   If the definition in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(74) of Tier Two Commercial
Edible Food Generator differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR
Section 18982(a)(74) shall apply to this Chapter.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.299.8. Transfer station.
   "Transfer station" means those facilities utilized to receive Solid Waste,
and temporarily store and transfer such waste directly from smaller to larger
vehicles for transport.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.299.9. Transformation facility.
   "Transformation Facility" means one that incinerates, pyrolyzes, distills,
gasifies, or biologically converts waste materials other than composted waste
materials.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.299.10. Waste.
   "Waste" means the useless, unused, unwanted or discarded material and debris
resulting from normal residential and commercial activity or materials which,
by their presence, may injuriously affect the health, safety, and comfort of
persons or depreciate property values in the vicinity thereof.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.299.11. Waste diversion.
   "Waste diversion" means to divert Solid Waste, in accordance with all
applicable Federal, State, and local requirements, from disposal at landfills
or transformation facilities through source reduction, composting or recycling.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.299.12. Waste generator.
   "Waste generator" means any person, as defined by the most current version
of the Public Resources Code, whose act or process produces Solid Waste as
defined in that same code, or whose act first causes Solid Waste to become
subject to regulation.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.299.13. Waste enclosure.
   "Waste Enclosure" means a walled structure for the storage of Solid Waste,
Recyclable Materials and Organic Material Collection Containers, with one or
more gates for access and egress and a covered roof.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.299.14. White goods.
   "White goods" means enamel-coated major appliances, such as washing
machines, clothes dryers, hot water heaters, stoves, and refrigerators.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.299.15. Wood waste.
   "Wood waste" means Solid Waste consisting of stumps, large branches, tree
trunks, and wood pieces or particles that are generated from the manufacturing
or production of wood products, harvesting, processing or storage of raw wood
materials, or construction and demolition activities.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Article 3. Franchise and Permit System
Sec. 6-2.301. Authorization.
   The City Council, pursuant to the California Public Resources Code, does
hereby determine that the collection, processing and/or disposal of Solid
Waste, Organic Waste, and Recyclable Materials shall be provided within the
City through the issuance of Exclusive or Limited Franchises or Permits, with
or without public bidding, in accordance with the terms of this Chapter. The
receipt of services is voluntary and not required of any property within City,
and any owner or Service Recipient of property within City has the opportunity
to avoid the services available under this Agreement either through self-
hauling or use of property in such a manner that Solid Waste is not generated.
However, all residents and businesses must manage their Organic Waste and
Recyclable Materials in a manner consistent with State Law. The use of public
waste containers for disposal of Solid Waste generated at residential or
commercial premises is prohibited.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.302. Franchises or permits required for solid waste, organic waste,
and recyclable materials collection.
   (a)   Authorization to grant Franchises and Permits. The City Council may
grant, at its discretion, Exclusive or Limited Franchises to designated
Contractors. The collection of a franchise fee from these designated
Contractors may be in lieu of all other business tax certificate fees required
by the City as determined by the Director of Finance. The City Manager, or
designee, may grant Commercial Recycling Permits to those applicants meeting
the Permit criteria. The City Council may establish by resolution standards
regarding the collection, transporting, processing, and/or disposal of Solid
Waste, Organic Waste, and Recyclable Materials generated from residential,
commercial and industrial premises.
   (b)   Collection by Contractor or Permittee. So long as any such Exclusive
or Limited Franchise or Permit remains in force, collection and handling of
material provided for in this Chapter shall be made by the Contractor or
Permittee in accordance with the terms and conditions of this Chapter, the
rules and regulations adopted by the City, the terms and conditions of the
Franchise Agreement, and the terms and conditions of the Permit.
   (c)   Unlawful collection. Except as expressly provided in this Chapter, it
is unlawful for any person to collect or transport Solid Waste, Organic Waste,
and Recyclable Materials within the City unless such person is a designated
Contractor with an Exclusive or Limited Franchise, or a Permittee, or the
material collected is exempted under subsections (c)(1) through (10) of this
section. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly authorize, allow or enter
into any agreement for the collection or transportation of Solid Waste, Organic
Waste, and Recyclable Materials by a person who is not a Contractor or
Permittee, except as follows:
   (1)   Green Waste removed from a premise by a contracted gardening,
landscaping, or tree trimming business or by a public agency representative as
an incidental part of a landscape maintenance service rather than as a separate
transportation service, or Green Waste delivered by a generator to a processing
facility;
   (2)   Debris removed from a premise by a licensed land clearing contractor
using its own employees and equipment, when transport is provided as an
incidental part of a total service offered by that contractor rather than as a
separate transportation service;
   (3)   Hazardous or dangerous materials, liquid and dry caustics, acids,
biohazardous, flammable, and explosive materials, pesticides, and similar
substances;
   (4)   Infectious medical waste as defined in the most current California
Health and Safety Code;
   (5)   Source separated Recyclable Materials delivered by the generator to a
facility for recycling under the California Beverage Container and Recycling
Litter Reduction Act, California Public Resources Code §§ 14500 et seq.
   (6)   Source separated Recyclable Materials or Organic Waste delivered by
the generator to a facility for Recycling or Composting ("Self-haul");
   (7)   Source separated Edible Food Waste removed from residential or
commercial premises and donated for human consumption ("Food Recovery");
   (8)   By-products of sewage treatment, including sludge, biosolids, grit and
screenings;
   (9)   Solid Waste generated at any residential or commercial premises and
which is transported personally by the owner or occupant of such premises to a
licensed disposal facility or disposed of in a manner consistent with the
provisions of the Municipal Code and other applicable laws.
   (10) Source separated Organic Waste byproducts generated from food or
beverage processing intended to be used as animal feed and which meet the
criteria of Public Resource Code section 40059.4 and AB 3036.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.303. Types of franchises and permits.
   The City may issue the following types of Franchises or Permits:
   (a)   Exclusive Franchise. An Exclusive Franchise will be issued for ongoing
regularly scheduled weekly collection of residential, commercial and industrial
Solid Waste, Organic Waste, and/or Recyclable Materials from a Designated Zone
as defined in this Chapter.
   (b)   Limited Franchise. A Limited Franchise will be issued for temporary
collection of Solid Waste, Organic Waste, Construction and Demolition Waste,
and/or Recyclable Materials from a Designated Zone as defined in this Chapter
and shall require a valid Encroachment Permit.
   (c)   Commercial Recycling Permit. A Permit may be issued for the collection
of commercial and industrial Recyclable Materials, including Organic Waste from
within the Commercial zones as defined in this Chapter. The Permittee may
charge service recipients a fee for the collection, transportation, or
processing of such materials only if the Exclusive Franchise hauler is unable,
or declines, to collect and recycle the materials. A list of such materials is
provided in the Exclusive Franchise Agreement and updated annually.
   (d)   Emergency Permit. In emergencies, such as the breakdown of equipment,
or other unforeseen or unpreventable circumstances where, in the judgment of
the City Manager or designee, the particular situation justifies such action,
limited or temporary permits to private persons or businesses to perform any of
the services covered by this Chapter may be issued by the City Manager or
designee. These services shall be subject to such reasonable fees, charges and
conditions as the circumstances may warrant and as the parties involved may
agree upon.
   Emergency Permits shall not exceed six (6) months in duration unless
approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.304. Approval or denial of franchise or permit.
   The City Manager or designee shall investigate the information required by
this Chapter and verify that the Contractor or Permittee is capable of
complying with the provisions of this Chapter and the rules and regulations of
the City. The City Manager or designee shall notify the City Council of the
findings prior to approval or denial of the Exclusive or Limited Franchise.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.305. Issuance and term.
   (a)   Franchise issuance and term. An issuance of Exclusive or Limited
Franchises, pursuant to this Chapter shall only be effective when approved by
the City Council and when a separate written agreement is signed by the
Contractor and the City. Each Franchise shall terminate as referenced in the
Exclusive or Limited Franchise agreement.
   (b)   Permit issuance and term. A Commercial Recycling Permit application
shall be completed by a Permit applicant and approved by the City prior to
offering service in the City. The issuance of a Commercial Recycling Permit
pursuant to this Chapter shall only be effective when approved by the City
Manager or designee. Each Permit shall expire annually on December 31, in
conjunction with the City Business Tax Certificate (Business License), as
referenced in the terms of the Permit.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.306. Assignment or transfer of franchise or permit.
   (a)   The Contractor shall not assign its rights or delegate or otherwise
transfer its obligations under an Exclusive or Limited Franchise granted
pursuant to this Chapter in whole or in part to any other person without the
prior written consent of the City. Any such assignment made without the consent
of the City shall result in the revocation of the Exclusive or Limited
Franchise. Permits issued under this Chapter may not be transferred or
assigned.
   (b)   For purposes of this section, "assignment" shall include, but not be
limited to:
   (1)   A sale, exchange or other transfer of substantially all of
Contractor's assets dedicated to service under this Chapter to a third party;
   (2)   A sale, exchange or other transfer of 30 percent or more of the
outstanding common stock of Contractor;
   (3)   Any reorganization, consolidation, merger, recapitalization, stock
issuance or re-issuance, voting trust, pooling agreement, escrow arrangement,
liquidation or other transaction to which Contractor or any of its shareholders
is a party which results in a change of ownership or control of thirty (30)
percent or more of the value or voting rights in the stock of Contractor;
   (4)   Any combination of the foregoing, whether or not in related or
contemporaneous transactions, which has the effect of any such transfer or
change of ownership. For purposes of this section, the term "proposed assignee"
shall refer to the proposed transferee(s) or other successor(s) in interest
pursuant to the assignment. Assignment shall not include the gifting or sale of
ownership interest to a spouse or lineal family members nor shall it include a
transfer by bequest to a spouse or lineal family members.
   (c)   If Contractor requests City Council consideration of and consent to an
assignment, the City Council may deny or approve such request. No request by
Contractor for consent to an assignment need be considered by the City Council
unless and until Contractor has met the following requirements:
   (1)   Contractor shall pay to City the cost for administrative staff time
and attorney fees to investigate the suitability of any proposed assignee, and
to review, evaluate and process any documentation required as a condition for
approving any such assignment. Contractors possessing a Limited Franchise who
request an assignment or transfer of Franchise must apply for a termination of
the Franchise and reapply for a new Franchise under a new name.
   (2)   Contractor shall furnish City Manager or designee with audited
financial statements of the proposed assignee's operations for the immediately
preceding three (3) operating years unless an exception is granted by the City
Manager or designee.
   (3)   Prior to consideration by the City Council, the Exclusive Franchise
Contractor shall furnish the City Manager or designee with satisfactory written
proof the proposed assignee has at least ten (10) years of solid waste
management experience on a scale equal to or exceeding the scale of operations
conducted by Contractor under this Chapter; that in the last five (5) years,
the proposed assignee has not received any citations or other censure from any
federal, state, or local agency due to any significant failure to comply with
federal, state, or local laws and that the assignee has provided the City
Manager or designee with a complete list of such citations and censures; that
the proposed assignee has at all times conducted its operations in an
environmentally safe and conscientious fashion; that the proposed assignee
conducts its solid waste management practices in accordance with sound waste
management practices in full compliance with all federal, state, and local laws
regulating the collection and disposal of solid waste, including hazardous
waste as identified in Title 22 of the California Code of Regulations; and, of
any other information required by the City Council to ensure the proposed
assignee can fulfill the terms of this Chapter in a timely, safe and effective
manner. Proposed assignees must be approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.307. Revocation.
   An Exclusive or Limited Franchise may be revoked at the option of the City
Council, per the terms of the Franchise Agreement. A Permit may be revoked at
the option of the City Manager or designee if he/she determines that the
Permittee has not complied with either the provisions of this Chapter, State
statute on solid waste collection, the terms of the Permit, or the City's rules
and regulations.
   Unless otherwise specifically stated in the Franchise Agreement, non-
compliance shall be handled as follows:
   The City Manager or designee shall issue a written notice of noncompliance
to Contractor or Permittee specifying the nature of Contractor or Permittee's
noncompliance and require compliance within 30 days. If the City Manager or
designee finds that, for health and safety reasons, compliance cannot be
delayed for 30 days, the City Manager or designee shall order that the
Contractor or Permittee shall immediately commence and diligently pursue
correction. If said noncompliance is not corrected within said 30 day period,
or if Contractor fails to immediately commence and diligently pursue correction
as directed, as the case may be, then the Contractor or Permittee shall be
given a minimum of five (5) days written notice of a hearing before the City
Manager or designee, at which time the City Manager or designee shall make
findings, and by written decision, either take no action, revoke or add
conditions to Contractor or Permittee's Franchise or Permit. Should revocation
be ordered, Contractor or Permittee shall be given a maximum of 90 days to
cease operations within the City and remove all containers in service.
   Within five (5) days of written notice of cancellation, Contractor or
Permittee may appeal the City Manager or designee's decision to the City
Council. Any appeal request shall state in full all grounds for appeal. Action
on the Contractor or Permittee's appeal shall be set on a City Council agenda;
however; such appeal shall not act as a stay on the ordered compliance. The
City Council shall announce its decision and thereafter adopt a resolution
setting forth such decision. All City decisions shall be served on Contractor
or Permittee in person or by certified return-request United States mail,
postage prepaid. Service by mail shall be deemed complete two (2) business days
after the date of mailing.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.308. Charges for franchise or permit service.
   (a)   Collection charge. A charge for the collection of Solid Waste, Organic
Waste, and Recyclable Materials shall be imposed by the City or Contractor on
the Service Recipient, or assigned responsible party of each Residential and
Commercial Premises or entity subscribing to Solid Waste, Organic Waste, and
Recyclable Materials collection service. The City Council shall establish fees,
by resolution, to be charged for the collection, transportation, and disposal
of Solid Waste, the collection, and processing of Organic Waste and Recyclable
Materials, and the service of planning and administering the City's solid waste
programs and franchises contemplated under this Chapter.
   (b)   Where allowed under this Chapter, Permittee shall only charge a fee
when the Exclusive Franchise hauler is unable, or declines, to collect and
recycle the Recyclable or Organic Materials. A list of such materials is
provided in the Exclusive Franchise Agreement and updated annually.
   (c)   Rate adjustments. Service rates shall be adjusted annually in
accordance with the procedures described in the Exclusive Franchise Agreement.
No fees shall be charged to Service Recipients other than those approved by
resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Article 4. Billings for Franchised Services
Sec. 6-2.401. Billings for franchised service.
   (a)   Billings and penalties. Each Service Recipient in the City shall be
billed periodically, and in accordance with the Franchise Agreement, by the
Contractor providing service at rates established by the City Council. Should
any Service Recipient fail, refuse or neglect to pay any such bill, a late
penalty may be added to the bill and the sum, together with any costs incurred
by the City or by the Contractor, may be recovered by either the City or the
Contractor, as provided by law. The amount of the late penalty will be
determined by the City Council and set by resolution.
   (b)   Billings by Contractor. The City shall not be responsible for the
collection of any sums due to the Contractor in providing said service, nor
does the City guarantee or warrant payment to the Contractor for said services
in any way whatsoever, except the City will assist the Contractor in placing an
assessment against the property for the unpaid fees in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter. Advance billing of Service Recipient shall not be
permitted more than 60 days in advance of delivery of collection service.
   (c)   Solid waste collection of delinquent accounts. Should the Service
Recipient fail or refuse to pay the fee assessed for the collection of Solid
Waste, Organic Waste, and Recyclable Materials according to the provisions
stated above, then the Contractor shall notify the City Manager or designee of
such refusal. Failure to pay may, except for the provisions hereof, result in
the non-collection of Solid Waste, Organic Waste, and Recyclable Materials,
which condition the City Council may determine and may declare to be a threat
to the public health, safety, and welfare, and which condition may be declared
to be, if permitted to exist, a public nuisance. Contractor shall continue to
collect Solid Waste, Organic Waste, and Recyclable Materials when directed to
do so by the City Manager or designee. In such cases, Contractor may seek
reimbursement from the City.
   (d)   Collect charges. All costs incurred by the City or Contractor shall be
charged against the property from which the Solid Waste, Organic Waste, or
Recyclable Materials were collected.
   (e)   Payment under protest. Any Service Recipient who has been billed for
service and desires to contest the extent, degree or reasonableness of the
charge billed, shall make payment of such charges under protest and, at the
same time, file a written statement of such protest with the Contractor, who
shall submit a copy of the protest to the City Manager or designee. Within 60
days after the date of filing, the City Manager or designee shall notify the
protesting customer of the findings and adjustment in the matter.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.402. Uniform City-wide rate.
   The City Council shall set uniform rates applicable to all areas of the City
for residential, commercial and industrial Solid Waste, Organic Waste, and
Recyclable Materials collection service for each Service Recipient class. Rates
shall be based on the type of service provided, type and quantity of waste
generated, the number, size and location of containers, frequency of
collection, and billing methods.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Article 5. Service Recipient Responsibilities
Sec. 6-2.501. Payment responsibility.
   Payment for service of Solid Waste, Organic Waste, and Recyclable Materials
collection from single-family/duplex, Multi-Family dwellings, Mixed-Use
dwellings, and all commercial and industrial accounts is an obligation of the
Service Recipient, regardless of any lease or possession held by another. In
the case of non-payment by the Service Recipient, the owner of the residential
unit, commercial, and industrial establishment shall be responsible for
payment.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.502. Collection containers.
   (a)   Residential Collection Containers. Residential Service Recipients
shall use only those Collection Containers provided by the Exclusive Franchise
Contractor and as herein specified for the accumulation and disposal of source
separated Solid Waste, Organic Waste, and Recyclable Materials. Service
Recipients shall maintain Collection Containers in a sanitary and functional
manner.
   (b)   Residential collection limits. The maximum number of Garbage
Collection Containers that can be placed for weekly residential collection by
an Exclusive Franchise Contractor is two carts, each with a capacity of no more
than 96 gallons, excluding source-separated Recyclable Materials and Organic
Waste. No residential Service Recipients shall set out, or cause to be set out,
for collection Solid Waste, Organic Waste, or Recyclable Materials other than
Solid Waste, Organic Waste, or Recyclable Materials originating at that
premises. The combined weight of a Residential Collection Container and its
contents shall not exceed the maximum weight limit of the Collection Container.
Container lids must be kept closed at all times except during the loading and
unloading process.
   (c)   Commercial Collection Containers. Commercial Service Recipients shall
use only Contractor-provided Collection Containers as herein specified for the
accumulation and disposal of source separated Solid Waste, Organic Waste, and
Recyclable Materials. The combined weight of a Commercial Collection Container
and its contents shall not exceed a weight that can be maneuvered safely by one
person and lifted by the Contractor's collection vehicle. Special handling
charges shall apply for overweight bins. Container lids must be kept closed at
all times except during the loading and unloading process.
   (d)   Temporary Containers for Limited Franchise Service. Service Recipients
may contract with Limited Franchise Contractor to provide Bins, Roll-offs, and/
or Drop Boxes for Residential and Commercial Service Units for the temporary
accumulation and disposal of source separated Solid Waste, Organic Waste, and
Recyclable Materials generated by short-term clean up, event, land clearing,
and Construction and Demolition projects.
   (e)   Filling of containers. No Service Recipient shall so fill any
container with Solid Waste, Organic Waste, or Recyclable Materials above the
top of the container to such an extent as to permit the contents of any
container to be strewn about or prevent lids from being closed. Material shall
not be compacted in the Collection Container to the extent that the material
cannot fall out of the container by its own weight when being serviced by
mechanical means by the Contractor's collection vehicle. Containers filled
beyond their stated weight capacity will not be serviced.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.503. Placement and maintenance of residential collection containers.
   Residential Service Recipients shall set out or place Collection Containers
for the collection of Solid Waste, Organic Waste, and Recyclable Materials by
the Exclusive Franchisee as follows:
   (a)   Proper location of Collection Containers. Collection Containers shall
be placed on the street against the curb, rolled curb, swale, or driveway
approach in front of premises where the Solid Waste, Organic Waste, or
Recyclable Materials originated or along the alley in the rear of the premises,
depending upon whether the prescribed collection route is along the street or
alley. The City or Contractor (with the authorization of the City) may alter
the placement location for containers as necessary for safety, construction or
other tenable reasons upon notice to Service Recipient. Any Collection
Container placed for collection in an alley shall be placed as close to the
property line as possible. Placement of Collection Containers for collection
shall not impede pedestrian or handicap accessibility on the public sidewalk or
right-of-way.
   (b)   Timing of placement and removal of Collection Containers. Collection
Containers may not be placed out for collection any earlier than 4:00 p.m. on
the day before the designated collection day for their route. All Collection
Containers shall be removed from public view before 8:00 a.m. the day after the
Collection Containers have been serviced. Collection Containers shall be stored
away from general public view at all other times.
   (c)   Responsibility for containers. Service Recipient shall be responsible
for Collection Containers on the premises and shall maintain the same in a
sanitary condition. If, after correct and timely placement of Collection
Containers for collection, the Collection Containers are not emptied and
contents removed on the date and time scheduled by the Exclusive Franchise
Contractor, Service Recipient should immediately notify the Contractor who
shall arrange for the collection and disposal or processing of the materials.
Exclusive Franchise Contractor must collect materials within 24 hours of
receipt of Service Recipient notification, weekends and Holidays excepted.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.504. Placement and responsibility for commercial collection
containers.
   Commercial Service Recipients shall set out or place Collection Containers
for the collection of Solid Waste, Organic Waste, and Recyclable Materials by
the Exclusive Franchisee as follows:
   (a)   Placement. Commercial Collection Containers must be stored in
designated enclosures that comply with all conditions set forth in the City's
Waste Enclosure Guidelines or as amended or placed elsewhere on the premises in
a location approved by the City Manager or designee if siting constraints
apply.
   (b)   Maintenance. Commercial Service Recipients shall be responsible for
the Collection Containers on the premises. Commercial Service Recipient must
maintain Collection Container enclosure in a sanitary condition and is
responsible for cleanup of material around the Collection Container, unless
such spillage is caused by the Contractor. If the Collection Containers are not
emptied and the contents removed on the date and time scheduled by the
Contractor, Service Recipient should immediately notify the Contractor who
shall arrange for the collection and disposal or processing of the materials.
Contractor must collect materials within 24 hours of receipt of Service
Recipient notification, weekends and Holidays excepted.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.505. Accumulation and duration of storage.
   It is unlawful for any person owning, managing or having control of a
premises to permit the accumulation of Solid Waste such that it emits offensive
odors, becomes or remains unsightly or a threat to the public health or safety,
or is a fire hazard, or to deposit, keep or accumulate, or permit or cause any
Solid Waste to be deposited, kept or accumulated, upon any property, lot,
parcel of land, vacant land or any public or private street, lane, alley or
driveway, except as provided in this Chapter, other than as follows, or as
exempted by the City Manager or designee:
   (a)   Solid Waste material. Solid Waste material shall not be accumulated or
stored for a period of time in excess of seven (7) days.
   (b)   Holidays. The above periods of time, which end in any week in which a
Holiday occurs, are extended one additional day.
   (c)   Unauthorized disposal. Other than as herein set forth in this Chapter,
it is unlawful for any person or legal entity to dump, deposit, release, spill,
leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, discharge, inject, bury or otherwise dispose of
or store Solid Waste on any private or public property within the City, except
in an authorized or permitted container or at an authorized or permitted Solid
Waste Collection facility. Storage of leaves, grass clippings, and other
Organic Material may be permitted for the purpose of Composting under such
circumstances and conditions as are established by the City Manager or
designee.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.506. Collection and recycling of commercial recyclable materials.
   Commercial Service Recipients that generate four (4) cubic yards or more per
week of Solid Waste, Recyclable, and Organic Materials in aggregate, shall
separate Recyclable Materials for collection by Franchise or Permittee for
recycling, and shall not dispose of such materials as Solid Waste, in
accordance with AB 341. Commercial Service Recipients who do not subscribe to
Commercial Recycling Service with a Commercial Franchise or Permittee may
utilize alternate methods for processing and diverting from landfill disposal
their Recyclable Materials, but shall verify compliance with AB 341 annually by
completing and submitting a City-provided compliance certification form.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.507. Collection and recycling of commercial organic materials.
   Commercial Service Recipients that generate two (2) cubic yards or more per
week of Solid Waste, Recyclable, and Organic Materials in aggregate, shall
separate Organic Materials for collection by Franchise or Permittee for
recycling, and shall not dispose of such materials as Solid Waste, in
accordance with AB 1826 and SB 1383. Commercial Service Recipients who do not
subscribe to Commercial Organics Recycling Service with a Commercial Franchise
or Permittee may utilize alternate methods for processing and diverting from
landfill disposal their Organic Materials, but shall verify compliance with AB
1826 and SB 1383 annually by completing and submitting a City-provided
compliance certification form.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.508. Burning or incineration of waste prohibited.
   It is unlawful for any person to cause or permit the burning or incineration
of any Solid Waste, Organic Waste, Recyclable Materials, Hazardous waste, or
medical waste within the City limits.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Article 6. Contractor and Permittee Responsibilities
Sec. 6-2.601. Collection.
   (a)   Residential Solid Waste, Organic Waste, and Recyclable Materials
Collection Service. As directed by City Manager or designee, residential
Exclusive Franchise Contractor shall collect and dispose of all Solid Waste and
collect and process source-separated Organic Waste and Recyclable Materials
generated at residential premises within the City and placed for collection,
not less than once per week, as scheduled, unless another collection program is
approved by the City Manager or designee. Exclusive Franchise Contractor may
collect Solid Waste, Organic Waste, and Recyclable Materials from residential
premises only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday, subject to review by the City Manager or designee. Collection
Containers shall be returned by Contractor to the collection point upright with
lids properly secured. Residential Service Recipients may make arrangements
with Exclusive Franchise Contractor to collect excess material and bulky waste;
extra charges may apply to this service as approved by resolution of the City
Council. White goods and ferrous metals shall be separated at the time of
collection so as not to become mixed with other Solid Waste to be landfilled.
Collected white goods shall be recycled to the maximum extent feasible and
Contractor shall comply with all provisions of the Franchise Agreement. Special
charges may apply to this service, as found in the fee schedule approved by
City Council.
   (b)   Commercial Solid Waste materials collection service. Exclusive
Franchise Contractor shall collect and dispose of Solid Waste generated at
Commercial Premises within the City and placed in a Collection Container for
collection from one to six (6) times per week as scheduled with each Commercial
Service Recipient. Exclusive Franchise Contractor may collect Solid Waste from
Commercial Premises between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday
through Saturday, except for Holidays, subject to review by the City Manager or
designee.
   (c)   Commercial Recyclable Materials and Organic Material collection and
processing service. Exclusive Franchise Contractor shall collect and process
those source-separated Recyclable Materials and Organic Waste materials
generated at Commercial Premises within the City which are placed in a
Collection Container for collection as scheduled with each Commercial Service
Recipient. Exclusive Franchise Contractor may collect Recyclable Materials and
Organic Materials from Commercial Premises between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, except for Holidays, subject to review by
the City Manager or designee. Exclusive Franchise Contractor must provide and
maintain its Commercial Recycling and Organic Waste Collection Service in a
manner designed to ensure that all Recyclable Materials and Organic Waste
collected are diverted from the landfill in accordance with AB 939, AB 1826, AB
1594, and SB 1383, and any subsequent or other Applicable Law. Commercial
Contractors must ensure that the Recyclable Materials and Organic Waste
collected are not disposed of in a landfill, except for residue resulting from
processing. Exclusive Franchise Contractor will notify Commercial Service
Recipients of the requirements to comply with the laws. Exclusive Franchise
Contractor must provide the necessary volume of Collection Service to
Commercial Service Units in order to be in full compliance with the law.
   (d)   Limited Franchise Collection Service. Temporary Bin and Roll-off
service shall be provided by a Limited Franchise. Limited Franchise Contractor
is entitled to place Bins and Drop Box containers and collect Solid Waste,
Organic Waste, and Recyclable Materials on a temporary service basis at the
premises within the City from which such Solid Waste, Organic Waste, and
Recyclable Materials originate. Land clearing, Construction and Demolition
projects, and residential or commercial short-term construction, vegetation
clearing, tree removal, event and cleanup projects would be typical types of
such temporary service. Construction and Demolition projects with an active
City building and/or grading permit may be serviced continually until
construction activities have been completed and/or a certificate of occupancy
has been issued by the City. Other temporary service shall be provided for a
maximum of 30 consecutive days per calendar year per account location. All
concrete, asphalt, construction materials, dirt, Green Waste, Wood Waste, and
other Organic and Recyclable Materials shall be diverted to the maximum extent
possible in accordance with AB 939, AB 341, AB 1826, AB 1594, SB 1383, and any
subsequent or other Applicable Law.
   (e)   Commercial Recycling Permit Collection Service. Subject to Permit
conditions, Commercial Recycling Permittee may collect and process source-
separated Organic Waste and Recyclable Materials that are generated at
Commercial Premises within the City. Collection shall occur between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, subject to review by the
City Manager or designee. Permittee must ensure that all Organic Waste and
Recyclable Materials collected are diverted from the landfill in compliance
with AB 939, AB 341, AB 1826, AB 1594, and SB 1383, and any subsequent or other
Applicable Law. Permittee must ensure that all Organic Waste and/or Recyclable
Materials collected are not disposed of in a landfill, except for any non-
recyclable residue resulting from processing.
   (f)   Special collection provisions. Special collection provisions shall be
as follows:
   (1)   Unless otherwise agreed to, the Contractor shall not be required to
collect material in excess of the weekly limit of two 96-gallon carts of
Garbage for residential premises, medical or infectious waste, liquid waste,
hot ashes, dead animals, abandoned vehicles, explosive substances, radioactive
materials, or any material defined by Federal, State, or local law as hazardous
waste.
   When materials referred to in subsection (f)(1) above are not collected,
Contractor shall place a tag on the Collection Container which shall state the
reason for refusal to collect such materials, giving references to the Code or
to the section of rules and regulations which has been violated and which gives
grounds for refusal.
   Contractor shall keep a record listing the address of the waste identified
in subsection (f)(1), and this record shall be submitted to the City Manager or
designee as part of the annual report.
   (2)   Animal waste. Animal waste, with the exception of domestic pet waste,
shall not be placed in containers for regular collection and disposal, but
shall be removed by special arrangement with the Franchise hauler at the
Service Recipient's expense, in accordance with all Federal, State and local
laws and regulations. For purposes of this section, horses, non-domesticated
animals, and livestock are not considered pets.
   (g)   Cleanup of illegal dumping. Each Contractor holding an Exclusive
Franchise shall respond to all calls from the City Manager or designee
regarding spilled or illegally dumped waste, including bulky materials, during
regular work hours and, in emergencies, at night, and on weekends in accordance
with the terms of the Exclusive Franchise Agreement. Contractor shall collect
and deliver such waste to the appropriate disposal or processing site. In such
cases, Contractor may seek reimbursement from the City as determined by the
Exclusive Franchise Agreement.
   (h)   Collection/spillage. Contractor and/or Permittee shall exercise all
reasonable care and diligence in collecting Solid Waste, Organic Waste, and
Recyclable Materials to prevent spilling, scattering or dropping such waste and
materials and shall immediately, at the time of occurrence, cleanup any
spillage whether or not Contractor or Permittee has caused the litter.
Contractor shall discuss instances of repeated spillage not caused by the
Contractor directly with the responsible Service Recipient and will report such
instances to the City Manager or designee. The City Manager or designee will
attempt to rectify such situations with the Service Recipient if Contractor has
already attempted to do so without success.
   (i)   Supervision of Contractors by City. The City Manager or designee shall
supervise the collection and disposal of Solid Waste and collection and
processing of Organic Waste and Recyclable Materials by Contractor as follows:
   (1)   The City Manager or designee, within the terms and conditions of this
Chapter or any agreement entered into pursuant to the provisions of this
Chapter, may establish the days and hours within which collection services may
occur and may change the same from time to time. When such days and hours are
established or changed, Contractor shall give 30 days written notice thereof to
all affected residential and/or commercial and industrial Service Recipients.
   (2)   In all cases where the City Manager or designee shall find that
practical difficulty exists in complying with the requirements of this Chapter
as to the placement of Solid Waste for collection by the Contractor, the City
Manager or designee shall designate where such Solid Waste shall be placed or
kept for collection by the Contractor and the conditions under which shall be
collected.
   (3)   The City Manager or designee, with City Council approval, shall make
such rules, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter or the
agreements or permits between the City and Contractor, as may be necessary,
reasonable and proper to affect the expedient, economical and efficient
collection and disposal of Solid Waste and collection and processing of Organic
Waste and Recyclable Materials by Contractor.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.602. Collection containers.
   (a)   General. As directed by the City Manager or designee, Contractor shall
provide Residential and Commercial Service Recipients Collection Containers of
sufficient number and capacity for the collection, removal and disposal of
Solid Waste, Organic Waste, and Recyclable Materials. Collection Containers
shall be water-tight, constructed of a material of suitable strength and
durability, shall be tight-seamed, shall incorporate appropriate labelling and
use of recycled content to the maximum extent possible, and shall comply with
the requirements of AB 939, AB 341, AB 1826, AB 1594, SB 1016, SB 1383, and any
other applicable law.
   (b)   Commercial Collection Containers. Contractor shall provide Collection
Containers to occupants of Commercial Premises which are constructed of metal
or heavy plastic, watertight and of sufficient strength to prevent the
container from being broken under ordinary conditions of use and possess a fly-
tight lid (Bins and Carts only) constructed of metal or heavy plastic, so as to
minimize the intrusion of rainwater and minimize odor. Collection Containers
shall be constructed of noncombustible material and provided with a
noncombustible metal or plastic lid and approved by the Fire Department or its
representative as providing adequate protection against fire hazard. At request
of the Service Recipient, Contractor shall provide a container locking
mechanism at rates established by the City Council.
   (c)   Collection Containers placed on private property shall not require a
City Encroachment Permit as described in the City's Municipal Code. Collection
Containers placed in the public right-of-way shall require an Encroachment
Permit and be restricted to the following:
   (1)   Collection Containers may only be placed where vehicles can legally
park.
   (2)   Placement is restricted to any location on the street right-of-way
that has a slope less than seven percent (7%).
   (3)   Collection Containers shall be identified by Contractor's name and
phone number on at least two (2) sides. Identification shall be visible from
the street in letters a minimum of two inches (2") in height.
   (4)   Collection Containers shall be adequately reflectorized with a minimum
of ten square inches of plastic or reflective sheeting on each corner at a
height between 15" and 60 inches from the ground.
   (5)   Collection Containers shall only be placed at locations permissible by
this Chapter and with approval of the Service Recipient requesting said
service.
   (6)   Collection Containers shall be left in residential areas no more than
30 consecutive days per calendar year at a single location unless a time
extension is granted by City Manager or designee, or unless it is for the
purpose of a Construction and Demolition project with an active City building
and/or grading permit in which case it may be left until construction
activities have been completed and/or a certificate of occupancy has been
issued by the City.
   (d)   Maintenance. Contractor shall maintain all Collection Containers on a
regular basis so as to be functional and present a clean appearance. Within
five (5) work days of being notified of the existence of graffiti, Contractor
shall arrange for removal, weekends and Holidays excepted.
   (e)   Commercial Container replacement. Exclusive Franchise Contractor shall
repair or replace, at no additional cost to Service Recipient, damaged
Commercial Collection Containers, and/or Waste Enclosures including gates which
are damaged as a result of service provided by Contractor for regular Solid
Waste service. Exclusive Franchise Contractor shall remove and/or replace
within five (5) work days of written notice from the City Manager or designee,
weekends and Holidays excepted, any Collection Container which has been
determined to be unsatisfactory for service by the City Manager or designee, at
no cost to the Service Recipient. If such removal is not accomplished within
five (5) work days of written notice, weekends and Holidays excepted, the
Contractor further agrees the City Manager or designee may remove and dispose
of said Collection Container and the cost of same shall be reimbursed to the
City by the Contractor, less any salvage value received.
   (f)   Signage. All Collection Containers shall be labeled with adequate
signage describing acceptable materials and the unacceptability of hazardous
waste and contaminants (in the case of Recycling and Organics Collection
Containers). Container size, color, design and construction content shall be
approved by the City Manager or designee and shall comply with the requirements
of AB 341, SB 1383, and any other Applicable Law.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.603. Processing, disposal and transfer.
   (a)   Organic Waste and Recyclable Materials processing. Contractor shall
process, broker, or deliver Organic Waste and/or Recyclable Materials to a
legally permitted processing facility at Contractor's expense, and in a manner
satisfactory to the City and in accordance with all Federal, State, and local
laws and regulations. Contractor shall not dispose of any material collected
from residential, commercial, or industrial Service Recipients in a landfill
which it has agreed to recycle or compost, without advance written notice to
and approval from the City Manager or designee.
   (b)   Disposal. Contractor shall arrange for, and dispose of, collected
Solid Waste at a City-approved disposal site in a manner satisfactory to the
City and in accordance with all Federal, State and local laws and regulations
at the contractor's expense. The City shall not be liable for the disposal of
the collected waste.
   (c)   Burial or dumping. Except as otherwise expressly allowed by this
Chapter, it is unlawful for any person to bury or dump Solid Waste or
Recyclable Materials within the City at any time, or dump Organic Waste within
the City.
   (d)   Transfer. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent the
transfer of Solid Waste, Organic Waste, or Recyclable Materials within the City
limits from collection to transfer vehicles, provided such operation shall not
be conducted in the public right-of-way or in violation of any federal, state
or local law or regulation.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.604. Contractor's properties, facilities and equipment.
   (a)   General. The following general requirements shall be met by the
Contractor:
   (1)   Contractor shall maintain all of its properties, facilities, and
equipment used in providing service under this Chapter in a safe, neat, clean
and operable condition at all times. Facilities and office equipment shall be
appropriate for effective and timely data management and efficient service
operation.
   (2)   All solid waste collection operations shall be conducted as quietly as
possible and shall not exceed 75 decibels at a distance of 25' feet from the
vehicle, measured at an elevation of five feet (5') above the ground level and
shall conform to applicable Federal, State, and local regulations.
   (b)   Specifications and restrictions on collection vehicles. Contractor
shall have available on collection days sufficient back-up vehicles for each
type of collection vehicle used (i.e., rear-end load, side load, front-end
load, or roll-off) to respond to service complaints and emergencies.
   The following requirements and restrictions shall apply to collection
vehicles:
   (1)   The transportation of all Solid Waste, Organic Waste, and Recyclable
Materials shall be in a leak-proof and fly-proof Collection Container or in
leak-proof vehicle bodies or compartments fitted with sliding or hinged covers
which shall be kept closed at all times, except one cover at a time may be open
during loading.
   (2)   All loaded Roll-Off containers shall have a minimum covering of a
clean tarpaulin which shall be securely placed over the entire load and tied
down during transportation.
   (3)   All trucks or vehicles used for service in the City shall be painted
the colors as approved by the City Manager or designee. Contractor's name,
telephone number and unique vehicle identification number shall be located on
each side and the rear of each collection vehicle and shall be a minimum of
four inches (4") in height and in a contrasting color with the background to
highlight the information to the public, unless other identification methods
are approved by City Manager or designee.
   (4)   Each vehicle to be used within the City shall be inspected annually or
at will, as designated by the City Manager or designee, and shall conform to
all provisions of the California Vehicle Code, City of Thousand Oaks Municipal
Code and be in satisfactory mechanical and presentable condition free of
noxious odors. Contractor shall keep on record and have available for City
review, evidence of vehicle inspections conducted. The City Manager or
designee's decision as to the serviceability of each vehicle shall be final.
   (5)   All vehicles used for transporting Solid Waste, Organic Waste, and
Recyclable Materials shall not exceed the allowable legal load limits.
   (6)   All vehicles used for collecting or transporting Solid Waste, Organic
Waste, and Recyclable Materials shall be equipped with an audible warning
device that is activated when the vehicle is backing up.
   (7)   The City Manager or designee shall require the Contractor to remove
from service or repair those vehicles that do not comply with these
specifications.
   (c)   Use of vehicles. The following shall apply to the use of vehicles for
Solid Waste, Organic Waste, and Recyclable Materials collection:
   (1)   No person shall leave trucks loaded with Solid Waste, Organic Waste,
and Recyclable Materials parked for more than a 24-hour period on the City
streets.
   (2)   Each vehicle of the Contractor shall at all times have in the cab the
registration of the truck, a five (5) pound fire extinguisher certified by the
California State Fire Marshal, a certificate of insurance card and an
identification card with the name of whom to contact in case of an accident.
Each vehicle shall also be equipped with two-way radio unless an exception is
made in writing by the City Manager or designee.
   (3)   Contractor shall inspect each vehicle daily to ensure all equipment is
operating properly. Vehicles that are not operating properly shall be taken out
of service until they are repaired and do operate properly. The City Manager or
designee's decision as to the serviceability of each vehicle shall be final.
   (4)   Contractor shall perform all maintenance functions in accordance with
the manufacturer's specifications and schedule.
   (5)   Contractor shall keep accurate records of all vehicle maintenance,
according to date and mileage, and shall make such records available to the
City Manager or designee upon request.
   (6)   Contractor shall furnish the City Manager or designee a written
inventory of all vehicles, including collection vehicles, used in providing
service, and shall update the inventory annually.
   (7)   If required by State law, California Highway Patrol inspection reports
shall be provided for each collection vehicle on an annual basis and shall be
submitted with the annual report.
   (8)   Contractor shall clean all vehicles inside and out at least once each
week when in use or when necessary at the discretion of the City Manager or
designee.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.605. Contractor's employees.
   Contractor shall employ only competent, qualified, sober and drug-free
personnel who can effectively communicate and serve the public in a courteous,
professional, helpful, and impartial manner.
   (a)   Nondiscrimination. Contractor shall hire and promote with equal
opportunity to all without regard to sex, sexual orientation, age, race, color,
religious creed, national origin, ancestry, political affiliation, marital
status, disability, or other non-merit factors.
   Contractor shall operate in accordance with the Immigration Reform Act of
1986 and verify that once an employment offer has been made, that each employee
has written proof of his/her right to work in the United States. A copy of the
employee's State of California driver license and social security card must be
submitted to the Contractor prior to employment and shall be kept on file for
the duration of the person's employment and for two (2) years thereafter.
   (b)   Americans with Disabilities Act. Contractor shall comply with all
provisions of Title 24 of Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) prohibiting
employment discrimination against qualified individuals with disabilities.
   (c)   Licenses. Any employee driving Contractor's vehicles shall, at all
times, have in his or her possession a valid and legally appropriate vehicle
operator's license issued by the State of California.
   (d)   Training. Contractor shall comply with all Federal, State and local
regulations relating to the training and the documentation of training of
personnel who operate vehicles or other equipment. Contractor shall train its
collection employees to identify, and not to collect hazardous waste or
infectious waste that is placed in Solid Waste Collection Containers.
   (e)   Uniforms. Contractor holding an Exclusive Franchise shall require each
employee to wear clean uniforms bearing the Contractor's name when engaged in
collection service on public streets. Contractor's employees who normally come
into direct contact with the public, including drivers, must bear some means of
individual photographic identification such as a name tag or identification
card. Contractor shall be responsible for maintaining uniforms in a clean, neat
and well-mended appearance.
   (f)   Supervision. Contractor shall designate at least one qualified
employee as supervisor of field operations within the City. The field
supervisor will conduct regular field investigation of collection operations,
including responding to complaints. Contractor shall also provide an alternate
contact when the field supervisor is absent.
   (g)   Identification. Contractor shall provide collection employees with
company identification materials which shall be available to the public upon
request. The City may, at its option, require fingerprinting of the
Contractor's employees whose service will cause them to enter onto or work in
close proximity to private property.
   (h)   Gratuities. Contractor's employees may not accept gratuities of any
kind.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.606. Inquiries, complaints and complaint reimbursement.
   (a)   Office location. Exclusive Franchise Contractor shall provide a local
office within Ventura County, or as approved by the City Manager or designee.
   (b)   Telephone service. Exclusive Franchise Contractor shall maintain a
toll-free telephone service for the entire City. A 24-hour emergency number
shall be made available to City Manager or designee.
   (c)   Prompt response. Contractor shall be responsible for the prompt and
courteous attention to, and prompt and reasonable resolution of, all Service
Recipients complaints. Contractor shall respond to all complaints from Service
Recipients within 24 hours, weekends and Holidays excluded.
   (d)   Complaint log. Contractor shall maintain a log of all complaints
received in a format approved by the City Manager or designee. The log shall
include, but is not limited to, the date, time, address of premises,
description of complaint and method of resolution. Contractor shall submit a
quarterly summary of such log to the City Manager or designee in a City-
approved format.
   (e)   Complaint reimbursement. Contractor shall reimburse the City for all
labor and materials expended by the City if the City is required to assist in
resolving complaints from Service Recipients concerning Contractor service. In
such cases, the City shall invoice Contractor for such costs, indicating the
name and address of the Service Recipient, nature of complaint, amount of time
spent, hourly rates for employees involved, and materials required to resolve
the complaint.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.607. Maintenance and inspection of records.
   (a)   Contractor shall keep and preserve during the term of the Franchise or
Permit, full, complete and accurate records which shall be subject to review
and reproduction by the City Manager or designee.
   (b)   Contractor shall make available to the City Manager or designee for
examination the records maintained pursuant to this section as may be necessary
to assist the City in meeting its obligations under AB 939, AB 1826, SB 1383,
and any subsequent applicable laws.
   (c)   The City Manager or designee shall have the right to audit, inspect or
review the specific documents or records required pursuant to this Chapter, or
any other similar records or reports of Contractor which it shall deem, at its
sole discretion, necessary to evaluate annual reports, rate review
applications, and contractor's performance review.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.608. Hazardous waste notification.
   Contractor shall be responsible to carry out its duties imposed by law,
agreement and/or permit, to notify all agencies with jurisdiction, including
the California Department of Toxic Substances Control and local emergency
response providers, and, if appropriate, the National Response Center, of
reportable quantities of abandoned hazardous waste, found or observed by
Contractor's officer's agents or employees anywhere within the City, including,
but not limited to, on, in, under or about City property, and other publicly
and privately owned properties. Contractor will also immediately notify the
City Manager or designee of each incident or occurrence and under or pursuant
to any Federal, State, or local laws to protect, hold harmless and indemnify
the City and their respective appointed and elected officers, employees,
volunteers, and agents.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.609. Privacy.
   (a)   Contractor shall strictly observe and protect the rights of privacy of
Service Recipient. Information identifying individual Service Recipients, or
the composition or contents of a Service Recipient's refuse or recyclables
materials container shall not be revealed to any person, governmental or
private agency or company, unless upon the authority of a court of law, by
statute, or upon written authorization of the Service Recipient. This provision
shall not be construed to preclude Contractor from providing such data to City
for compliance monitoring or tracking purposes, waste data analysis, service
transition, or from preparing, participating in, or assisting in the
preparation of waste characterization studies, waste stream analyses or other
reporting which may be required by State law or as otherwise requested by the
City Manager or designee.
   (b)   Contractor shall not market or distribute lists containing any or all
the following information: name, address, telephone number, or email addresses
of Service Recipients.
   (c)   The rights accorded Service Recipients pursuant to this Chapter shall
be in addition to any other privacy rights accorded Service Recipients pursuant
to Federal, State or local law.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.610. Damage by contractor or permittee.
   If Contractor's employees or subcontractors cause any injury, damage or loss
to City property, including but not limited to City streets or curbs, excluding
normal wear and tear, Contractor shall be liable and must reimburse City for
City's cost of repairing or replacing such injury, damage or loss. Such
reimbursement is not in derogation of any right of City to be indemnified by
Contractor for any such injury, damage or loss. With the prior written approval
of City, Contractor may repair the damage at Contractor's sole cost and
expense. Any injury, damage or loss to private property caused by the negligent
or willful acts or omissions of Contractor to private property must be repaired
or replaced by Contractor at Contractor's sole expense. Disputes between
Contractor and its Service Recipients or private property owners as to damage
to private property are civil matters and complaints of damage will be referred
to Contractor as a matter within its sole responsibility.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Article 7. Waste Enclosure Requirements
Sec. 6-2.701. Commercial, multi-family (MFD-C), and mixed-use dwelling
enclosures.
   All Solid Waste, Recyclable Materials, and Organics Materials Collection
Containers serving Commercial, Mixed-Use Dwelling, and Multi-Family (MFD-C)
locations that utilize a centralized collection service are provided by the
Exclusive Franchise Contractor, and must be screened and stored in a Waste
Enclosure at all times except when serviced by the Contractor. Waste Enclosures
must be consistent with the City's Waste Enclosure Design Guidelines and comply
with the following requirements:
   (a)   The Waste Enclosure design and finish must be architecturally similar
to the building it serves and its location approved by the City. Outdoor Waste
Enclosures shall be covered with a roof and the style and composition of the
roof shall be determined by the City.
   (b)   The design of the enclosure must be large enough to accommodate
Collection Containers for source-separated Solid Waste, Organic Waste, and
Recyclable Materials. The minimum interior dimensions of the three-bin
enclosure shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet deep, 20 feet wide when viewed
from the front, and nine (9) feet high at the lowest point inside the
structure.
   (c)   Gates providing access and egress for employees shall be equipped with
self-closing hinges.
   (d)   Two (or more) "Recycle" signs and two (or more) "Compostables" signs
shall be purchased from the City of Thousand Oaks Public Works Department at a
cost stipulated in the current City User Fees Manual, and shall be posted in
conspicuous places on the enclosure (as per Ordinance No 1677-NS). At least one
"Recycle" sign and one "Compostables" sign shall be posted on the access/egress
gates at or above waist level, and one "Recycle" sign and one "Compostables"
sign shall be posted on the back wall at or slightly below "eye level."
   (e)   Compactor units that are self-contained and watertight are not
required to be placed inside Waste Enclosures provided that the surrounding
area is kept clear of litter and debris.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.702. Location requirements for outdoor waste enclosures.
   (a) Whenever practical, Waste Enclosures shall not be visible from a public
street or right-of-way. In those instances when it is not possible to locate
the Waste Enclosure at the back of the parcel and/or behind the main structure,
the enclosure shall be situated in such a manner that the gates shall not be
readily visible from a public street or right-of-way.
   (b)   If conditions are such that the Waste Enclosure must be built where it
will be visible from the street, the architectural design and decor must be the
same as the structure it serves.
   (c)   Adequate back-up distance shall be provided for the Contractor's
service vehicles. The required distance varies depending on circumstances, so
developers are required to consult with Exclusive Franchise Hauler and obtain
approval prior to submitting building plans to the City.
   In relation to the building served:
   (d)   Resident access to Waste Enclosures serving MFD-C or MXD developments
via walk-up shall be located no further than 150 feet from the front door of
the furthest residential unit served as measured along the accessible path of
travel. Waste Enclosures serving all other commercial buildings shall be
located no further than 250 feet from the nearest point of the building served.
   (e)   Haulers must have access to parking garages or locked gates without
restriction or prior notification. The building occupants may bring out
containers for collection, but they must meet timing and placement requirements
under Sections
6-2.503 and
6-2.504 of this Ordinance.
   (f)   The path between the building served and the enclosure will be used by
those that empty the waste containers in the building. The path of travel shall
be sufficiently accessible for the building occupants and users. If the
enclosure must be handicapped accessible, an accessible route of travel from
the building will be required, per California Building Code.
   (g)   Collection Containers cannot be placed within five (5) feet of
combustible walls, openings, or combustible roof eave lines unless the
enclosure is protected by an approved automatic fire sprinkler system. This
restriction does not apply to carts or cans. Containers cannot be placed under
stairways unless the stairway is fire rated for one (1) hour or protected by
automatic fire sprinklers.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.703. Location requirements for parking garages and indoor waste
enclosures.
   (a)   Overhead clearances must follow City Waste Enclosure design guidelines
in order to be serviced by waste collection vehicles.
   (b)   Resident access to Waste Enclosures serving MFD-C or MXD developments
via chutes or walk-up shall be located no further than 150 feet from the front
door of the furthest residential unit served as measured along the accessible
path of travel. Waste Enclosures serving all other commercial buildings shall
be located no further than 250 feet from the nearest point of the building
served.
   (c)   Haulers must have access to parking garages or locked gates without
restriction or prior notification. The building occupants may bring out
containers for collection, but they must meet timing and placement requirements
under Sections
6-2.503 and
6-2.504 of this Chapter.
   (d)   For indoor locations where organics bins are located and contain food
waste, the trash/recycling area requires the following additional features for
sanitation:
   (1)   Fully enclosed room (including ceiling) within the parking garage/
building.
   (2)   Walls and floor constructed with a smooth finish that can be easily
cleaned.
   (3)   Mechanical ventilation, or with screened vent openings to the
outdoors.
   (4)   Floor drain with proper drainage slope that connects to the sanitary
sewer.
   (5)   Spigot with hose for cleaning.
   (e)   An indoor trash/recycling area that serves any of the following
occupancies will require the additional features listed in (d) above:
   (1)   Caterer or food production facility.
   (2)   Coffee shop or restaurant.
   (3)   Day care, preschool, and/or K-12 school.
   (4)   Grocery store or market with perishable items.
   (5)   Homeless shelter.
   (6)   Residential.
   (7)   Nursing care facility.
   (8)   Any facility with a commercial kitchen.
   (9)   Any similar facility that has the same potential for odor and/or
nuisance.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Article 8. Organic Waste Requirements
Sec. 6-2.801. Requirements for single-family and MFD-I organic waste
generators.
   Single-Family and Multi-Family residents with individual cart service (MFD-
I) who generate Organic Waste shall comply with the following requirements
except generators who meet the Self-Hauler requirements in Section
6-2.808 of this Chapter:
   (a)   Shall subscribe to Organic Waste collection services for all Organic
Waste generated as described below in Section (b). The City or its designee
shall have the right to review the number and size of a generator's containers
to evaluate adequacy of capacity provided for each type of collection service
for proper separation of materials and containment of materials; and,
generators shall adjust their service level for their collection services as
requested by the City or its designee. Generators may additionally manage their
Organic Waste by preventing or reducing their Organic Waste, managing Organic
Waste on site, and/or using a Community Composting site pursuant to 14 CCR
Section 18984.9(c).
   (b)   Shall participate in the City's Organic Waste collection service
program by placing designated materials in designated containers as described
below, and shall not place Prohibited Container Contaminants in Collection
Containers.
   (1)   Generator shall place Source Separated Organic Waste, including Food
Waste, in the Organics Container; Source Separated Recyclable Materials in the
Recycling Container; and non-recyclable Solid Waste in the Garbage Container.
Generator shall not place non-recyclable Solid Waste into the Organics or
Recycling Containers.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.802. Requirements for commercial service recipients.
   Commercial Service Recipients, including Mixed-Use Dwellings (MXD) but
excluding MFD-C service recipients, who are covered separately in
6-2.803, shall comply with the following requirements except generators that
meet the Self-Hauler requirements in Section
6-2.808 of this Chapter:
   (a)   Subscribe to three-container collection services and comply with
requirements of those services as described below in Section (b). The City or
its designee shall have the right to review the number and size of a
generator's containers and frequency of collection to evaluate adequacy of
capacity provided for each type of collection service for proper separation of
materials and containment of materials; and, Commercial Service Recipients
shall adjust their service level for their collection services as needed or as
requested by the City or its designee.
   (b)   Participate in the City's Organic Waste collection service program by
placing designated materials in designated containers as described below.
   (1)   A three-container collection service (Garbage, Recycle, Organics).
   (A)   Generator shall place Source Separated Organic Waste, including Food
Waste, in the Organics Container; Source Separated Recyclable Materials in the
Recycling Container; and non-recyclable Solid Waste in the Garbage Container.
Generator shall not place non-recyclable Solid Waste into the Organics or
Recycling Containers.
   (c)   Supply and allow access to adequate number, size and location of
Collection Containers with sufficient labels or colors (conforming with SB
1383) for employees, contractors, tenants, and customers, consistent with
City's solid waste collection service or, if self-hauling, per the Self-Hauler
requirements of Section 6-2.808.
   (d)   Businesses must provide containers for the collection of Source
Separated Organic Waste and Source Separated Recyclable Materials in all indoor
and outdoor areas where disposal containers are provided for customers, for
materials generated by that business, in accordance with AB 827. Such
containers do not need to be provided in restrooms. If a Business does not
generate any of the materials that would be collected in one type of container,
then the Business does not have to provide that particular container in all
areas where disposal containers are provided for customers. Pursuant to 14 CCR
Section 18984.9(b), the containers provided by the business shall have either:
   (1)   A body or lid that conforms with the container colors provided through
the collection service provided by the City, with either lids conforming to the
color requirements or bodies conforming to the color requirements or both lids
and bodies conforming to color requirements of SB 1383. A Business is not
required to replace functional containers, including containers purchased prior
to January 1, 2022, that do not comply with the requirements of the subsection
prior to the end of the useful life of those containers, or prior to January 1,
2036, whichever comes first.
   (2)   Container labels that include language or graphic images, or both,
indicating the primary material accepted and the primary materials prohibited
in that container, or containers with imprinted text or graphic images that
indicate the primary materials accepted and primary materials prohibited in the
container. Pursuant 14 CCR Section 18984.8, the container labeling requirements
are required on new containers commencing January 1, 2022.
   (e)   To the extent practical through education, training, inspection, and/
or other measures, prohibit employees from placing materials in a container not
designated for those materials per the City's solid waste collection service
or, if self-hauling, per the Self-Hauler requirements of Section
6-2.808.
   (f)   Periodically, as directed by the City or its designee, inspect
Recycling Containers, Organics Containers, and Garbage Containers for
contamination and inform employees if containers are contaminated and of the
requirements to keep contaminants out of those containers pursuant to 14 CCR
Section 18984.9(b)(3).
   (g)   Annually provide information to employees, contractors, tenants, and
customers about Organic Waste Recovery requirements and about proper sorting of
Source Separated Organic Waste and Source Separated Recyclable Materials.
   (h)   Provide education information before or within 14 days of occupation
of the premises to new tenants that describes requirements to keep Source
Separated Organic Waste and Source Separated Recyclable Materials separate from
Solid Waste and the location of containers and the rules governing their use at
each property.
   (i)   Provide or arrange access for City or its Contractor to their
properties during all Inspections conducted in accordance with Section
6-2.809 of this ordinance to confirm compliance with the requirements of this
Chapter.
   (j)   If a Commercial Service Recipient wants to self-haul, they shall meet
the Self-Hauler requirements in Section
6-2.808 of this ordinance.
   (k)   Nothing in this Section prohibits a Commercial Service Recipient from
preventing or reducing waste generation, managing Organic Waste on site, or
using a Community Composting site pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18984.9(c).
   (l)   Commercial Service Recipients that are Tier One or Tier Two Commercial
Edible Food Generators shall comply with Food Recovery requirements, pursuant
to Section
6-2.805.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.803. Requirements for multi-family dwellings with centralized service
(MFD-C).
   Property owner in Multi-Family Residential Dwellings with centralized bin
service (MFD-C) shall comply with the following requirements except generators
that meet the Self-Hauler requirements in Section
6-2.808 of this ordinance:
   (a)   Subscribe to three-container collection services and comply with
requirements of those services as described below in Section (b). The City or
its designee shall have the right to review the number and size of a
generator's containers and frequency of collection to evaluate adequacy of
capacity provided for each type of collection service for proper separation of
materials and containment of materials; and, Service Recipients shall adjust
their service level for their collection services as needed or as requested by
the City or its designee.
   (b)   Tenants in MFD-C complexes shall participate in the City's Organic
Waste collection service program by placing designated materials in designated
containers as described below.
   (1)   A three-container collection service (garbage, recycle, organics)
   (A)   Generator shall place Source Separated Organic Waste, including Food
Waste, in the Organics Container; Source Separated Recyclable Materials in the
Recycling Container; and non-recyclable Solid Waste in the Garbage Container.
Generator shall not place non-recyclable Solid Waste into the Organics or
Recycling Containers.
   (c)   To the extent practical through education, training, inspection, and/
or other measures, property manager shall prohibit tenants from placing
materials in a container not designated for those materials per the City's
solid waste collection service or, if self-hauling, per the Self-Hauler
requirements of Section
6-2.808.
   (d)   Periodically, as directed by the City or its designee, property
manager shall inspect Recycling Containers, Organics Containers, and Garbage
Containers for contamination and inform tenants if containers are contaminated
and of the requirements to keep contaminants out of those containers pursuant
to 14 CCR Section 18984.9(b)(3).
   (e)   Annually provide information to tenants about requirements of this
ordinance and about proper sorting of Source Separated Organic Waste and Source
Separated Recyclable Materials.
   (f)   Provide education information before or within 14 days of occupation
of the premises to new tenants that describes requirements to keep Source
Separated Organic Waste and Source Separated Recyclable Materials separate from
Solid Waste and the location of containers and the rules governing their use at
each property.
   (g)   Provide or arrange access for City or its Contractor to their
properties during all Inspections conducted in accordance with Section 6-2.809
of this ordinance to confirm compliance with the requirements of this Chapter.
   (h)   If a MFD-C generator wants to self-haul, they shall meet the Self-
Hauler requirements in Section
6-2.808 of this Chapter.
   (i)   Nothing in this Section prohibits a generator from preventing or
reducing waste generation, managing Organic Waste on site, or using a Community
Composting site pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18984.9(c).
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.804. Waivers for generators.
   (a)   De Minimis Waivers. The City may waive a Commercial Service
Recipient's obligation, including MFD-C and Mixed-Use Dwellings, to comply with
some or all of the Organic Waste requirements of this ordinance if the
Commercial Service Recipient provides documentation that the location generates
below a certain amount of Organic Waste material as described in SB 1383 and
item (a)(2) below. Commercial Service Recipients requesting a de minimis waiver
shall:
   (1)   Submit a "Request for Waiver" application available from the City or
Contractor specifying the services that they are requesting a waiver from and
provide documentation as noted in item (a)(2) below.
   (2)   Provide documentation that either:
   (A)   The Commercial Service Recipient's total Solid Waste collection
service is two cubic yards or more per week and Organic Waste comprises less
than 20 gallons per week of the business' total waste; or,
   (B)   The Commercial Service Recipient's total Solid Waste collection
service is less than two cubic yards per week and Organic Waste comprises less
than 10 gallons per week of the business' total waste.
   (3)   Notify City if circumstances change such that Commercial Service
Recipient's Organic Waste exceeds threshold required for waiver, in which case
waiver will be rescinded.
   (4)   Provide written verification of eligibility for de minimis waiver
annually, if City has approved de minimis waiver.
   (b)   Physical Space Waivers. The City may waive a Commercial Service
Recipient's or property owner's obligations (including MFD-C and Mixed-Use
Dwellings) to comply with some or all of the Recyclable Materials and/or
Organic Waste collection service requirements if the City has evidence from its
own staff, Contractor, licensed architect, or licensed engineer demonstrating
that the premises lacks adequate space for the collection containers required
for compliance with the Organic Waste collection requirements of this Chapter.
   A Commercial Service Recipient or property owner may request a physical
space waiver through the following process:
   (1)   Submit a "Request for Waiver" application available from the City or
Contractor specifying the type(s) of collection services for which they are
requesting a compliance waiver.
   (2)   Provide documentation that the premises lacks adequate space for
Recyclable Materials Containers and/or Organics Containers including
documentation from Contractor, licensed architect, or licensed engineer.
   (3)   Provide written verification to City that it is still eligible for
physical space waiver every year, if City has approved application for a
physical space waiver.
   (c)   Review and Approval of Waivers by the City. The City's Exclusive
Franchise Agreement Administrator shall review and either approve or deny
Waivers.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.805. Requirements for commercial edible food generators.
   (a)   Tier One Commercial Edible Food Generators must comply with the
requirements of this Section commencing January 1, 2022, and Tier Two
Commercial Edible Food Generators must comply commencing January 1, 2024,
pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18991.3.
   (b)   Large Venue or Large Event operators not providing food services, but
allowing for food to be provided by others, shall require Food Facilities
operating at the Large Venue or Large Event to comply with the requirements of
this Section, commencing January 1, 2024.
   (c)   Commercial Edible Food Generators shall comply with the following
requirements:
   (1)   Arrange to Recover the maximum amount of Edible Food that would
otherwise be disposed.
   (2)   Contract with, or enter into a written agreement with Food Recovery
Organizations or Food Recovery Services for: (i) the collection of Edible Food
for Food Recovery; or, (ii) acceptance of the Edible Food that the Commercial
Edible Food Generator self-hauls to the Food Recovery Organization for Food
Recovery.
   (3)   Shall not intentionally spoil Edible Food that is capable of being
recovered by a Food Recovery Organization or a Food Recovery Service.
   (4)   Allow the City's enforcement entity or designee to access the premises
and review records pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18991.4.
   (5)   Keep, and submit to the City annually, records that include the
following information, or as otherwise specified in 14 CCR Section 18991.4:
   (A)   A list of each Food Recovery Service or organization that collects or
receives its Edible Food pursuant to a contract or written agreement
established under 14 CCR Section 18991.3(b).
   (B)   A copy of all contracts or written agreements established under 14 CCR
Section 18991.3(b).
   (C)   A record of the following information for each of those Food Recovery
Services or Food Recovery Organizations:
   (i)   The name, address and contact information of the Food Recovery Service
or Food Recovery Organization.
   (ii)   The types of food that will be collected by or self-hauled to the
Food Recovery Service or Food Recovery Organization.
   (iii)   The established frequency that food will be collected or self-
hauled.
   (iv)   The quantity of food, measured in pounds recovered per month,
collected or self-hauled to a Food Recovery Service or Food Recovery
Organization for Food Recovery.
   (d)   Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to limit or conflict with
the protections provided by the California Good Samaritan Food Donation Act of
2017, the Federal Good Samaritan Act, or share table and school food donation
guidance pursuant to Senate Bill 557 of 2017 (approved by the Governor of the
State of California on September 25, 2017, which added Article 13 (commencing
with Section 49580) to Chapter 9 of Part 27 of Division 4 of Title 2 of the
Education Code, and to amend Section 114079 of the Health and Safety Code,
relating to food safety, as amended, supplemented, superseded and replaced from
time to time).
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.806. Requirements for food recovery organizations and services.
   (a)   Food Recovery Services collecting or receiving Edible Food directly
from Commercial Edible Food Generators, via a contract or written agreement
established under 14 CCR Section 18991.3(b), shall maintain the following
records, or as otherwise specified by 14 CCR Section 18991.5(a)(1):
   (1)   The name, address, and contact information for each Commercial Edible
Food Generator from which the service collects Edible Food.
   (2)   The quantity in pounds of Edible Food collected from each Commercial
Edible Food Generator per month.
   (3)   The quantity in pounds of Edible Food transported to each Food
Recovery Organization per month.
   (4)   The name, address, and contact information for each Food Recovery
Organization that the Food Recovery Service transports Edible Food to for Food
Recovery.
   (b)   Food Recovery Organizations collecting or receiving Edible Food
directly from Commercial Edible Food Generators, via a contract or written
agreement established under 14 CCR Section 18991.3(b), shall maintain, and
report to the City annually, the following records, or as otherwise specified
by 14 CCR Section 18991.5(a)(2):
   (1)   The name, address, and contact information for each Commercial Edible
Food Generator from which the organization receives Edible Food.
   (2)   The quantity in pounds of Edible Food received from each Commercial
Edible Food Generator per month.
   (3)   The name, address, and contact information for each Food Recovery
Service that the organization receives Edible Food from for Food Recovery.
   (c)   Food Recovery Organizations and Food Recovery Services that have their
primary address physically located in the City and contract with or have
written agreements with one or more Commercial Edible Food Generators pursuant
to 14 CCR Section 18991.3(b) shall report to the City it is located in the
total pounds of Edible Food recovered in the previous calendar year from the
Tier One and Tier Two Commercial Edible Food Generators they have established a
contract or written agreement with pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18991.3(b) no
later than January 31st.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.807. Requirements for haulers and facility operators.
   (a)   Requirements for Haulers. Exclusive Franchise waste hauler providing
Residential and/or Commercial Organic waste collection service shall follow all
requirements stipulated in the Exclusive Franchise Agreement and this
ordinance.
   (b)   Requirements for Facility Operators and Community Composting
Operations located within the City.
   (1)   Owners of facilities, operations, and activities that recover Organic
Waste, including, but not limited to, Compost facilities, in-vessel digestion
facilities, and publicly-owned treatment works shall, upon City request,
provide information regarding available and potential new or expanded capacity
at their facilities, operations, and activities, including information about
throughput and permitted capacity necessary for planning purposes. Entities
contacted by the City shall respond within 60 days.
   (2)   Community Composting operators, upon City request, shall provide
information to the City to support Organic Waste capacity planning, including,
but not limited to, an estimate of the amount of Organic Waste anticipated to
be handled at the Community Composting operation. Entities contacted by the
City shall respond within 60 days.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.808. Self-hauler requirements.
   (a)   Self-Haulers shall source separate all Organic Waste (materials that
the City otherwise requires generators to separate for collection in the City's
organics recycling collection program) generated on-site from Solid Waste in a
manner consistent with 14 CCR Sections 18984.1 and 18984.2.
   (b)   Self-Haulers shall haul their Source Separated Organic Waste to a
Solid Waste facility, operation, activity, or property that processes or
recovers Source Separated Organic Waste. Alternatively, Self-Haulers may haul
Organic Waste to a High Diversion Organic Waste Processing Facility as
specified in 14 CCR Section 18984.3.
   (c)   Self-Haulers that are Commercial, MFD-C or MXD Service Recipients
shall keep a record of the amount of Organic Waste delivered to each Solid
Waste facility, operation, activity, or property that processes or recovers
Organic Waste; this record shall be provided to City if requested and/or
subject to Inspection by the City. The records shall include the following
information:
   (1)   Delivery receipts and weight tickets from the entity accepting the
waste.
   (2)   The amount of material in cubic yards or tons transported by the
generator to each entity.
   (3)   If the material is transported to an entity that does not have scales
on-site, or employs scales incapable of weighing the Self-Hauler's vehicle in a
manner that allows it to determine the weight of materials received, the Self-
Hauler is not required to record the weight of material but shall keep a record
of the entities that received the Organic Waste.
   (d)   A residential Organic Waste Generator that self hauls Organic Waste is
not required to record or report information in Section
6-2.808(c).
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.809. Inspections and investigations by the City.
   (a)   City representatives and/or designee are authorized to conduct
Inspections and investigations, at random or otherwise, of any collection
container, collection vehicle loads, or transfer, processing, or disposal
facility for materials collected from generators, or Source Separated materials
to confirm compliance with this ordinance by Organic Waste Generators,
Commercial, MFD-C, MXD, MFD-I and SFD Service Recipients, property owners,
Commercial Edible Food Generators, haulers, Self-Haulers, Food Recovery
Services, and Food Recovery Organizations, subject to applicable laws. This
Section does not allow City to enter a private residential property, or the
non-public areas of a commercial property, for Inspection without consent or a
warrant.
   (b)   Service Recipient shall provide or arrange for access during all
Inspections (with the exception of residential property interiors) and shall
cooperate with the City's employee or its designee during such Inspections and
investigations. Such Inspections and investigations may include confirmation of
proper placement of materials in containers, Edible Food Recovery activities,
records, or any other requirement of this Chapter described herein. Failure to
provide or arrange for: (i) access to an entity's premises; or (ii) access to
records for any Inspection or investigation is a violation of this Chapter and
may result in penalties described.
   (c)   Any records obtained by the City during its Inspections, and other
reviews shall be subject to the requirements and applicable disclosure
exemptions of the Public Records Act as set forth in Government Code Section
6250 et seq.
   (d)   City representatives, and its Designee are authorized to conduct any
Inspections, or other investigations as reasonably necessary to further the
goals of this Chapter, subject to applicable laws.
   (e)   The City shall receive written complaints from persons regarding an
entity that may be potentially non-compliant with SB 1383 Regulations,
including receipt of anonymous complaints.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
Sec. 6-2.810. Enforcement.
   (a)   Violation of any provision of this Chapter shall constitute grounds
for issuance of a Notice of Violation and assessment of a fine by City.
Enforcement Actions under this ordinance are issuance of an administrative
citation and assessment of a fine. The City's procedures on imposition of
administrative fines are hereby incorporated in their entirety, as modified
from time to time, and shall govern the imposition, enforcement, collection,
and review of administrative citations issued to enforce this ordinance and any
rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this ordinance, except as otherwise
indicated in this ordinance.
   (b)   Other remedies allowed by law may be used, including civil action or
prosecution as misdemeanor or infraction. City may pursue civil actions in the
California courts to seek recovery of unpaid administrative citations.
   (c)   Responsible Entity for Enforcement.
   (1)   Enforcement pursuant to this ordinance may be undertaken by the City
Manager or their designated entity, legal counsel, or combination thereof.
   (d)   Process for Enforcement.
   (1)   City Manager and/or their Designee, and/or Contractor, will monitor
compliance with the ordinance randomly and through Compliance Reviews, Route
Reviews, investigation of complaints, and an Inspection program (that may
include Remote Monitoring). Section 6-2.809 establishes the City's right to
conduct Inspections and investigations.
   (2)   Contamination incidences will be dealt with as specified in the
Exclusive Franchise Agreement.
   (e)   Penalty Amounts for Types of Violations. The penalty levels are as
follows:
   (1)   For a first violation, the amount of the base penalty shall be $100
per violation.
   (2)   For a second violation, the amount of the base penalty shall be $200
per violation.
   (3)   For a third or subsequent violation, the amount of the base penalty
shall be $500 per violation.
   (f)   Compliance Deadline Extension Considerations. The City may extend the
compliance deadlines set forth in a Notice of Violation issued in accordance
with this section if it finds that there are extenuating circumstances beyond
the control of the respondent that make compliance within the deadlines
impracticable, including the following:
   (1)   Acts of God such as earthquakes, wildfires, flooding, and other
emergencies or natural disasters;
   (2)   Delays in obtaining discretionary permits or other government agency
approvals; or,
   (3)   Deficiencies in Organic Waste recycling infrastructure or Edible Food
Recovery capacity and the City is under a corrective action plan with
CalRecycle pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18996.2 due to those deficiencies.
   (g)   Appeals Process. Persons receiving an administrative citation
containing a penalty for an uncorrected violation may request a hearing to
appeal the citation. A hearing will be held only if it is requested within the
time prescribed and consistent with the City's procedures in the Thousand Oaks
Municipal Code for appeals of administrative citations. Evidence may be
presented at the hearing. The City will appoint a hearing officer who shall
conduct the hearing and issue a final written order.
   (h)   Education Period for Non-Compliance. Beginning January 1, 2022 and
through December 31, 2023, The City will conduct Inspections, Remote
Monitoring, Route Reviews or waste evaluations, and Compliance Reviews,
depending upon the type of regulated entity, to determine compliance, and if
the City determines that Organic Waste Generator, Self-Hauler, hauler, Tier One
Commercial Edible Food Generator, Food Recovery Organization, Food Recovery
Service, or other entity is not in compliance, it shall provide educational
materials to the entity describing its obligations under this Chapter and a
notice that compliance is required by January 1, 2022, and that violations may
be subject to administrative civil penalties starting on January 1, 2024.
   (i)   Civil Penalties for Non-Compliance. Beginning January 1, 2024, if the
City determines that an Organic Waste Generator, Self-Hauler, hauler, Tier One
or Tier Two Commercial Edible Food Generator, Food Recovery Organization, Food
Recovery Service, or other entity is not in compliance with this Chapter, it
shall document the noncompliance or violation, issue a Notice of Violation, and
take Enforcement Action pursuant to Section 17, as needed.
(Ord. 1688-NS, eff. December 17, 2021)
CHAPTER 3. CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE MANAGEMENT
(Chapter 3. Health Nuisances, Sections 6-3.01 through 6-3.10, codified from
Sections 4111, T.O.O.C. through 4114, T.O.O.C. and Sections 4117, T.O.O.C. and
4118, T.O.O.C. and Ordinance No. 770-NS, repealed by Section 19, Ordinance No.
1250, effective January 9, 1996)
Sec. 6-3.101. Purpose and Intent.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations effectively reducing
landfill-bound waste from construction and demolition activity by requiring
applicants undertaking specific covered projects to divert, recycle, and/or
salvage for reuse a minimum percentage (by weight) of the construction and
demolition waste materials resulting from their projects, as defined and set
forth by current CalGreen diversion requirements, goals and policies.
(§ 1, Ord. 1544-NS, eff. November 12, 2010; § 1, Ord. 1639-NS, eff. January 12,
2018)
Sec. 6-3.102. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   (a)   "Applicant" means any individual, firm, limited liability company,
association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency,
municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity
whatsoever who applies to the City for any applicable permits, as defined in
this chapter, to undertake any construction, demolition, or renovation project
within the City.
   (b)   “C&D debris recycling compliance official” means the Director or
representative designated by the Director.
   (c)   "C&D debris recycling plan" means a written plan for recycling and/or
reuse of project C&D debris prepared and submitted pursuant to Section
6-3.106 in a form approved by the Public Works Director or designee for the
purpose of reviewing project compliance with this chapter prior to project
commencement.
   (d)   "C&D debris recycling report" means a completed form, and all
supporting recycling and disposal facility weight tickets and records,
submitted by an applicant for any covered project approved by the City for the
purpose of compliance with this chapter. This form is submitted after
completion of a project.
   (e)   "Completion" means the earliest of the following dates: the date a
certificate of occupancy is issued by the City for a covered project, the
completion date of a covered project per final City inspection and approval,
or, if no final approval is required, 30 calendar days following the date the
work authorized by the permit(s) is completed, as determined by the Director.
   (f)   "Construction" means the building or enlargement of any structure, or
any portion thereof, and includes without limitation alterations or
improvements to an existing structure.
   (g)   "Construction and demolition debris" or "C&D debris" means the excess
or discarded materials removed from a site during, or after, the construction,
demolition, repair, remodeling or renovation of any pavement, residential
building, commercial building, fence, wall or other structure.
   (h)   "Covered project" means any project meeting any one or more of the
following thresholds:
      (1)   All new construction of residential and/or non-residential
structures requiring a permit, irrespective of gross floor area, cost or
valuation;
      (2)   All demolition of residential and/or non-residential structures
requiring a permit, irrespective of gross floor area, cost or valuation;
      (3)   Additions and alterations to residential buildings that increase
the structures' conditioned area, volume, or size, and require a permit;
      (4)   Additions and alterations to non-residential buildings of 1,000
square feet or greater and/or with a valuation of $200,000 or more, and require
a permit;
      (5)   Any grading work requiring a permit, irrespective of cost, from
which inert material will be removed from project site;
      (6)   All City construction projects awarded pursuant to procurement
policy and the competitive bid process defined by California state code.
   (i)   "Commingled facility" Any facility that accepts commingled or mixed
C&D debris and processes the materials for diversion.
   (j)   "Conversion rate" means the rate set forth in the standardized
conversion rate table for use in estimating the volume or weight of C&D debris,
approved by the California Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery
(CalRecycle).
   (k)   "Deconstruct" and "deconstruction" means the careful and systematic
dismantling of a structure in order to salvage materials for diversion.
   (l)   "Demolition" means the razing, tearing down or wrecking of any
structure, wall, fence or paving, whether in whole or in part, whether interior
or exterior.
   (m)   "Designated recyclable and reusable materials" means all C&D debris
described within any of the following categories:
      (1)   Masonry building materials, including all products generally used
in construction including, but not limited to asphalt, concrete, rock, stone
and brick.
      (2)   Wood materials including any and all dimensional lumber, fencing or
construction wood not chemically treated, creosoted, CCA pressure treated,
contaminated or painted.
      (3)   Vegetation material including trees, tree parts, shrubs, logs,
brush, stumps or any other type of plants (i.e., "green waste") cleared from a
site for construction or other use.
      (4)   Metals including all ferrous and nonferrous metal scrap such as,
but not limited to, pipes, siding, window frames, door frames, hardware and
fences.
      (5)   Roofing materials including wood shingles as well as asphalt, clay,
stone and slate based roofing material.
      (6)   Salvageable materials include all salvageable materials and
structures including, but not limited to, wallboard, doors, windows, hardware,
fixtures, toilets, sinks, bath tubs and appliances.
      (7)   Any other non-hazardous construction and demolition debris
generated from a construction or demolition project that is available for
recycling or reuse including, but not limited to, cardboard and paper fiber,
glass, and mixed plastics.
   (n)   "Director" means the Public Works Director.
   (o)   "Divert" and "diversion" mean the reuse or recycling of C&D debris to
avoid disposal in a landfill.
   (p)   "Diversion requirement" means a minimum diversion percent of the total
C&D debris generated by a covered project as defined and set forth by current
CalGreen Code.
   (q)   "Grading" means altering a land surface by cutting, filling and/or
smoothing to meet a designated form and function.
   (r)   "Inert material" means nonputrescible solid material including,
without limitation, soil, rock, gravel, concrete, asphalt, brick, ceramics,
metal and similar material not containing hazardous waste, radioactive waste,
medical waste, soluble pollutants or decomposable matter.
   (s)   "Paving" means driveways, walkways, parking areas, streets and
sidewalks.
   (t)   "Permit" means any building, grading, paving, encroachment or
demolition permit.
   (u)   "Project" means any proposal for grading, new construction or changed
use, alteration, demolition, deconstruction or enlargement of any structure,
requiring a permit from the City of Thousand Oaks.
   (v)   "Recycling" and "reuse" means the process of collecting, sorting,
cleansing, treating, and reconstituting C&D debris that would otherwise be
disposed in a landfill for use as finished or raw material for new, reused, or
reconstituted products meeting industry standards necessary for such use in the
marketplace.
   (w)   "Recycling facility" means a facility collecting specific types of C&D
debris for reuse or recycling.
   (x)   "Salvage" means the controlled removal of construction or demolition
debris from a permitted building or demolition site for the purpose of
recycling, or reuse.
(§ 1, Ord. 1544-NS, eff. November 12, 2010; § 1, Ord. 1639-NS, eff. January 12,
2018)
Sec. 6-3.103. Application of Article to Covered Projects.
   (a)   Unless otherwise exempt under Section
6-3.105 ("exempt projects"), covered projects shall meet the diversion
requirement defined and set forth by current CalGreen code and shall comply
with all provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be a condition of
approval on all building, paving, grading, encroachment or demolition permits
issued for a covered project.
(§ 1, Ord. 1544-NS, eff. November 12, 2010; § 1, Ord. 1639-NS, eff. January 12,
2018)
Sec. 6-3.104. Required Diversion Rates.
   The applicant for a covered project shall divert a minimum percent of the
total C&D debris resulting from the covered project as defined and set forth by
current CalGreen Code.
(§ 1, Ord. 1544-NS, eff. November 12, 2010; § 1, Ord. 1639-NS, eff. January 12,
2018)
Sec. 6-3.105. Exempt Projects.
   The following projects are exempt from the requirements of this chapter:
   (a)   Immediate or emergency demolition required to protect the public
health, safety or welfare, as determined by any public safety official or code
compliance officer of the City.
   (b)   Single-family residential projects consisting solely of the
installation of pre-fabricated accessories such as patio enclosures and covers,
or antennas where no foundation or other structural building modifications are
required;
   (c)   Work for which only a plumbing permit, an electrical permit, or a
mechanical permit is required or any combination thereof;
   (d)   Seismic tie-down projects;
   (e)   Other work a C&D debris recycling compliance official determines will
not produce significant amounts of C&D debris.
(§ 1, Ord. 1544-NS, eff. November 12, 2010; § 1, Ord. 1639-NS, eff. January 12,
2018)
Sec. 6-3.106. C&D Debris Recycling Plan Requirements.
   Applicants for covered project permits shall complete and submit a C&D
debris recycling plan as part of the permit application process. The C&D debris
recycling plan shall be in a form approved by the Public Works Director or
designee and shall include the following information, calculated with the
conversion rate, and shall be attested by the applicant, under penalty of
perjury, as true and correct for all stated facts and as a best estimate based
on all information reasonably available about the project, where all of the
facts cannot be ascertained:
   (a)   The estimated weight of C&D debris listed for each material;
   (b)   The estimated weight of C&D debris that can be diverted from the
landfill listed by each material type;
   (c)   The estimated weight of C&D debris that will be landfilled as solid
waste;
   (d)   The identification of a City-permitted franchise C&D waste hauler
providing dumpster or roll-off box service in which to collect and transport
C&D debris, and/or signed statement by the applicant that they will self haul
C&D debris;
   (e)   The identification of the waste or recycling facility to receive
project C&D debris; and
   (f)   The estimated dates on which grading, demolition or construction is to
commence and be completed.
(§ 1, Ord. 1544-NS, eff. November 12, 2010; § 1, Ord. 1639-NS, eff. January 12,
2018)
Sec. 6-3.107. Review of C&D Debris Recycling Plan.
   (a)   Time for review. A C&D debris recycling plan shall be approved or
denied no later than five (5) business days after a complete application is
filed with the City. The approval may be based on imposed conditions reasonably
necessary to meet the standards of this chapter.
   (b)   Approval. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no
permit shall be issued for any covered project unless and until the C&D debris
recycling plan has been approved, based upon the following findings by the C&D
debris recycling plan compliance official.
      (1)   All of the information required by Section
6-3.106 has been provided;
      (2)   The plan establishes a mechanism ensuring the diversion requirement
shall be met; and
      (3)   A valid permitted franchise hauler is identified or the applicant
certifies that they will self-haul materials.
   (c)   Denial. If the C&D debris recycling compliance official denies the C&D
debris recycling plan, the grounds for denial shall be clearly stated in
writing.
(§ 1, Ord. 1544-NS, eff. November 12, 2010; § 1, Ord. 1639-NS, eff. January 12,
2018)
Sec. 6-3.108. C&D Debris Recycling Report Compliance.
   (a)   Final Report. No later than 30 days from the completion of a covered
project, the applicant shall submit a C&D debris recycling report, in a form
approved by the Public Works Director or designee, signed under penalty of
perjury, to the C&D debris recycling compliance official. The report shall
include the following information:
      (1)   The dates on which grading, building, paving, demolition and/or
construction actually commenced and were completed;
      (2)   The actual volume or weight of C&D debris, listed by specific
material or if taken to a commingled recovery facility the weight of the
commingled load and primary composition;
      (3)   The actual volume or weight of C&D debris that was diverted, listed
by specific material type or in the case of commingled C&D materials the
aggregate weight of the materials and the amount that was disposed;
      (4)   A specification of the method used to determine the volume and
weights and a certification that the method used was the most accurate,
commercially reasonable method available; and
      (5)   Copies of receipts and/or weight tickets from all vendors and
recycling facilities, which collected or received C&D debris, indicating and
verifying actual weights and volumes received by each.
(§ 1, Ord. 1544-NS, eff. November 12, 2010; § 1, Ord. 1639-NS, eff. January 12,
2018)
Sec. 6-3.109. Violations.
   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter to do any of the
following:
   (a)   To willfully fail to comply with any provision of this chapter;
   (b)   To provide false or misleading information in any plan, report or
document required by this chapter; or
   (c)   To fail to meet the diversion requirement for any covered project as
required by this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1544-NS, eff. November 12, 2010; § 1, Ord. 1639-NS, eff. January 12,
2018)
Sec. 6-3.110. Appeal.
   Any person or entity aggrieved by any decision or finding under the
provisions of this chapter with respect to approving, denying, or conditioning
a C&D debris recycling plan, may appeal such decision, finding, or condition
pursuant to Chapter 4 of Title 1 of the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code. An appeal
must be filed with the City Manager's office within fourteen (14) days after
notification setting forth in writing the full facts, reasons and grounds for
the appeal. The appeal shall include supporting documentary evidence and
declarations signed under penalty of perjury. There shall be no hearing before
the City Manager. In all such cases, the burden of proof shall be upon the
appellant to show there was no substantial evidence or rational basis to
support the appealed decision, finding, or condition. The City Manager shall
make the final ruling on the appeal no more than thirty (30) business days from
the date of filing.
(§ 1, Ord. 1544-NS, eff. November 12, 2010; § 1, Ord. 1639-NS, eff. January 12,
2018)
Sec. 6-3.111. Misdemeanor; Separate Offenses.
   (a)   Misdemeanors. Any person who negligently or knowingly violates any
provision of this chapter, undertakes to conceal any violation of this chapter,
continues any violation of this chapter beyond the date set for compliance
after delivery of notice thereof, or has previously violated the same provision
of this chapter, may be charged with criminal misdemeanor for such violation.
   (b)   Separate offenses. Each day a violation continues unabated as ordered
by the Director is a separate offense and separate violation. For violations of
Section
6-3.109(c), the violation shall be considered to commence on the date when
demolition or construction first commenced.
   (c)   Failure to file the required report will result in future C&D
recycling plan authorizations being withheld until the responsible party
complies with the provisions of this Article.
(§ 1, Ord. 1544-NS, eff. November 12, 2010; § 1, Ord. 1639-NS, eff. January 12,
2018)
Sec. 6-3.112. Civil Remedies; Injunctions.
   The Director may request that the City file a civil action seeking an
injunction against any threatened or continuing noncompliance with the
provisions of this chapter. Any temporary, preliminary or permanent injunction
issued pursuant hereto may include an order for reimbursement to the City of
all costs incurred in enforcing this chapter, including costs of inspection,
investigation and monitoring, the costs of abatement undertaken at the expense
of the City, costs relating to restoration of the environment, attorney's fees,
court costs, and all other expenses as authorized by law.
   The remedies available to the City pursuant to the provisions of this
article shall not limit the right of the City to seek any other remedy that may
be available by law.
(§ 1, Ord. 1544-NS, eff. November 12, 2010; § 1, Ord. 1639-NS, eff. January 12,
2018)
CHAPTER 4. WATER WELLS
(Sections 6-4.01 through 6-4.09, as added by Ordinance No. 168-NS, repealed by
§2, Ordinance No. 1105-NS, effective June 6, 1991)
CHAPTER 5. SMOKING
Sec. 6-5.101. Purpose.
   This chapter controls exposure to second-hand smoke by prohibiting smoking
at certain locations. Exposure to second-hand smoke is a significant health
hazard for several population groups, including elderly people, individuals
with cardiovascular diseases, and individuals with impaired respiratory
function, including asthmatics and those with obstructive airway disease.
Health hazards induced by breathing second-hand smoke also include lung cancer,
respiratory infection, decreased exercise tolerance, decreased respiratory
function, bronchoconstriction and bronchospasm. The intent and purpose of
prohibiting smoking at the identified locations is to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare by reducing the number of locations in Thousand
Oaks where exposure to second-hand smoke can occur.
(§ 2, Ord. 1502-NS, eff. August 7, 2008)
Sec. 6-5.102. Definitions.
   The following words and phrases, as used in this chapter or in any other
applicable municipal regulation, shall have the following meanings:
   (a)   “Common area at a shopping center” means any outdoor common area of a
shopping center accessible to and usable by the occupants or customers of more
than one (1) retail establishment used as a lobby, outdoor eating area, play
area, gathering area with either seats or benches provided, or gathering areas
having a water feature such as a fountain.
   (b)   “Dining area” means a non-residential location where food or beverages
are served by a business or routinely consumed by customers. This includes, but
is not limited to, restaurant or bar seating areas, outdoor customer dining
areas and patios.
   (c)   “Electronic cigarette” means any device or delivery system which can
be used to deliver to a person nicotine, cannabis or other liquid product, in
aerosolized or vaporized form, including, but not limited to, an e-cigarette,
e-cigar, e-pipe, vape pen or e-hookah, including any component, part, or
accessory of such device, that is used during the operation of the device.
   (d)   “Playground” means any park or recreational area designed in whole or
in part to be used by children that has play or sports equipment installed or
has been designated or landscaped for play or sports activities, or any similar
area or facility located on public or private school grounds, or on City
property. “Playground” does not include the teeing areas, fairways, putting
greens, and other playing and practice areas of a municipal golf course.
   (e)   “Outdoor gathering and event area” means any non-enclosed area
accessible to the general public where people are gathered to witness or
participate in an event. For the purposes of this section, such gathering and
event areas include, but are not limited to, permanent or temporary
grandstands, bleachers, other seating areas, standing areas, viewing areas,
playing courts and fields, circulation areas, and ancillary areas such as
lobbies, foyers, restrooms, and concession areas. For the purposes of this
section, events include, but are not limited to, shows, movies, plays,
lectures, exhibitions, demonstrations, concerts, competitions, sporting events,
arts and crafts shows, fairs, pageants, and parades, whether or not an
admission fee is required or other compensation is provided.
   (f)   “Service area” means a place where people use or wait for services
provided by a private or government entity. This includes, but is not limited
to, bus stops, ATM lines, information kiosks and theater lines.
   (g)   “Shopping Center” means any parcel of land used for retail sales by
more than one (1) retailer that is jointly operated or which includes shared
parking facilities.
   (h)   “Smoke or smoking” means the carrying or holding of a lighted pipe,
cigar, cigarette, e-cigarette or any other lighted smoking product or equipment
used to burn, aerosolize or vaporize any tobacco product, weed, plant, liquid
product or any other combustible substance. Smoking includes emitting or
exhaling the fumes or vapor of any pipe, cigar, cigarette, e-cigarette or any
other smoking equipment used for burning, aerosolizing or vaporizing any
tobacco product, weed, plant, or any other combustible substance.
   (i) “Designated smoking area” means any area designated for smoking pursuant
to this chapter. A designated smoking area shall be as small as practicable to
accommodate the number of smokers that are expected to use the area, but in no
event may the designated smoking area exceed more than twenty (20%) percent of
the total event area. Designated smoking areas shall be posted with one (1) or
more conspicuously displayed signs that identify the area as a designated
smoking area.
   (j)   “Tobacco product” means a product containing, made, or derived from
tobacco or nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether smoked,
heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by
any other means, including an electronic device that delivers nicotine or other
vaporized liquids to the person inhaling from the device.
   (k)   “Tobacco shops” means any retail or wholesale business establishment
the main purpose of which is the sale of tobacco products, including but not
limited to, cigars, pipe tobacco and smoking accessories.
(§ 2, Ord. 1502-NS, eff. August 7, 2008, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1505-NS, eff.
October 9, 2008, as amended by part 1, Ord. 1659-NS, eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 6-5.103. Prohibition of smoking in public places.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to smoke in the following places:
      (1)   Any playground and within twenty-five (25) feet thereof;
      (2)   Any public gardens;
      (3)   Any outdoor service area;
      (4)   The grounds of the Thousand Oaks Civic Arts Plaza, except in any
designated smoking area;
      (5)   Any outdoor customer dining area, except where authorized by a
permit issued pursuant to Section 6-5.110.
      (6)   The public portion of any public library grounds;
      (7)   Any Common Area at a Shopping Center;
      (8)   Out of doors within twenty-five (25’) feet of the entrance or exit
of any building open to the public except tobacco shops that are a free
standing business;
      (9)   Any outdoor gathering and event area, except in separate designated
smoking area. This prohibition applies from the time sixty (60) minutes before
the event begins to the time sixty (60) minutes after the event ends;
      (10)   A bus, taxi cab or other means of public transportation,
   (b)   No person, owner, business owner, operator or manager shall knowingly
or intentionally permit smoking in a Common Area at a shopping center or in an
outdoor dining area under his, her, or its legal or de facto control. This
chapter does not require the physical ejection of any person from the business.
(§ 2, Ord. 1502-NS, eff. August 7, 2008 as amended by § 3 Ord. 1505-NS, eff.
October 9, 2008)
Sec. 6-5.104. Where smoking is allowed.
   (a)   Smoking is permitted in any outdoor area not listed above in Sec. 6-
5.103;
   (b)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any owner,
operator, manager, or other person who controls any establishment described in
this chapter may declare that entire establishment as a nonsmoking facility.
(§ 2, Ord. 1502-NS, eff. August 7, 2008)
Sec. 6-5.105. Disposal of smoking waste.
   No person shalt dispose of any cigarette, e- cigarette, cigar or tobacco, or
any part of a cigarette, e-cigarette or cigar, in any place where smoking is
prohibited under this chapter, except in a designated waste disposal container.
(§ 2, Ord. 1502-NS, eff. August 7, 2008, as amended by part 1, Ord. 1659-NS,
eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 6-5.106. Posting of Signs in Public Places.
   (a)   “No Smoking” signs shall be conspicuously posted and an ashtray placed
at every public entrance in every public place where smoking is prohibited by
this chapter, and “smoking area” signs shall be posted only in those public
areas authorized for smoking by this chapter.
   (b)   Every business or property subject to the provisions of this chapter
shall post the required signs immediately upon commencing operations.
   (c)   Signs shall have letters of not less than one (1”) inch in height or
shall have the international “No Smoking” symbol (consisting of a pictorial
representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar
across it) not less than five (5”) inches in diameter. These signs shall be
posted and maintained in good condition by the owner, operator, manager or
other person having control of such building or other place.
(§ 2, Ord. 1502-NS, eff. August 7, 2008, as amended by part 1, Ord. 1659-NS,
eff. January 1, 2019)
Sec. 6-5.107. Prohibition of Cigarette or Tobacco Vending Machines.
   (a)   On or after August 9, 2008, no person shall sell or dispense
cigarettes or other tobacco products by vending machine or any other device
that automatically sells or dispenses tobacco products.
   (b)   It is unlawful to sell cigarettes out of the manufacturer's package or
without required health warnings.
(§ 2, Ord. 1502-NS, eff. August 7, 2008)
Sec. 6-5.108. Violations and Penalties.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or
otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to regulation under this
chapter to fail to comply with any of its provisions.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any area where smoking
is prohibited by the provisions of this chapter.
   (c)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of an infraction, punishable as provided in Section
1-2.03 of this Municipal Code.
   (d)   Punishment under this section shall not preclude punishment pursuant
to Health and Safety Code Section 13002, Penal Code Section 374.4, or any other
law proscribing the act of littering.
(§ 2, Ord. 1502-NS, eff. August 7, 2008)
Sec. 6-5.109. Other applicable laws.
   This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where
it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws.
(§ 2, Ord. 1502-NS, eff. August 7, 2008)
Sec. 6-5.110. Permits for Smoking in Outdoor Customer Dining Areas.
   (a)   A permit for smoking in an outdoor customer dining area may be issued,
after application to the Community Development Director, only if it is
determined that all conditions in Section
6-5.110(b) are satisfied.
   (b)   Mandatory conditions that a restaurant shall comply with to receive a
permit for allowing smoking in outdoor customer dining areas.
      (1)   The outdoor customer dining area has been permitted by an
entitlement approved by the City.
      (2)    The approved perimeter of the outdoor customer dining area is not
within twenty-five (25’) feet of any area where smoking is prohibited by
Section
6-5.103(a), except the restaurant where the outdoor customer dining area is
located, and also that it is not located within twenty-five (25’) feet of any
outdoor customer dining area where smoking is prohibited.
      (3)   During the period of time that smoking is allowed, the approved
perimeter of the outdoor customer dining area may not be within twenty-five
(25’) feet of an entrance or exit of another business and/or occupant that is
opened for business, based on that other business' or occupant's regular
operational hours.
      (4)   All doors into the restaurant within twenty- five (25’) feet of the
outdoor customer dining area where smoking is allowed must be self-closing and
have a seal around the door to keep smoke from entering the restaurant when the
door is closed.
      (5)   The outdoor customer dining area is not a common dining area
serving more than one (1) restaurant.
      (6)   The outdoor customer dining area is not enclosed by a temporary
canopy and side panels.
      (7)   A sign is placed at all entrances into the outdoor customer dining
area from the restaurant, with letters not less than one (1”) inch in height,
stating that smoking is allowed.
   (c)   Revocation. The City may revoke any permit approved pursuant to
Section
6-5.110(a) upon a verified violation of any condition as set forth in Section
6-5.110(b), which has not been corrected within the time specified in the
notice of violation. Any notification of revocation shall be provided in
writing to the permit holder stating the specific condition(s) violated.
   (d)   Appeal. Any administrative decision to deny or revoke a permit under
this section may be appealed pursuant to Title 1, Chapter 4, Article 1. An
appeal may only be granted if the denial or revocation was the result of a
mistake in a factual administrative determination regarding the permit
application.
   (e)   Fees. The Community Development Department is hereby authorized to
collect an application processing fee and, where applicable, an appeal fee, as
set by Council resolution, to offset the cost of processing.
(§ 4, Ord. 1505-NS, eff. October 9, 2008)
CHAPTER 6. PROHIBITION ON THE USE, DISTRIBUTION, AND SALE OF EXPANDED AND RIGID
POLYSTYRENE PRODUCTS, FOOD SERVICE WARE AND UTENSILS, AND RESTRICTION ON THE
DISTRIBUTION OF PLASTIC BEVERAGE STRAWS
Article 1. General Provisions
Sec. 6-6.101. Title.
   This chapter shall be known as the "City of Thousand Oaks Single-Use
Plastics and Litter Reduction Ordinance".
(§ 3, Ord. 1680-NS, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-6.102. Purpose and intent.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards and procedures for
distribution, sale and use of plastic single-use disposable products and food
ware to reduce litter and implement environmentally sustainable practices in
the City by prohibiting the distribution, sale and use of expanded and rigid
polystyrene disposable products and limiting the distribution of plastic
utensils and plastic beverage straws by food providers within the City of
Thousand Oaks.
(§ 3, Ord. 1680-NS, eff. January 1, 2022)
Article 2. Definitions.
Sec. 6-6.201. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases used in
this chapter are defined as follows unless it is apparent from the context that
a different meaning is intended:
   (a)   "Beverage straw" means any straw or tube that is used for transferring
a beverage from its container to the mouth of the drinker.
   (b)   "Biodegradable" means the ability of organic matter to break down from
a complex to a simpler form through the action of bacteria. Biodegradable
materials may vary greatly in the amount of time taken to break down and do not
necessarily produce soil nutrients.
   (c)   "Bio-plastic" means plastic materials produced from renewable biomass
sources, such as vegetable fats and oils, corn starch, straw, woodchips,
sawdust, recycled food waste, etc. Bio-plastic can be made from agricultural
by-products and from used plastic bottles and other containers using
microorganisms. Not all bio-plastics are biodegradable.
   (d)   "City" means the City of Thousand Oaks.
   (e)   "City Facility" means any building, structure, property, park, or open
space, owned, leased or operated by the City, its agents, agencies, departments
or franchisees.
   (f)   "City Contractor" means any person that enters into an agreement with
the City to furnish products or services to or for the City including all
franchisees, contractors, and vendors doing business with the City.
   (g)   "City-sponsored event" means any event, activity or meeting organized,
sponsored, permitted, in whole or in part, by the City or any department of the
City. This includes events at rented or borrowed City Facilities, City-managed
concessions, and City co-sponsored events.
   (h)   "Compostable" means all the materials in the product or package will
break down, or otherwise become part of usable compost (e.g. soil-conditioning
material, mulch). To be considered "Compostable", disposable food containers
must meet ASTM Standards for compostable materials and must be certified by the
Biodegradable Products Institute (BPI) as such.
   (i)   "Customer" means any person obtaining prepared food from a restaurant
or food provider.
   (j)   "Disposable food ware" or "disposables" means single-use, disposable
products used for serving, transporting, or consuming prepared food, including
but not limited to plates, bowls, trays, wrappers or wrapping, platters,
cartons, hinged food containers, condiment containers, utensils, cups or drink
ware, or any other container in or on which prepared foods are placed or
packaged for consumption.
   (k)   "Distribute" means to provide or offer to provide an item, either as a
separate transaction or as part of a transaction for another item, regardless
of whether compensation is received.
   (l)   "Encapsulated expanded polystyrene Product" means expanded polystyrene
products that have been completely encased by a more durable material that
protects the EPS material from disintegration and makes the product suitable
for reuse multiple times.
   (m)   "Event" means an organized recreational or cultural activity promoted
or sponsored by a business or non-profit group.
   (n)   "Expanded polystyrene" or "EPS" means polystyrene that has been
expanded or blown using a gaseous blowing agent into a solid foam. EPS is
sometimes called "Styrofoam", a Dow Chemical Co. trademark form of polystyrene
foam insulation.
   (o)   "Expanded polystyrene product" means any item such as a cooler, ice
chest, cup, bowl, plate, hinged food container (clamshell), shipping box, or
any other merchandise made from expanded polystyrene.
   (p)   "Food provider" means any person or establishment that provides or
sells prepared food within the City to the public to be consumed on the
premises or for take-away consumption. Food provider includes but is not
limited to (1) a grocery store, supermarket, delicatessen, restaurant, drive-
thru, cafe, cafeteria, coffee shop, snack shop, public food market, farmers'
market, convenience store, or similar fixed place where prepared food is
available for sale on the premises or for take-away consumption; and (2) any
mobile store, food vendor, caterer, food truck, vending machine or similar
mobile outlet. Food provider also includes any business, organization, group or
individual that regularly provides prepared food to its members or the public
as a part of its activities or services.
   (q)   "Food tray" means a tray commonly used for packaging food for retail
sale.
   (r)   "Person" means any person, business, corporation, or event organizer
or promoter; public, nonprofit or private entity, agency or institution; or
partnership, association or other organization or group, however organized.
   (s)   "Plastic straw" or "plastic beverage straw" means a beverage straw
made of plastic derived from fossil fuel or biologically based polymer (Bio-
plastic).
   (t)   "Plastic utensil" means fork, spoon, knife, chopstick or stirrer, or
other eating implement made predominately of plastic derived from fossil-fuel
or a biologically based polymer.
   (u)   "Polystyrene" means a thermoplastic petrochemical material utilizing
the styrene monomer, including but not limited to polystyrene foam or expanded
polystyrene, processed by any number of techniques, including but not limited
to fusion of polymer spheres (expandable bead polystyrene), injection molding,
foam molding, or extrusion- blow molding (extruded foam polystyrene), and clear
or solid polystyrene (oriented polystyrene). The Recycle Code for polystyrene
is '6' or 'PS,' either alone or in combination with other letters. This
definition applies to all polystyrene food ware, regardless of whether it
exhibits a Recycle Code.
   (v)   "Prepared food" means any food or beverage that is (1) ready to
consume without any further preparation, alteration or repackaging; and (2)
prepared, provided, sold or served by a food provider using any cooking,
packaging or food preparation technique. Prepared food may be eaten either on
or off the food provider's premises. For purposes of this ordinance, prepared
food does not include (1) any raw uncooked meat, poultry, fish unless provided
for consumption without further food preparation, and (2) fresh produce
provided for consumption without food preparation or repackaging, including
fruits, vegetables, and herbs, sold by grocery stores, supermarkets, food
markets, farmers' markets and other food vendors.
   (w)   "Recyclable" means any material that is specified in the exclusive
franchise agreement with the City's solid waste service provider where such
list exists, or, in the absence of such includes, but is not limited to,
aluminum, tin and bi-metal cans, clear and colored glass containers, corrugated
cardboard, mixed paper and plastics with Recycling Codes 1-7 with the exception
of #6 or PS.
   (x)   "Restaurant" means any person or establishment doing business within
the City of Thousand Oaks that provides prepared food or beverages for
consumption on or off its premises such as a, dining establishment, cafe,
bakery, grocery or convenience store counter or delicatessen, or catering truck
vehicle. "Restaurant" for the purposes of this chapter, includes mobile food
preparation units and employee cafeterias operated at businesses located within
the City.
   (y)   "Recycling Code" is used to identify the material from which an item
is made to facilitate processing. Generally, codes are indicated as a number
from 1-7 within a recycling mobius or chasing arrows logo. Codes can also be in
the form of an abbreviation. PS and No. 6 are both used to indicate a
polystyrene product. Number 7 indicates a product that does not fit within the
other six classifications and is designated as "Other". Compostable plastics
are designated as No. 7 plastics. The presence of a Recycling Code is not an
indicator that the item is recyclable.
   (z)   "Reusable food ware" means all food ware, including plates, bowls,
cups, trays, glasses, hinged food containers (clamshells), straws, stirrers,
condiment cups and utensils, that is manufactured of durable materials and is
specifically designed and manufactured to be washed and sanitized and to be
used repeatedly over an extended period of time, and is safe for washing and
sanitizing according to applicable Health Department regulations.
   (aa)   "Undue hardship" means that alternative food ware products that meets
the same functional requirements are not available or result in a significant
cost increase to operations.
   (bb)   "Vendor" means any store or business, located or operating within the
City of Thousand Oaks, that sells or offers goods or merchandise including
those referenced in "food provider."
(§ 3, Ord. 1680-NS, eff. January 1, 2022)
Article 3. Disposable Food Ware.
Sec. 6-6.301. Prohibition on polystyrene disposable food service wares.
   (a)   No food provider shall distribute or sell any polystyrene disposable
food ware in conjunction with the sale of prepared food or beverages at any
location within the City of Thousand Oaks.
   (b)   Food providers that distribute prepared food or beverages with
disposable food ware shall:
      (1)   Distribute only those disposables that exhibit a Recycle Code
(1,2,3,4,5,7). At no time shall disposables with a Recycle Code of No. 6 or PS
be permitted for distribution or use; and
      (2)   Maintain documentation about the composition of any disposable food
ware that does not exhibit a Recycle Code. Documentation may include
information from the supplier or manufacturer or provided in the product
packaging or any other relevant information that demonstrates that the material
is not polystyrene or comprising of a material containing Recycle Code No. 6 or
PS.
(§ 3, Ord. 1680-NS, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-6.302. Distribution of plastic utensils.
(§ 3, Ord. 1680-NS, eff. January 1, 2022, repealed by part 3, Ord. 1708-NS,
eff. February 10, 2023)
Sec. 6-6.303. Distribution of plastic beverage straws.
(§ 3, Ord. 1680-NS, eff. January 1, 2022, repealed by part 3, Ord. 1708-NS,
eff. February 10, 2023)
Article 4. Sale and Distribution of Expanded or Rigid Polystyrene Products.
Sec. 6-6.401. Prohibition on the distribution or sales of polystyrene products.
   (a)   No person shall distribute, or sell disposable food ware made, in
whole or in part, from polystyrene.
   (b)   No person shall distribute or sell expanded polystyrene loose fill
packaging and cushioning material, such as foam peanuts, packing peanuts, foam
popcorn or packing noodles, intended for the packaging of products, equipment,
or other items.
   (c)   No person shall distribute, or sell products made in whole or in part,
from expanded polystyrene that is not wholly encapsulated or encased within a
non-polystyrene material.
(§ 3, Ord. 1680-NS, eff. January 1, 2022)
Article 5. Standard Exemptions.
Sec. 6-6.501. Polystyrene products exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
   The following polystyrene products are exempt from the provisions of this
chapter:
   (a)   Prepared food packaged outside the City, provided such food is not
altered, packaged or repackaged within the City limits.
   (b)   Expanded polystyrene insulated containers designed to safely transport
by mail or common carrier prepared food, frozen goods, perishables,
pharmaceuticals, biotech, and medical supplies in compliance with the Food and
Drug Administration or other regulatory agency recommended temperatures.
   (c)   Containers, plates or trays for raw, butchered meats, fish and/or
poultry.
   (d)   Food ware, plastic utensils, or plastic beverage straws brought by
individuals for personal consumption or use at public facilities, including but
not limited to schools and parks, provided the facility use is not part of an
event.
   (e)   Public Health and Safety. The City may exempt a food provider or
beverage provider when there is a public health and safety requirement or
medical necessity to use an otherwise prohibited food ware product.
   (f)   During a locally declared emergency, the City, emergency response
agencies operating within the City, users of City facilities, and food
providers shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
   (g)   Construction products made from polystyrene/plastic foam are exempted
from this chapter if the products are used in compliance with City of Thousand
Oaks Municipal Code Title 8, Building Regulation, or Title 7, Chapter 8, Storm
Water Quality Management, and used in a manner preventing the polystyrene/
plastic foam from being released into the environment.
   (h)   Polystyrene/plastic foam packaging products which have been received
from sources outside the City may be reused to keep them out of the waste
stream.
   (i)   Shipping of manufactured goods produced within the City where viable
alternatives are not available.
(§ 3, Ord. 1680-NS, eff. January 1, 2022)
Article 6. Waivers.
Sec. 6-6.601. Consideration of waiver by the City Manager.
   The City Manager or his/her designee may consider a waiver filed by any food
provider or person as detailed below.
   (a)   A request for a waiver shall be filed in writing with the City Manager
or his/her designee annually and shall include documentation of the reason for
the claimed waiver and any other information necessary for the City to make its
decision, including, but not limited to the factual support for the claimed
waiver as follow:
      (1)   Situations unique to the food provider where there are no
reasonable alternatives to polystyrene disposable food ware;
      (2)   Situations where no reasonably feasible available alternatives
exist to a specific and necessary expanded polystyrene use.
      (3)   Compliance with this chapter would cause undue hardship to that
food provider.
(§ 3, Ord. 1680-NS, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-6.602. Effect of waiver.
   The City Manager or his/her designee's written decision on the waiver
application is effective within thirty (30) days of the decision and is not
appealable.
(§ 3, Ord. 1680-NS, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-6.603. Waiver fees.
   The City Council may by resolution establish a fee for waiver applications.
The application fee shall be an amount sufficient to cover the costs of
processing the waiver application.
(§ 3, Ord. 1680-NS, eff. January 1, 2022)
Article 7. Compliance.
Sec. 6-6.701. Compliance.
   The City may inspect and monitor affected locations to determine compliance
with this chapter.
(§ 3, Ord. 1680-NS, eff. January 1, 2022)
Article 8. Enforcement.
Sec. 6-6.801. Civil liability and penalties.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to fail to comply with
this chapter.
   (b)   Each violation of this Code or other ordinance of the City shall
constitute a separate offense.
   (c)   The City may also seek to enforce violations of this chapter through
the City's civil penalty procedure pursuant to section
1-2.201 et seq. of this Code.
   Upon a first violation of any provision of this chapter, the City shall
issue a written Notice of Violation to the offending establishment, person or
entity. The Notice of Violation shall specify the violation(s), a date by which
the violation(s) must be ceased and abated. If, after the specified correction
period, the violation is not ceased or abated, the City may issue a civil
penalty assessing fines in accordance with Section
1-2.205.
(§ 3, Ord. 1680-NS, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-6.802. Other remedies.
   The remedies and penalties provided in this chapter are cumulative and not
exclusive and nothing in this chapter shall preclude the City from pursuing any
other legal remedies available. The City Attorney may seek legal, injunctive,
or any other relief to enforce the provisions of this chapter and any
regulations or administrative procedures developed pursuant hereto.
(§ 3, Ord. 1680-NS, eff. January 1, 2022)
CHAPTER 7. SINGLE-USE FOODWARE ACCESSORIES AND CONDIMENTS
Sec. 6-7.101. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases used in
this Chapter are defined as follows unless it is apparent from the context that
a different meaning is intended:
   (a)   "City" means the City of Thousand Oaks.
   (b)   "Consumer" has the same meaning as in Section 113757 of the Health and
Safety Code.
   (c)   "Food facility" has the same meaning as in Section 113789 of the
Health and Safety Code.
   (d)   "Ready-to-eat food" has the same meaning as in Section 113881 of the
Health and Safety Code.
   (e)   "Self-service dispenser or station" means any type of dispenser,
container, shelf, or other location that is accessible to consumers of a food
service provider at which consumers can independently access single-use
foodware accessories and standard condiments.
   (f)   "Single-use" means designed to be used once and then discarded, and
not designed for repeated use and sanitizing.
   (g)   "Single-use foodware accessories" means all of the following single-
use items provided alongside prepared food: utensils, which is defined as
forks, knives, spoons, and sporks; chopsticks; condiment cups and packets;
straws; stirrers; splash sticks; cocktail sticks.
   (h)   "Standard condiment" means relishes, spices, sauces, confections, or
seasonings that require no additional preparation and that are usually used on
a food item after preparation, including ketchup, mustard, mayonnaise, soy
sauce, hot sauce, salsa, salt, pepper, sugar, and sugar substitutes.
   (i)   "Third-party food delivery platform" has the same meaning as in
Section 113930.5 of the Health and Safety Code.
(part 4, Ord. 1708-NS, eff. February 10, 2023)
Sec. 6-7.102. Disposable foodware and standard condiments to be provided upon
request by consumer.
   (a)   Except as provided in subdivisions (c) and (d), a food facility, for
on-premises dining or when using a third-party food delivery platform, shall
not provide any single-use foodware accessory or standard condiment packaged
for single use to a consumer unless the single-use foodware accessory or
standard condiment is requested by the consumer.
   (b)   Single-use foodware accessories and standard condiments packaged for
single use provided by food facilities for use by consumers shall not be
bundled or packaged in a manner that prohibits a consumer from taking only the
type of single-use foodware accessory or standard condiment desired without
also having to take a different type of single-use foodware accessory or
standard condiment.
   (c)   A food facility may ask a drive-through consumer if the consumer wants
a single-use foodware accessory if the single-use foodware accessory is
necessary for the consumer to consume ready-to-eat food, or to prevent spills
of or safely transport ready-to-eat food.
   (d)   A third-party food delivery platform shall provide consumers with the
option to request single-use foodware accessories or standard condiments from a
food facility serving ready-to-eat food.
   (e)   If a food facility uses any third-party delivery platform for ready-
to-eat food, the food facility shall customize its menu with a list of
available single-use foodware accessories and standard condiments, and only
those single-use foodware accessories or standard condiments selected by the
consumer shall be provided by the food facility. If a consumer does not select
any single-use foodware accessories or standard condiments, no single-use
foodware accessory or standard condiment shall be provided by the food facility
for delivery of ready-to-eat food.
   (f)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit a food facility from making
unwrapped single-use foodware accessories available to a consumer using
refillable self-service dispensers that dispense one item at a time to allow
for single-use foodware accessories to be obtained.
   (g)   A food facility is encouraged, but not required, to take actions in
addition to the requirements of this section that support a goal of reducing
the use of and waste generated by all single-use food service products.
(part 4, Ord. 1708-NS, eff. February 10, 2023)
Sec. 6-7.103. Exceptions.
   This chapter does not apply to any of the following:
   (a)   Health care facilities licensed pursuant to Article 1 (commencing with
Section 1250) of Chapter 2 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code or
facilities that are owned or operated by a health care service plan licensed
pursuant to Chapter 2.2 (commencing with Section 1340) of Division 2 of the
Health and Safety Code.
   (b)   Residential care facilities licensed pursuant to Division 2
(commencing with Section 1200) of the Health and Safety Code.
   (c)   Public and private school cafeterias, as referenced in paragraph (1)
of subdivision (b) of Section 113789 of the Health and Safety Code.
(part 4, Ord. 1708-NS, eff. February 10, 2023)
Sec. 6-7.104. Enforcement and penalties.
   (a)   Any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of
a violation of this Code pursuant to
Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code and subject to the penalties of subdivision
(b).
   (b)   The first and second violations of this Chapter shall result in a
notice of violation, and any subsequent violation shall constitute an
infraction punishable by a fine of twenty-five dollars for each day in
violation, but not to exceed three hundred dollars annually.
(part 4, Ord. 1708-NS, eff. February 10, 2023)
TITLE 7. PUBLIC WORKS
CHAPTER 1. CURBS, GUTTERS, SIDEWALKS, PAVEOUTS, RIGHTS-OF-WAY, AND DRAINAGE
FACILITIES
Article 1. General Provisions
      
7-1.101–Interpretation
      
7-1.102–Certain conditions declared dangerous
      
7-1.103–Improvements required for new and modified construction
      
7-1.104–Property deeds for street widening
      
7-1.105–Improvements and property deeds: Exceptions
      
7-1.106–Denial of public utility connections
      
7-1.107–Implementation and administration
Article 2. Drainage Area No. 1 (Repealed)
CHAPTER 2. ENCROACHMENTS
Article 1. Title and Application
      
7-2.101–Title
      
7-2.102–Application
Article 2. Definitions
      
7-2.201–Scope
      
7-2.202–Applicant
      
7-2.203–City Engineer
      
7-2.204–Encroach and encroachment
      
7-2.205–Encroachment work
      
7-2.206–Permittee
      
7-2.207–Public highway
      
7-2.208–Right-of-way
Article 3. Permits
      
7-2.301–Required: Exceptions
      
7-2.302–Applications: Form: Filing
      
7-2.303–Applications: Accompanying exhibits
      
7-2.304–Schedule of fees
      
7-2.305–Fees: Deposits: Refunds
      
7-2.306–Issuance
      
7-2.307–Acceptance
      
7-2.308–Additional requirements
      
7-2.309–Grounds for denial
      
7-2.310–Revocation
      
7-2.311–Changes in authorized work
      
7-2.312–Display
      
7-2.313–Nontransferable
      
7-2.314–Blanket permits
      
7-2.315–Permits to move certain vehicles and objects
Article 4. Security Instruments
      
7-2.401–Cash deposits
      
7-2.402–Bonds
      
7-2.403–Instruments of deposit
      
7-2.404–Annual bonds
      
7-2.405–Insurance certificates
      
7-2.406–Additional bonds and cash deposits
      
7-2.407–Release of deposits
      
7-2.408–Expiration date of deposits
      
7-2.409–Bonds: Exemptions
Article 5. Liability Protection
      
7-2.501–Liability for roadway damages
      
7-2.502–Nonliability of City for damages
      
7-2.503–Liability insurance
      
7-2.504–Responsibility of subsequent owners
Article 6. Construction
      
7-2.601–Inspections: Charges
      
7-2.602–Commencement of work
      
7-2.603–Commencement of work: Notices
      
7-2.604–Completion of work: Notices
      
7-2.605–Completion of work: Inspections
      
7-2.606–Completion of work: Filing of maps and atlas sheets
      
7-2.607–Completion of work: Restoration of rights-of-way
      
7-2.608–Completion of work: Delays
      
7-2.609–Emergency work: Notices
      
7-2.610–Standards
      
7-2.611–Storage of materials
      
7-2.612–Monuments
      
7-2.613–Open trenches
      
7-2.614–Interference with drainage
      
7-2.615–Small pipes
      
7-2.616–Covering pipes and conduits
      
7-2.617–Backfilling
      
7-2.618–Paving by City
      
7-2.619–Cleanup
Article 7. Relocation and Removal
      
7-2.701–Requirements
      
7-2.702–Removal of prior encroachments
Article 8. Public Safety
      
7-2.801–Interference with use of highways
      
7-2.802–Safety devices
      
7-2.803–Visibility aids
Article 9. Landscaping Provisions in Public Rights-of-Way
      
7-2.901–Purpose and intent
      
7-2.902–Definitions
      
7-2.903–General requirements: Landscape plans
      
7-2.904–Medians: Types of landscaping required
      
7-2.905–Trees in parkways, public service easements, and the like
      
7-2.906–Trimming, removal, and replacement of street trees
      
7-2.907–Repairs of street improvements within public rights-of-way where
damages have been caused by street trees
      
7-2.908–Scenic highways
      
7-2.909–Installation and maintenance programs, costs, and operation for medians
and parkways on secondary and primary highways, including scenic highways
      
7-2.910–Planting lawns and ground cover
      
7-2.911–Planting and erecting hedges, shrubs, and fences
      
7-2.912–Maintenance of hedges, shrubs, and fences
      7-2.913–Private property encroachments on public right-of-way
Article 10. Vehicles
      
7-2.1001–Moving certain vehicles and objects
Article 11. Appeals
      
7-2.1101–Appeals: Hearings
Article 12. Violations
      
7-2.1201–Violations
Article 13. Newsracks
      
7-2.1301–Purpose
      
7-2.1302–Definitions
      
7-2.1303–Permits
      
7-2.1304–Newsrack requirements
      
7-2.1305–Sites: Location, placement, and number restrictions
      
7-2.1306–Displays of matter harmful to minors prohibited
      
7-2.1307–Abandonment
      
7-2.1308–Notice to correct
      
7-2.1309–Impoundment
      
7-2.1310–Hearings
      
7-2.1311–Violations
      
7-2.1312–Initial filing, processing and abatement of nonconforming existing
newsracks
CHAPTER 3. GRADING
      
7-3.01–Purpose
      
7-3.02–Scope
      
7-3.03–Permissive provisions
      
7-3.04–California Environmental Quality Act of 1970
      
7-3.05–Waivers, hearings, and appeals
      
7-3.06–Definitions
      
7-3.07–Permits required
      
7-3.08–Permit requirements
      
7-3.09–Permit limitations and conditions
      
7-3.10–Exceptions for emergencies
      
7-3.11–Conditions of approval
      
7-3.12–Liability
      
7-3.13–Denial of permits
      
7-3.14–Fees
      
7-3.15–Bonds
      
7-3.16–Hazardous soil and earth conditions
      
7-3.17–General excavating and grading requirements
      
7-3.18–Inspections of excavations and fills
      
7-3.19–Excavations
      
7-3.20–Fills
      
7-3.21–Erosion control and drainage devices
      
7-3.22–Buttress fills
      
7-3.23–Areas subject to slides and unstable soil
      
7-3.24–Planting and irrigation of cut and fill slopes
      
7-3.25–Rules and regulations
      
7-3.26–Violations
CHAPTER 4. SEPARATION OF WATER AND SEWER FACILITIES
      
7-4.01–Definitions
      
7-4.02–Purpose and extent of regulations
      
7-4.03–Water and sewer lines
      
7-4.04–Water supply and sewer facilities
      
7-4.05–Exceptions
      
7-4.06–Violations
CHAPTER 5. UTILITY LINES
Article 1. Removal and Undergrounding of Existing Overhead Facilities
      
7-5.101–Definitions
      
7-5.102–Public hearings by Council
      
7-5.103–Report by City Engineer
      
7-5.104–Council may designate Underground Utility Districts by resolution
      
7-5.105–Unlawful acts
      
7-5.106–Exceptions: Emergencies or unusual circumstances
      
7-5.107–Other exceptions
      
7-5.108–Notices to property owners and utility companies
      
7-5.109–Responsibility of utility companies
      
7-5.110–Responsibility of property owners
      
7-5.111–Responsibility of City
      
7-5.112–Extension of time
Article 2. Underground Installations
      
7-5.201–Purposes
      
7-5.202–Required: Exceptions
      
7-5.203–Waivers
      
7-5.204–Compliance with provisions prerequisite to issuance of building permits
      
7-5.205–Aboveground equipment
      
7-5.206–Appeals: Hearings
CHAPTER 6. REPRODUCTION MACHINE FEES
      
7-6.01–Fee schedule
      
7-6.02–Liability
CHAPTER 7. OVERTIME CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION FEES
      
7-7.01–Fee schedule
      
7-7.02–Overtime construction inspections: Applications
CHAPTER 8. STORMWATER DISCHARGES AND STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT
Article 1. General Provisions
      
7-8.101–Purpose and intent
      
7-8.102–Definitions
Article 2. Prohibition of Illicit Connections and Illicit Discharges: Reduction
of Pollutants
      
7-8.201–Prohibition of illicit connections, improper property maintenance, and
illicit discharges, and other prohibited acts
Article 3. Control of Urban Runoff
      
7-8.301–Development, stormwater quality master and stormwater pollution control
plans
      
7-8.302–Best management practices and requirements
      
7-8.303–Notification of intent and compliance with general permits
      
7-8.304–Elimination of illicit discharge and illicit connections
Article 4. Inspections
      
7-8.401–Scope of inspections
Article 5. Enforcement and Penalties
      
7-8.501–Administrative remedies
      
7-8.502–Appeals of administrative remedies
      
7-8.503–Public nuisance
      
7-8.504–Infraction or misdemeanor: Separate offenses
      
7-8.506–Violations of other laws
      
7-8.507–Civil remedies: Injunctions
CHAPTER 1. CURBS, GUTTERS, SIDEWALKS, PAVE-OUTS, RIGHTS-OF WAY, AND DRAINAGE
FACILITIES
Article 1. General Provisions
Sec. 7-1.101. Interpretation.
   The provisions of this article shall not be construed to conflict with or
supersede in any way the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act of the State or
City laws applicable to the Planning Commission’s authority to require
improvements and dedications.
(§ 8, Ord. 38)
Sec. 7-1.102. Certain conditions declared dangerous.
   Earthen sidewalks, curbs, and gutters, unimproved street rights-of-way, and
inadequate drainage facilities are hereby found and declared to be dangerous to
the public health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 38)
Sec. 7-1.103. Improvements required for new and modified construction.
   (a)   Every owner, or lessee or agent thereof, constructing or substantially
modifying or causing the construction of, or substantial modifications to, a
building, dwelling, or other structure or off-street parking shall provide or
make provisions for the construction of sidewalks, curbs, gutters, adequate
drainage facilities, and paving, unless adequate sidewalks, curbs, gutters,
drainage facilities, and paving exist along all street frontages adjoining the
lot on which the building, dwelling, or other structure or off-street parking
facility is to be constructed or modified. All improvements required by this
section shall be constructed or installed in accordance with City standards and
designs or on an agreement made and a bond or cash posted in an amount approved
by the City Engineer to assure the construction of the improvements.
   (b)   For the purposes of this section, a modification shall be deemed
substantial unless it meets one or more of the following criteria:
   (1)   The work involves only exterior remodeling of a structure.
   (2)   A proposed addition to a structure which does not exceed ten (10%)
percent of the total existing building gross floor area, or eight thousand
(8,000) square feet, whichever is less.
   (c)   For the purposes of this section, any lot in any planning zone, except
a lot zoned One-Family Residential (R-1) or Rural Exclusive (R-E), with a
required lot size of not less than twenty-thousand (20,000) square feet shall
come within the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 38, as amended by Ord. 102, and §§ 4 and 5, Ord. 38, as amended by
Ord. 217-NS, eff. August 12, 1971, § II, Ord. 725-NS, eff. September 27, 1979,
and § 1, Ord. 1230-NS, eff. April 18, 1995)
Sec. 7-1.104. Property deeds for street widening.
   In addition to the provisions of Section 7-1.103 of this article, if, on any
lot adjoining a public street, the construction or substantial modification of
a building, dwelling, or other structure or off-street parking will cause an
increase in, or contribute to, vehicular or pedestrian traffic, there shall be
deeded to the City sufficient property adjoining the public street to provide
for the widening of such public street to the ultimate width established by the
Council.
(§ 3, Ord. 38, as amended by Ord. 102)
Sec. 7-1.105. Improvements and property deeds: Exceptions.
   The City Engineer, upon the application of any interested property owner or
other person subject to the provisions of this article or upon motion of the
Commission, may waive or conditionally waive the provisions of this article
where the public health, safety, and welfare will not be adversely affected,
taking into consideration, as any of the same may apply to a particular case,
the following:
   (a)   The contour of the ground;
   (b)   The relation of the adjacent property to the street elevation;
   (c)   The use made of the property in the area; and
   (d)   The convenience of the public with relation thereto.
   Prior to the granting of any waiver or conditional waiver, the City Engineer
shall provide notice and an opportunity to be heard to interested persons in
the vicinity of the application that may be affected, pursuant to the notice,
hearing and appeal procedures set forth in Section 9-4.2805 of this code
relating to administrative actions.
(§ 7, Ord. 38, as amended by Ord. 77, § II, Ord. 295-NS, eff. August 10, 1972,
§ 1, Ord. 899-NS, eff. October 22, 1985, and § 26, Ord. 1374-NS, eff. April 26,
2001)
Sec. 7-1.106. Denial of public utility connections.
   The Building Official shall deny final approval and acceptance for public
utility connections to any building, dwelling, or other structure or facility
until the provisions of Sections 7-1.103 and 7-1.104 of this article are met or
are waived by the Planning Commission or construction thereof is guaranteed by
a cash deposit or bond of a sum equal to the prevailing cost of such
improvements as determined by the City Engineer from comparable contemporary
construction work in the City.
(§ 6, Ord. 38, as amended by § 1, Ord. 122-NS, eff. December 18, 1969)
Sec. 7-1.107. Implementation and administration.
   The Council shall, by resolution, adopt appropriate procedures, standards,
and rules for the implementation and administration of the provisions of this
chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 122-NS, eff. December 18, 1969)
Article 2. Drainage Area No. 1
(Sections 7-1.201 through 7-1.204, codified from Ordinance No. 184, repealed by
Section I, Ordinance No. 313-NS, effective November 2, 1972)
CHAPTER 2. ENCROACHMENTS
Article 1. Title and Application
Sec. 7-2.101. Title.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Encroachment
Regulations” of the City.
(§ 11000, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.102. Application.
   (a)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any officer or
employee of the City in the discharge of his official duties.
   (b)   Work performed by any person under contract with, or at the request
of, the City shall be exempt from the fee and bond requirements of this
chapter.
(§ 11451, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Article 2. Definitions
Sec. 7-2.201. Scope.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined in this
article.
Sec. 7-2.202. Applicant.
   “Applicant” shall mean any person who proposes to encroach upon a right-of-
way and has applied for a permit for the proposed encroachment pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
(§ 11009, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.203. City Engineer.
   “City Engineer” shall mean the City Engineer of the City who shall be
charged with the responsibilities of City Road Commissioner and City Surveyor.
(§ 11006, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.204. Encroach and encroachment.
   “Encroach” and “encroachment” shall mean going upon, over, under, within, or
using or doing work upon any right-of-way so as to prevent, obstruct, or
interfere with the normal use of the right-of-way. “Encroach” and
“encroachment” shall include the performance on a right-of-way of any of the
following acts:
   (a)   Excavating or placing embankments or stockpiling any material within a
right-of-way;
   (b)   Placing or leaving any rubbish, brush, earth, or other material of any
nature whatever on a right-of-way;
   (c)   Constructing, placing, or maintaining any pathway, sidewalk, curb,
gutter, driveway, surfacing, culvert, drainage facility, pipe, conduit, or
cable on, over, under, or within a right-of-way;
   (d)   Erecting or maintaining any post, sign, banner, pole, fence, guard
rail, wall, loading platform, or any other structure on, over, under, or within
a right-of-way;
   (e)   Planting or removing any tree, shrub, grass, or growing thing within a
right-of-way;
   (f)   Taking, placing, moving, or using on a right-of-way any vehicle, or
combination of vehicles, or other object of a dimension, weight, or other
characteristic prohibited by the Vehicle Code of the State;
   (g)   Lighting or building a fire for the purpose of the disposal of weeds,
brush, or debris on a right-of-way;
   (h)   Using a right-of-way for commercial motion or still picture
photography;
   (i)   Locating, drilling, or plugging test holes for seismological
exploration or any other similar purpose within a right-of-way; and
   (j)   Conducting land surveying operations or making traffic counts in such
a way that it is necessary to excavate within a right-of-way or in any way
interfere with the normal flow of traffic on a public highway.
(§ 11004, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.205. Encroachment work.
   “Encroachment work” shall mean the work of designing, constructing, placing,
or installing an encroachment in a right-of-way.
(§ 11005, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50; § 2, Ord. 1637-NS, eff. January 12,
2018)
Sec. 7-2.206. Permittee.
   “Permittee” shall mean any person who proposes to encroach upon a right-of-
way and has been issued a permit for the proposed encroachment by the City
Engineer pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 11008, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.207. Public highway.
   “Public highway” shall mean the part of a right-of-way which is improved for
use as a City road, street, way, lane, or alley, including shoulders.
(§ 11003, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.208. Right-of-way.
   “Right-of-way” shall mean any land, or interest therein, which, by deed,
conveyance, agreement, dedication, usage, or other process of law, has been
reserved for or dedicated to the City for the use of the general public for
public road purposes.
(§ 11002, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Article 3. Permits
Sec. 7-2.301. Required: Exceptions.
   (a)   Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to encroach, or to make
or cause to be made any encroachment, or to do any encroachment work upon,
over, under, or within any right-of-way in the City without first obtaining a
permit from the City Engineer.
   (b)   Exceptions. An owner, lessee, or person in control of property under
active agricultural use and immediately abutting the right-of-way may, without
obtaining a permit, use the untraveled portion of the right-of-way abutting
such property for the growing and maintenance of agricultural crops and the
burning of weeds so long as such use does not interfere with vehicular or
pedestrian traffic or drainage of the right-of-way. Encroachments for which
permits are not required shall be subject to removal under the procedure and
penalties set forth in Sections 1481 through 1485 of Chapter 6 of Division 2 of
the Streets and Highways Code of the State.
(§ 11050, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.302. Applications: Form: Filing.
   (a)   Form. The City Engineer shall prescribe and provide a form of
application for the permits required by the provisions of this article. The
application form shall contain spaces for the following:
   (1)   The applicant’s name and address;
   (2)   The contractor’s name, license number, and place of business; and
   (3)   Sufficient detail as, in the judgment of the City Engineer, is
necessary to show the purpose, location, and dimensions of the proposed
encroachment.
   Applications for tract directional signs shall also require the submission
of a location map indicating the exact installation site for each such sign.
   (b)   Filing. The application form shall be completed, signed by the
applicant, and filed with the City Engineer, together with all fees, cash
deposits, bonds, certificates of insurance policies, and any other documents
which are required by the provisions of this chapter to be submitted with the
application form.
(§ 11051, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50, as amended by § I, Ord. 358-NS, eff.
April 12, 1973)
Sec. 7-2.303. Applications: Accompanying exhibits.
   When required by the City Engineer, the applicant shall attach to, or
enclose with, the application a map, plot, sketch, diagram, or similar exhibit
which plainly shows any and all information necessary to locate, delineate,
illustrate, or identify the proposed encroachment.
(§ 11052, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.304. Schedule of fees.
   The schedule of fees to be paid to the Public Works Department shall be in
accordance with the fee schedule adopted by Council resolution.
(§ 11053, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50, as amended by §§ 1 and 2, Ord. 128-NS,
eff. January 22, 1970, § II, Ord. 358-NS, eff. April 12, 1973, and § I, Ord.
778-NS, eff. June 11, 1981)
Sec. 7-2.305. Fees: Deposits: Refunds.
   (a)   Deposits. Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall deposit with
the City Engineer cash or a check in a sufficient sum to cover the fees
established by the Council. Public utilities and political subdivisions may, at
the option of the City Engineer, make payment for such fees as billed by the
City instead of by advance deposit.
   (b)   Refunds. Fees shall not be refunded unless no permit is issued or
unless the permit issued is rejected by the permittee because of special
conditions imposed therein.
(§ 11054, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.306. Issuance.
   Upon receiving an application in the proper form, together with all other
items required to be submitted, the City Engineer shall issue a written permit
subject to the conditions set forth in this chapter and required by law,
authorizing the encroachment described in the application, unless grounds exist
for refusing to issue the permit.
(§ 11056, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50, as amended by § III, Ord. 358-NS, eff.
April 12, 1973, and § 5, Ord. 1621-NS, eff. September 30, 2016)
Sec. 7-2.307. Acceptance.
   By accepting the permit, the permittee agrees to be bound by all the terms
and conditions set forth in the permit and in this chapter.
(§ 11069, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.308. Additional requirements.
   The City Engineer may provide in any permit issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter any requirements which he finds will substantially
aid in the protection of the highway or of the traveling public. The City
Engineer may establish special provisions for the work to be done under the
permit, including the equipment to be used, the type of backfill, paving,
traffic signs or devices, hours of work, flagmen, lights, or inspections. He
may also require whatever advance notice he deems proper for requests for
inspections. The City Engineer may add such requirements and conditions by
rubber stamp or attachments to the permit, or both, and they shall become an
integral part of the permit.
(§ 11059, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.309. Grounds for denial.
   The City Engineer may refuse to issue a permit on the following grounds:
   (a)   That the applicant is not a responsible person. In determining whether
or not the applicant is a responsible person, the City Engineer may consider
the reports of other persons as to the applicant's reputation for faithfully
completing construction projects; and
   (b)   That the encroachment will not be in the public interest or will be
detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare.
(§ 11057, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.310. Revocation.
   If any of the provisions of the permit or this chapter are violated, the
City Engineer may serve written notice upon the permittee in violation, giving
the permittee twenty-four (24) hours in which to correct the violation. If the
violation results in a danger to life or property, the notice shall state that
all encroachment work shall stop until the violation is corrected. If, after
twenty-four (24) hours from the issuance of the notice, the violation is not
corrected or there is no evidence that diligence is being used to correct the
violation, the City Engineer may revoke the encroachment permit, subject to the
right of the permittee to appeal such revocation pursuant to the appeal
provisions of this chapter.
   Action taken pursuant to the provisions of this section shall not constitute
a bar to criminal proceedings provided for in this chapter.
(§ 11061, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.311. Changes in authorized work.
   No changes shall be made in the location, dimensions, character, or duration
of the encroachment or use as granted by the permit except on authorization by
the City Engineer.
(§ 11070, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.312. Display.
   The permittee shall keep any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter, or a copy thereof, at the site of work, or in the cab of the
vehicle when movement thereof on a public highway is involved, and the permit
shall be shown to any authorized representative of the City Engineer or law
enforcement officer upon demand.
(§ 11071, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.313. Nontransferable.
   No permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be
transferable or assignable to any other person.
(§ 11072, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.314. Blanket permits.
   The City Engineer may issue an annual blanket permit authorizing the
placing, replacing, or repairing of any facilities within a right-of-way where
the opening or excavation does not exceed two (2’) feet in width and sixty
(60’) feet in length, excavated at a right angle to the center line of the
road, or an excavation not exceeding thirty (30) square feet in area. The City
Engineer may issue an annual blanket permit authorizing the trimming of trees
to a public utility regulated by the Public Utilities Commission of the State
or to a person holding a franchise from the City.
(§ 11058, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50, as amended by §§ 3 and 4, Ord. 128-NS,
eff. January 22, 1970)
Sec. 7-2.315. Permits to move certain vehicles and objects.
   Before a vehicle or combination of vehicles or object of a weight or
dimension or characteristic prohibited by law without a permit is moved on any
public highway, a permit to do so shall first be granted by the Division of
Highways, Department of Public Works of the State, or by the City Engineer. In
all cases where the Building Code requires the owner of any premises to which
it is proposed to move any building or structure to obtain a relocation permit,
the City Engineer shall not grant a permit to move such building or structure
until the applicant furnishes to the City Engineer evidence that such owner has
such relocation permit.
   Before issuing a permit for the movement of a vehicle or object with a
rolling height of over sixteen (16’) feet, the City Engineer shall require
evidence of approval of height clearance from the public utility companies
having overhead lines crossing the proposed route.
(§ 11400, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Article 4. Security Instruments
Sec. 7-2.401. Cash deposits.
   Unless exempted from such requirement by law or by the City Engineer, each
applicant, before obtaining a permit, shall deposit with the City Engineer a
cash deposit consisting of cash or a certified or cashier’s check in a sum to
be fixed by the City Engineer as sufficient to reimburse the City for restoring
the right-of-way to its original condition. Such cash deposit may be used by
the City for either traffic control or emergency work on an as needed basis as
determined by the City Engineer. Where the size, nature, and location of the
project warrants, the City Engineer may require an additional time completion
deposit which shall be held by the City for the duration of the encroachment
activity. The permittee shall forfeit to the City a portion of such deposit for
each calendar day beyond the number of days specified on the encroachment
permit. The daily amount to be forfeited shall be in accordance with the fee
schedule adopted by Council resolution. The time completion deposit or any
unused portion thereof shall be returned to the permittee within sixty (60)
days upon the acceptance of the work by the City Engineer.
(§ 11100, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50, as amended by § I, Ord. 778-NS, eff.
June 11, 1981)
Sec. 7-2.402. Bonds.
   In lieu of the cash deposit required by the provisions of Section 7-2.401 of
this article, the applicant, with the approval of the City Engineer, may file a
surety bond issued by a company authorized to do a general surety business in
the State, in an amount fixed by the City Engineer as sufficient to reimburse
the City, in accordance with the schedule of charges adopted by the Council,
for restoring the right-of-way to its original condition. Where the size and
nature of the project warrant, the City Engineer may require an additional
deposit of Five Hundred and no/100ths ($500.00) Dollars cash for traffic
control or emergency work.
(§ 11011, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.403. Instruments of deposit.
   In lieu of the cash deposit required by the provisions of Section 7-2.401 of
this article, the applicant, with the approval of the City Engineer, may file a
certificate of deposit or savings and loan share assignment as a deposit in an
amount fixed by the City Engineer as sufficient to reimburse the City, in
accordance with the schedule of charges adopted by the Council, for restoring
the right-of-way to its original condition. Certificates of deposit or savings
and loan share assignments shall be in conformance with the requirements
established by the City Engineer and approved by the Council.
(§ 11102, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.404. Annual bonds.
   In lieu of the cash deposit, bond, certificate of deposit, or savings and
loan share assignment required by the provisions of Sections 7-2.401 through 7-
2.403 of this article, the applicant may, with the approval of the City
Engineer, annually file with the City Engineer a surety bond issued by a
company authorized to do a general surety business in the State, in a sum fixed
by the City Engineer as sufficient to reimburse the City for restoring the
right-of-way to its original condition, in accordance with the schedule of
charges adopted by the Council.
(§ 11103, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.405. Insurance certificates.
   In lieu of the cash deposit or bond required by the provisions of Sections
7-2.401 and 7-2.402 of this article, an applicant for a permit to move a
vehicle may, upon approval by the City Engineer, file with the City Engineer an
approved certificate of insurance issued by a company authorized to do a
general insurance business in the State, in an amount fixed by the City
Engineer as sufficient to reimburse the City, in accordance with the schedule
of charges adopted by the Council, for restoring the right-of-way to its
original condition in case of damage caused by moving any vehicle.
(§ 11104, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.406. Additional bonds and cash deposits.
   The City Engineer may at any time require an additional bond or cash deposit
if he finds that the amount of a bond or cash deposit previously made is
insufficient to cover the cost of restoring the right-of-way in accordance with
City standards and the schedule of charges adopted by the Council.
(§ 11105, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.407. Release of deposits.
   Any deposit required by the City Engineer pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall be payable to the City and shall be filed and deposited with the
City Engineer. Ninety (90) days after the satisfactory completion of all
authorized work and the fulfillment of all conditions of the permit, the City
Engineer shall release the deposit upon the application of the permittee.
(§ 11106, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50, as amended by § 1, Ord. No. 1537-NS,
eff. June 25, 2010)
Sec. 7-2.408. Expiration date of deposits.
   No bond, insurance, certificate, certificate of deposit, savings and loan
share assignment, or other form of indemnification shall be acceptable which
bears an expiration date not determined by the City.
(§ 11107, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.409. Bonds: Exemptions.
   Public utilities operating under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities
Commission of the State, utilities holding a franchise from the City, and
governmental agencies may be relieved by the City Engineer of the obligation of
furnishing a restoration bond if the City Engineer is satisfied that proper
restoration will be made.
(§ 11108, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Article 5. Liability Protection
Sec. 7-2.501. Liability for roadway damages.
   The permittee shall indemnify the City for any and all damages caused to its
roadways as a result of acts or omissions of the permittee in the performance
of encroachment work.
(§ 11150, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.502. Nonliability of City for damages.
   The permittee shall hold the City harmless from any claims or judgments for
damages or other relief against the City as a result of acts or omissions of
the permittee in the performance of encroachment work, whether the condition
giving rise to the claim or judgment was created in whole or in part by the
permittee.
(§ 11151, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.503. Liability insurance.
   The permittee shall maintain adequate public liability insurance, including
motor vehicle insurance, to protect him from any claims for damages for
personal injury, including death, and for damage to property which may arise
from the encroachment work or other operations under the permit, whether such
encroachment work or other operations are by himself or by any agent or by
anyone directly or indirectly employed by him or his agents. Certificates of
insurance shall be filed with the City Engineer and shall be subject to his
approval for adequacy of protection.
(§ 11152, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.504. Responsibility of subsequent owners.
   All obligations, responsibilities, and other requirements of the permittee,
as set forth in this chapter, shall be binding on subsequent owners of the
encroachment.
(§ 11060, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Article 6. Construction
Sec. 7-2.601. Inspections: Charges.
   If, in the judgment of the City Engineer, it appears desirable to maintain
an inspector to determine whether work is being done in compliance with the
permit, the City Engineer shall assign an inspector, and the permittee shall
pay the City in accordance with the schedule of charges adopted by the Council.
The provisions of this section shall be applicable to all permittees, including
districts and other political subdivisions.
(§ 11055, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.602. Commencement of work.
   The permittee shall commence the encroachment work within sixty (60) days
from the date of issuance of the permit unless a different period is stated in
the permit. If the encroachment work is not commenced within sixty (60) days or
within the time stated in the permit, the permit shall be void unless, prior to
its expiration, the time for commencement has been extended in writing by the
City Engineer.
(§ 11062, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.603. Commencement of work: Notices.
   Before commencing any encroachment work authorized by any permit, the
permittee shall notify the City Engineer of the time of commencing the work and
provide the name, address, telephone number, and license number of the
contractor, if any, who will perform the work.
(§ 11063, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.604. Completion of work: Notices.
   The permittee shall complete the encroachment work authorized by a permit
within the time specified in the permit. Upon completion of the work, the
permittee shall give a written notice of completion to the City Engineer. The
work shall be deemed to be incomplete until written notice of completion.
(§ 11064, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.605. Completion of work: Inspections.
   Upon receipt of the notice of completion of the encroachment work, the City
Engineer shall inspect the site of the encroachment work within three (3)
working days and ascertain whether or not the permittee has complied with all
the conditions and requirements imposed in the permit and by the provisions of
this chapter. The permittee shall be advised in writing of the results of the
inspection. If the City Engineer determines that the permittee has not complied
with all such conditions and requirements in performing the encroachment work,
the City Engineer may order the permittee to correct the work immediately. If
the permittee fails to correct the work within ten (10) days after being
ordered to do so in writing, the City Engineer may correct the work. The
permittee shall reimburse the City in accordance with the schedule of charges
adopted by the Council.
(§ 11065, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.606. Completion of work: Filing of maps and atlas sheets.
   Every person owning, using, controlling, or having an interest in any pipe,
conduit, duct, or tunnel under the surface of any right-of-way for supplying or
conveying gas, electricity, communication facilities, water, steam, ammonia, or
oil, or for any other purpose shall file in the office of the City Engineer,
within sixty (60) days after the complete installation, a corrected set of maps
or atlas sheets drawn to a scale of not more than two hundred (200’) feet to
one (1”) inch showing the complete installation of all such pipes, conduits,
ducts, or tunnels. The same shall be required showing the location in detail of
such pipes, conduits, ducts, or tunnels when such are abandoned. Maps and atlas
sheets submitted periodically by public utilities shall be deemed compliance
with the intent of this section.
(§ 11066, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.607. Completion of work: Restoration of rights-of-way.
   Upon completion of the encroachment work authorized by a permit, the
permittee shall restore the right-of-way by replacing, repairing, or rebuilding
it to its original condition before the encroachment work was commenced. The
permittee shall remove all obstructions, materials, and debris upon the right-
of-way and shall do any other work necessary to restore the right-of-way to a
safe and usable condition as directed by the City Engineer. Where excavations
occur within areas already paved, the City Engineer may require temporary
paving to be installed within twenty-four (24) hours after the excavated area
is backfilled.
   In the event the permittee fails to act promptly to restore the right-of-way
as provided in this section, or should the nature of any damage to the right-
of-way require restoration before the permittee can be notified or can respond
to notification, the City Engineer may, at his option, make the necessary
restoration. The permittee shall reimburse the City in accordance with the
schedule of charges adopted by the Council.
(§ 11067, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.608. Completion of work: Delays.
   If the encroachment work is not completed within the time specified in the
permit, or if at any time the City Engineer finds that delay in commencing or
prosecuting the encroachment work is caused by lack of diligence on the part of
the permittee, the City Engineer may cancel the permit and restore the right-
of-way to its original condition before the encroachment work was commenced.
The permittee shall reimburse the City in accordance with the schedule of
charges adopted by the Council.
(§ 11068, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.609. Emergency work: Notices.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not prevent any person from performing
emergency maintenance on any pipe or conduit lawfully on or under any public
highway, or from making an emergency use as may be necessary for the
preservation of life or property when an urgent necessity arises. The person
making an emergency use or encroachment of a public highway shall apply for a
written permit therefor on the first working day thereafter. Any person
requiring an emergency use or encroachment shall notify the City Engineer’s
office immediately. Notification during the hours the City offices are closed
shall be given to the Police Department.
(§ 11073, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.610. Standards.
   All encroachment work shall conform to standards established by the City
Engineer or, in the absence of established standards, to the specifications
contained in the current edition of the standard specifications of the State
issued by the Division of Highways, Department of Public Works of the State.
(§ 11200, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.611. Storage of materials.
   All materials excavated from trenching or other encroachment operations in
the right-of-way shall be piled compactly, kept trim, and maintained in such a
manner as not to endanger either the workers or the general public and to cause
as little inconvenience as possible to those using the right-of-way or adjacent
property.
   In areas too narrow to permit the proper storage of materials, the City
Engineer may require that the permittee remove the materials from the
encroachment site.
(§ 11201, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.612. Monuments.
   A monument set for the purpose of preserving survey points, lines, or
elevation shall not be removed or disturbed without first obtaining permission
from the City Engineer. The replacement of a removed or disturbed monument
shall be done by a registered civil engineer or a licensed surveyor and shall
be at the expense of the permittee.
(§ 11202, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.613. Open trenches.
   In any trenching operation, the open trench shall not be in excess of one
day's work ahead of the trench work proper unless specifically authorized by
the City Engineer. When any excavation is commenced, the work of making and
refilling shall be prosecuted diligently until completion.
(§ 11203, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.614. Interference with drainage.
   If the encroachment work interferes with the established drainage, the
permittee shall provide for proper drainage in a manner approved by the City
Engineer.
(§ 11204, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.615. Small pipes.
   Laterals, services, and other small diameter pipes shall be jacked, bored,
or driven beneath paved surface unless other methods are approved by the City
Engineer.
(§ 11205, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.616. Covering pipes and conduits.
   The minimum cover over any pipe or conduit installed under any public
highway shall be thirty (30”) inches of material measured from the existing or
proposed flow line of the nearest gutter to the top of the pipe or conduit. If
a gutter flow line is not established, the cover shall be thirty (30”) inches
of material measured from the surface of the nearest outermost edge of the
traveled way to the top of the pipe or conduit. Where there are existing curbs
and gutters or where curbs and gutters are under construction, utilities may
maintain a minimum sixteen (16”) inches of cover starting one (1’) foot back of
the curb line in the parkway or sidewalk area. The City Engineer may permit the
installation of pipes or conduits at lesser depths where the required cover
cannot be provided.
(§ 11206, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.617. Backfilling.
   The backfilling and compaction of an excavation shall be in accordance with
standards established by the City Engineer and adopted by resolution of the
Council, both as to materials and methods. The backfilling shall commence
within forty-eight (48) hours after the work in a trench is completed.
(§ 11207, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.618. Paving by City.
   The City Engineer shall have the power to order the paving by City employees
of any excavation up to one hundred (100’) feet in length. The permittee shall
reimburse the City in accordance with the schedule of charges adopted by the
Council.
(§ 11208, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.619. Cleanup.
   Except for materials properly stored, the permittee shall at all times keep
the public highway clear of all materials, earth, and debris. Immediately after
completion of the work, the permittee shall clean up and remove all materials,
earth, and debris of any kind. If the permittee fails, within twenty-four (24)
hours after having been notified to do so by the City Engineer, the work may be
done by the City Engineer and the permittee charged in accordance with the
schedule of charges adopted by the Council.
   When a pole, guy-stub, or similar timber is removed and not replaced, the
entire length thereof shall be removed from the ground and the hole backfilled
and compacted.
(§ 11209, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Article 7. Relocation and Removal
Sec. 7-2.701. Requirements.
   If any City construction or other maintenance work in a right-of-way
requires the relocation or removal of an encroachment, the permittee shall
relocate or remove the encroachment at his sole expense; provided, however,
when an encroachment has been removed or relocated once at the expense of the
permittee, any subsequent removal or relocation demanded by the City within
three (3) years after the first removal or relocation shall be at the expense
of the City. Such provision shall not apply if such highway becomes a freeway.
The provisions of this section are not intended in any way to supersede or
override any prior right which otherwise exists in favor of the permittee.
   When removal or relocation is required, the City Engineer shall give the
permittee a written demand specifying that the encroachment shall be relocated
within the right-of-way to a satisfactory location provided by the City
Engineer or removed from the right-of-way, and a reasonable time within which
the encroachment shall be relocated or removed. If the permittee fails to
comply with such instructions, the City may relocate or remove the encroachment
at the expense of the permittee in accordance with the schedule of charges
adopted by the Council.
   In determining what is a reasonable time for the purposes of this section,
the City Engineer shall take into consideration the nature of the encroachment,
the urgency of the need for its removal, the cost of its removal, the
difficulty of its removal, the value of the intact property of the owner, and
other facts peculiar to the particular situation.
   When an encroachment is removed and not replaced, the entire encroachment
shall be removed from the right-of-way and the hole backfilled and compacted
and returned to its preexisting condition unless the City Engineer permits
otherwise.
(§§ 11251 and 11252, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.702. Removal of prior encroachments.
   Any lawful or unlawful encroachment existing prior to August 3, 1965, shall,
when removal is required, be removed pursuant to the procedure and penalties
set forth in Sections 1481 through 1485 of Chapter 6 of Division 2 of the
Streets and Highways Code of the State.
(§ 11253, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Article 8. Public Safety
Sec. 7-2.801. Interference with use of highways.
   All encroachments shall be planned and executed in such a manner that they
will not unreasonably interfere with the safe and convenient travel of the
general public. Except as provided in Section 942.5 of Chapter 2 of Division 2
of the Streets and Highways Code of the State, at no time shall a public
highway be closed or the use thereof denied to the general public.
(§ 11300, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.802. Safety devices.
   In the conduct of the encroachment work, the permittee shall provide and
maintain such safety devices, including, but not limited to, lights,
barricades, signs, and watchmen, as are necessary to protect the public. Any
omission on the part of the City Engineer to specify in the permit what safety
devices shall be provided by the permittee shall not excuse the permittee from
complying with all laws and regulations relating to the protection of persons
under the circumstances. If the City Engineer finds that suitable safeguards
are not being provided, he may provide, maintain, and relocate such safety
devices as are deemed necessary, or he may cancel the permit and restore the
right-of-way in accordance with existing City standards, charging the permittee
in accordance with the schedule of charges adopted by the Council.
   A permittee making any excavation or leaving any obstruction which could be
a hazard to persons using a right-of-way shall provide and maintain warning
lights far enough away from the excavation or obstruction to give adequate
warning to such persons, and at not more than fifty (50’) feet intervals along
the excavation or obstruction, from one-half (1/2) hour before sunset of each
day to one-half (1/2) hour after sunrise the next day, until the work is
completed and the right-of-way is made safe for use.
   All safety devices shall conform to the requirements of the sign manual
issued by the Department of Public Works of the State so far as such manual is
applicable.
(§ 11301, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Sec. 7-2.803. Visibility aids.
   When the location or position of an encroachment impairs visibility to
vehicular traffic, the City Engineer may require that the encroachment be
painted or equipped with reflectors or other aids to visibility prescribed or
authorized by the Public Utilities Commission of the State, or the City
Engineer may require the encroachment to be relocated at the sole expense of
the permittee. No encroachment shall be maintained across any sidewalk area or
shoulder of a public highway. No encroachment of any nature shall be permitted
or maintained which impedes, obstructs, denies, or impairs the sight distance
for safe pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
(§ 11302, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Article 9. Landscaping Provisions in Public Rights-of-Way*
*   The title of Article 9, formerly entitled “Plants and Fences,” amended by
Section I, Ordinance No. 549-NS, effective November 13, 1975.
*Sec. 7-2.901. Purpose and intent.
   The intent and purpose of this article are as follows:
   (a)   To implement the goals and policies of the Scenic Highways Element of
the General Plan, which applies to a specific system of highways as designated
in that element;
   (b)   To establish provisions of law which serve to promote a uniform City
beautification program in public rights-of-way with the installation of street
trees, landscaped median islands and parkways, and other landscape
architectural features;
   (c)   To protect and enhance the visual character of the streets and
highways in the City, with particular attention being given to landscaping and
the materials used within the roadways themselves, and to provide
implementation methods for achieving this objective;
   (d)   To acknowledge that trees and other plant materials, by means of their
shape, texture, color, and shadow effect, give people a sense of closer contact
with nature within the urban environment;
   (e)   To acknowledge that trees and other vegetation ameliorate the effects
of air pollution through the absorption of air contaminants, reduce glare, and
attenuate traffic noise, thus making the highway environment more pleasant for
both residents and visitors of the City;
   (f)   To recognize that landscape treatment in the public rights-of-way
imparts important physical, functional, economic, and aesthetic benefits to the
community and that the presence of trees and other vegetation, as well as
distinctive ornamental streetscape design features, can enhance the visual
identity of the City and thus improve the overall quality of the environment;
   (g)   To promote and enhance scenic highway distinction and identity by
developing and maintaining highway landscape themes;
   (h)   To provide for median and parkway landscaping as new development
occurs adjacent to scenic highways;
   (i)   To provide a policy, where development exists, that provisions be made
for parkway and median improvements, including landscaping or other special
treatment of public rights-of-way; and
   (j)   To recognize that, as street trees mature along with increased
population and urbanization and increased potential for liability, there is a
need to have policies which guide decisions regarding proposed removal and
replacement of street trees.
(§ I, Ord. 549-NS, eff. November 13, 1975, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1372-NS,
eff. February 8, 2001)
*   Section 7-2.901 entitled “Planting trees and other plants,” recodified from
Section 11350, T.O.O.C., as added by Ordinance No. 50, amended by Section I,
said Ordinance No. 549-NS.
*Sec. 7-2.902. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this article are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Land development manual” shall mean a document containing City
standards and specifications for the improvement and maintenance of public
streets.
   (b)   “Landscaping design criteria.” Landscaping design criteria within
public rights-of-way and adjacent to public service easements shall be as
defined in the Council adopted resolution containing precise guidelines and
standards, and all landscaping shall be installed in accordance with City
specifications.
   (c)   “Parkway” shall mean and include that area of the public right-of-way
between the back of the curb and the gutter line and the lot line of the
adjacent property, other than a sidewalk.
   (d)   “Primary highway” shall mean the widest type of traffic thoroughfare
that is shown on the Circulation Element of the General Plan.
   (e)   “Public service easement” shall mean an easement area usually adjacent
to the street right-of-way containing utilities and City street trees.
   (f)   “Scenic Highways Element” shall mean an adopted element of the General
Plan containing the policies, objectives, principles, standards, and plan
proposals for the development, establishment, and protection of scenic highways
pursuant to the provisions of Article 2.5 (commencing with Section 260) of
Chapter 2 of Division 1 of the Streets and Highways Code of the State.
   (g)   “Secondary highway” shall mean a lesser type of main traffic
thoroughfare shown on the Circulation Element of the General Plan.
   (h)   “Street appurtenance” shall mean an appurtenance within or adjacent to
the public right-of-way, consisting of, but not limited to, street signs and
street lights.
   (i)   “Street median” shall mean a raised center strip of street right-of-
way with varying widths containing landscaping and street appurtenances that
serve to divide opposing traffic lanes and allow for left turn pockets.
   (j)   “Street tree” shall mean any tree planted or to be located within the
public right-of-way, or public service easement as a requirement of development
or an entitlement of the same or adjacent property.
   (k)   “Tree well” shall mean a designated tree planting location designed
and installed in accordance with City specifications.
   (l)   “Turn pocket” shall mean a special traffic lane for turning purposes
within the street right-of-way that is designed and installed in accordance
with City specifications.
   (m)   “Community association” shall mean an association officially
representing homeowners residing within a specific area that serves to manage
and maintain facilities on land in common ownership through the collection of
fees.
   (n)   “Landmark trees” shall have that meaning as defined in Article 43 of
Chapter 4 of Title 9 of this Code.
   (o)   “Historic trees” shall mean a tree that because of its historical or
cultural significance, will be preserved and safeguarded as symbolic of the
City’s heritage and to the beauty and image of the City of Thousand Oaks. All
historic trees shall be designated pursuant to Article 43 of Chapter 4 of Title
9 of this Code.
(§ I, Ord. 549-NS, eff. November 13, 1975, as amended by §§ 4, 8, Ord. 1217-NS,
eff. October 28,1994, § 2, Ord. 1372-NS, eff. February 8, 2001, Part 14, Ord.
1610-NS, eff. January 15, 2016, and § 2, Ord. 1649-NS, eff. September 28, 2018)
*   Section 7-2.902 entitled “Trimming and removing trees,” recodified from
Section 11351, T.O.O.C., as added by Ordinance No. 50, repealed by Section II,
Ordinance No. 549-NS, effective November 13, 1975.
Sec. 7-2.903. General requirements: Landscape plans.
   (a)   Where residential, commercial, or industrial development is proposed
adjacent to primary or secondary highways, including scenic highways, it shall
be the responsibility of the developer to prepare or have prepared a precise
landscape plan for that portion of the right-of-way improvement adjacent to the
proposed development. A registered landscape architect selected by either the
City or the developer shall be retained to prepare the landscape plan and
oversee the implementation phase of the project.
   (b)   The developer and the landscape architect shall meet with the Public
Works Director and the Community Development Director during the preliminary
design and planning stages of all median islands and parkways on primary and
secondary highways.
   (c)   All median landscaping, trees within the public service easement, and
parkway trees required to be planted by a developer shall be installed in
accordance with the intent and content of the City’s Forestry Master Plan and
approved by the Public Works Director and the Community Development Director or
their respective designees. Additionally, landscape plans for primary and
secondary highways adjacent to a project shall be prepared, and the
implementation overseen, by a California Licensed Landscape Architect.
(§ I, Ord. 549-NS, eff. November 13, 1975, as amended by § 5, Ord. 1217-NS,
eff. September 27, 1994)
Sec. 7-2.904. Medians: Types of landscaping required.
   Where medians are constructed within primary and secondary controlled access
highways, the type of landscaping to be installed shall depend upon the width
of the particular median strip and shall be determined in accordance with the
following:
   (a)   For median strips of widths less than six (6’) feet. Ground cover,
trees, and/or shrubs, subject to approval by the Public Works Director and the
Community Development Director. For areas within one hundred (100’) feet of an
intersection, ground cover, trees, and shrubs shall be planted which will, upon
maturity, not impede or restrict the vehicular sight distance. Where planting
is not feasible, the median shall be paved curb to curb, in which case a
decorative pavement pattern or textured surface material, approved by the
Public Works Director and the Community Development Director, shall be
utilized;
   (b)   For median strips of widths six (6’) feet to ten (10’) feet. Ground
cover, trees, and/or shrubs, subject to approval by the Public Works Director
and the Community Development Director. For areas within one hundred (100’)
feet of an intersection, ground cover, trees, and shrubs shall be planted which
will, upon maturity, not impede or restrict the vehicular sight distance. Where
planting is not feasible in turn pockets and approaches thereto, a decorative
pavement pattern or textured surface material, approved by the Public Works
Director and the Community Development Director, shall be utilized; and
   (c)   For median strips of widths greater than ten (10') feet. Lawn, ground
cover, trees and shrubs, subject to approval by the Public Works Director and
the Community Development Director. Lawns must be irrigated with non-potable
water. For areas within one hundred (100') feet of an intersection, ground
cover, trees, and shrubs shall be planted which will, upon maturity, not impede
or restrict the vehicular sight distance. Where planting is not feasible in
turn pockets and approaches thereto, a decorative pavement pattern or textured
surface material, approved by the Public Works Director and the Community
Development Director, shall be utilized.
   (d)   Every attempt shall be made to incorporate drought-tolerant species in
median areas.
(§ I, Ord. 549-NS, eff. November 13, 1975, as amended by § 6, Ord. 1217-NS,
eff. September 27, 1994, and § 2, Ord. 1630-NS, eff. May 26, 2017)
Sec. 7-2.905. Trees in parkways, public service easements, and the like.
   The following provisions shall apply with respect to trees in required
parkways and public service easements:
   (a)   A lot or parcel of land in any zone adjoining a primary, secondary,
collector, or residential street in connection with which a parkway is to be
installed shall have ornamental trees planted in the parkway, right-of-way or
public service easement.
   (b)   No building permit shall be issued for any construction on a lot or
parcel of land required to have trees planted in the parkway until the required
trees have been planted or a bond or security deposit is on file in the Public
Works Department to assure that the trees will be planted prior to the
occupancy of any structure. A condition to this effect shall be attached to all
development and other permits hereafter approved by the City.
   (c)   Public service easements or peripheral right-of-way property on
streets with monolithic sidewalks in residential, commercial, and industrial
developments shall be planted with ornamental street trees prior to the
issuance of any occupancy permit for any unit of the affected development. The
type of tree to be planted shall be one identified within the planting pallets
of the City’s Forestry Master Plan and approved by the Public Works Director
and the Community Development Director or their respective designees for the
particular street in question. As a condition of a tentative tract map for
large lot subdivisions (one acre minimum lot size), the Planning Commission
may, under special or unique circumstances, modify or waive this requirement.
   (d)   For single-family residential subdivisions, a developer or owner shall
submit to the City Engineer two (2) prints of the tentative subdivision map or
the plot plan showing all streets and lots. The City Engineer shall indicate
thereon the required trees and return one print to the subdivider or developer.
   (e)   To carry out the purposes of this section, the City shall prepare
standard specifications for street tree planting which shall include, but not
be limited to, the amount of bond required, the species of tree, planting
methods and location, and maintenance. The specifications shall be effective
upon adoption by the Council.
   (f)   That all planting shall conform to the City’s Forestry Master Plan and
any other City specifications.
(§ I, Ord. 549-NS, eff. November 13, 1975, as amended by §§ 7 and 9, Ord. 1217-
NS, eff. September 27, 1994)
Sec. 7-2.906. Trimming, removal, and replacement of street trees.
   (a)   Any tree which is either dead, dying, or diseased within one year
subsequent to the final acceptance of a development shall be replaced by the
developer at the developer’s sole cost and expense. Development entitlements
approved by the City shall be conditioned to impose this requirement and to
require the posting of a bond or cash deposit to guarantee performance.
   (b)   After one year subsequent to acceptance of the final improvements, the
removal and replacement of street trees shall be authorized by the City.
   (c)   Except for City agents or employees as set forth in Section 7-2.907,
no person shall cut, remove, trim, or in any manner alter the condition of a
street tree without obtaining approval from the City.
   (d)   City approval for cutting, trimming or removal of a street tree may be
granted if the City finds and determines that any of the following
circumstances exist:
      (1)   The tree poses a significant threat to people, lawfully established
structures, or other trees because of such factors as its continued growth, a
structural defect, or its potential to spread disease or pests; as determined
and certified by a certified arborist or City’s Landscape Supervisor;
      (2)   The location of the tree interferes with public utility facilities;
as certified by the Public Works Superintendent in consultation and concurrence
with a certified arborist or City’s Landscape Supervisor;
      (3)   The tree interferes with the public safety traffic line of sight or
vehicle movement; as certified by the City’s Traffic Engineer in consultation
with a certified arborist or City’s Landscape Supervisor;
      (4)   The removal, trimming, or cutting is part of a Council approved
program for the replacement of street trees;
      (5)   The tree is causing extensive or substantial damages to public or
private property, and pruning and other remedial means have proven unsuccessful
or will not, in the opinion of the City’s tree consultant or Landscape
Supervisor, prove to be effective. Wastewater lateral damage through root
infiltration alone shall not be sufficient reason for tree removal;
      (6)   Alteration or removal is necessary to construct improvements within
the public right-of-way as certified by a Registered Civil Engineer of the
State of California in consultation and concurrence with a certified arborist
or Landscape Supervisor;
      (7)   Such other reason as, in the judgment of the City, is justified or
required in the interests of the preservation of the public health, safety and
welfare.
   (e)   If a street tree is removed, it shall be replaced by a City approved
street tree as identified in the Forestry Master Plan and approved by the
City’s Landscape Supervisor.
   (f)   Whether the cost of removal and replacement of the tree shall be borne
by the developer, the City, or the adjoining property owner, shall be
determined by the Public Works Director or his/her designee according to the
facts and circumstances of each case, and on the basis of the causes and
reasons for the removal and replacement.
   (g)   The tree trimming or removal procedures utilized shall conform to the
City’s Forestry Master Plan.
   (h)   In addition to the penalties provided by this Code, any person who
cuts, damages, moves or removes any street tree or portion thereof without City
approval, in violation of this section, is responsible for payment of proper
restitution and may be required to replace the street tree so removed or
damaged. Any damage to the tree shall be valued pursuant to the “Standards of
Valuation of Amenity Trees” of the International Society of Arboriculture.
(§ I, Ord. 549-NS, eff. November 13, 1975, as amended by § 10, Ord. 1217-NS,
eff. September 27, 1994, and § 3, Ord. 1372-NS, eff. February 8, 2001)
Sec. 7-2.907. Repairs of street improvements within public rights-of-way where
damages have been caused by street trees.
   Damages caused to street improvements by street trees shall be handled in
the following manner:
   (a)   The City, at City expense, shall make the initial repairs of street
improvements damaged by tree roots. After the City has once made such repairs
with respect to a given tree, and the owner desires to retain the tree in
place, it will thereafter be the property owner’s responsibility to pay for any
future repairs necessitated by maintaining the tree or trees which caused the
damage. Non-fronting residential curbs and sidewalks shall be the
responsibility of the appropriate local community association, where one
exists, or of the individual property owner, where no such association exists,
after the City has made its initial repairs on the sidewalk or street
improvements. If the property owner or community association fails to make such
improvements, the City will make the repairs at the owner's expense, as
provided by law.
   (b)   The City, at City expense, shall remove trees within the public
rights-of-way when such trees are causing damages to sidewalks or other street
improvements; provided, however, this provision shall not apply to oak trees
and other historic trees which are provided for by resolution or specific
sections of this Code and, in addition, shall not apply when the property owner
on whose property the tree fronts agrees to be responsible for any and all
future repairs that may be necessitated due to the maintenance of the tree.
   (c)   Any tree which is removed shall be replaced with an appropriate City-
approved street tree at City expense.
   (d)   The City shall replace the curbs and gutters and make the necessary
repairs to the street improvements at the City’s expense.
(§ I, Ord. 549-NS, eff. November 13, 1975)
Sec. 7-2.908. Scenic highways.
   Scenic highways, as defined and adopted in the Scenic Highways Element of
the General Plan, shall have landscaped medians and parkways that are planned
for the full length of the right-of-way to achieve a continuous and/or
compatible landscape design theme. Where highways are wholly or partially
landscaped, attempts shall be made to continue the dominant landscape theme
along any future extensions of the route.
   (a)   Where new development occurs adjacent to “existing highways,” as
defined in the Scenic Highways Element, right-of-way landscaping and
improvements shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of this
article relating to medians, landscaping, and trees in parkways. In addition,
particular attention shall be given to the location and design of future
highway-adjacent structures, including walls and fences, for their enhancement
of scenic or aesthetic qualities of the route.
   (b)   Where “future routes” and “extension of existing routes,” as defined
in the Scenic Highways Element are constructed, at minimum, there shall be
compliance with the requirements specified in this article relating to medians,
landscaping, and trees in parkways. The development of future routes shall also
be subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   A general alignment and grade shall be established to fit the
scenic character of the area to be traversed. Such alignment and grade shall
also include an emphasis upon fitting the roadway to the natural topography.
      (2)   The dedication of scenic easements adjacent to street rights-of-way
may be required by the Planning Commission.
      (3)   Highway-adjacent structures, including subdivision walls, shall be
designed and located in such a manner as to enhance the scenic or aesthetic
qualities of the route.
   (c)   Scenic highways shall also be further distinguished by the use of
unique street appurtenances, including distinctive street lighting, street
signs, and scenic highway identification signs. Variations in the textural
finish or roadway surfaces at selected pedestrian crosswalks and street
intersections shall be within the Thousand Oaks Core Area whenever possible.
(§ I, Ord. 549-NS, eff. November 13, 1975)
Sec. 7-2.909. Installation and maintenance programs, costs, and operation for
medians and parkways on secondary and primary highways, including scenic
highways.
   (a)    Development permits, special use permits, and tentative tract maps
approved for the development or expansion of projects on property adjacent to
primary and secondary highways shall be conditioned to require the improvement
of median islands and parkways in accordance with the provisions of this
article, unless this requirement is waived by the Council.
   (b)   Landscape maintenance districts may be established by the Council for
specific areas to share the costs for the installation and maintenance of
landscaped median islands and parkways.
   (c)   Capital improvement programs may be adopted by the Council to provide
for the construction of landscaped median and/or parkway improvements on
primary or secondary highways, giving priority to scenic highways as funds
become available. Scenic highways to be considered for priority capital
improvement funding shall include Moorpark Road and Thousand Oaks Boulevard.
(§ I, Ord. 549-NS, eff. November 13, 1975)
Sec. 7-2.910. Planting lawns and ground cover.
   (a)   It shall be permissible to plant and maintain a lawn or similar ground
cover not prohibited by law within the right-of-way of a public highway without
a permit; provided, however, the lawn or similar ground cover shall not extend
into the traveled way of the public highway nor into the sidewalks, drainage
ditches, gutters, or other improved facilities.
   (b)   The public may not be denied the use of the planted area for
pedestrian or other lawful use. The City may use the planted area for any
purpose and may issue a permit to any applicant to perform encroachment work
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. If the lawn or similar ground cover
is damaged in the course of an authorized encroachment, the permittee who
caused the damage shall be responsible for the replacement thereof, unless the
permit specifically states otherwise.
   (c)   Plastic or artificial plants shall be prohibited, except as approved
by the Public Works Director and Community Development Director, within a
public right-of-way.
(§ 11352, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50, as renumbered by § II, Ord. 549-NS,
eff. November 13, 1975, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1649-NS, eff. September 28,
2018)
Sec. 7-2.911. Planting and erecting hedges, shrubs, and fences.
   No hedge, shrub, or other planting and no fence or other structure shall be
planted, erected, or maintained in a right-of-way without a permit upon any
sidewalk or shoulder or in such manner which impedes, obstructs, denies, or
impairs the sight distance for safe pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
(§ 11353, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50, as renumbered by § II, Ord. 549-NS,
eff. November 13, 1975)
Sec. 7-2.912. Maintenance of hedges, shrubs, and fences.
   The permittee shall maintain hedges, shrubs, or other plantings, and fences
or similar structures in a neat and orderly condition. If the encroachment is
not so maintained, the City Engineer may direct the permittee to remove the
encroachment and restore the right-of-way to its former condition at the
expense of the permittee.
(§ 11354, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50, as renumbered by § II, Ord. 549-NS,
eff. November 13, 1975)
Sec. 7-2.913. Private property encroachments on public right-of-way.
   (a)   Owners and occupants of private property shall maintain all hedges,
shrubs, or other plantings, and fences or similar structures upon their
property in a neat and orderly condition and shall not allow such plantings and
structures to encroach upon the public right-of-way.
   (b)   It is a violation of this chapter to allow hedges, shrubs, other types
of plantings, fences or similar structure to encroach upon the public right-of-
way.
   (c)   Upon failure of the owner or occupant of private property to remove an
encroachment after receipt of written notice, the City may take any actions
authorized by this Code or State law to bring the property into compliance.
Should the City perform necessary work to remove encroachments in the right-of-
way, such owner or occupant of the private property failing to remove such
encroachment shall be liable for all costs associated with the removal of such
encroachment by the City pursuant to section
1-2.06 of this Code.
(§ 4, Ord. 1649-NS, eff. September 28, 2018)
Article 10. Vehicles
Sec. 7-2.1001. Moving certain vehicles and objects.
   (a)   Compliance with general laws. When authorized by a permit issued by
the Division of Highways of the State or the City Engineer to move
a vehicle or combination of vehicles or load of a dimension or weight or other
characteristic generally prohibited by law, the permittee shall comply with the
general laws regulating travel over a public highway, including posted signs or
notices which limit speeds, directions of travel, weight which may be placed
upon a structure, the width or height which may be moved on, over, or across a
public highway, or which otherwise restrict or control travel on a public
highway, unless exempt by a special permit.
   (b)   Inspections. When it is deemed necessary that the City provide
inspection services, such services shall be paid for by the permittee in
accordance with the schedule of charges adopted by the Council.
(§§ 11401 and 11402, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Article 11. Appeals
Sec. 7-2.1101. Appeals: Hearings.
   (a)   Appeals: Form. Any person aggrieved by the refusal or revocation of a
permit may appeal to the Council within thirty (30) days after the date of such
action. The appeal shall be in the form of a written notice filed with the City
Clerk and signed by the applicant. The notice shall have attached a copy of the
application as filed with the City Engineer, shall recite such other items as
have been filed, and shall state clearly and concisely the grounds upon which
the applicant relies in his appeal.
   (b)   Hearings: Notices. The City Clerk shall set the matter for a hearing
within fifteen (15) days after the notice is filed and shall notify the
applicant and the City Engineer of the setting.
   (c)   Hearings: Council action. At the hearing the applicant shall establish
to the satisfaction of the Council that he is entitled to the issuance of a
permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or to the reinstatement of a
permit previously revoked. The City Engineer may present his grounds for the
denial or revocation of the permit. The decision of a majority of the Council
shall be final.
(§ 11500, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50)
Article 12. Violations
Sec. 7-2.1201. Violations.
   Any person who fails or refuses to comply with any provision of this chapter
or of the permit granted to him, or who commits any act in violation of the
provisions of this chapter or of the permit granted to him, shall be deemed
guilty of a violation of this Code pursuant to Section 1-2.01 of Chapter 2 of
Title 1 of this Code.
(§ 11450, T.O.O.C., as added by Ord. 50, as amended by § XXVIII, Ord. 770-NS,
eff. February 26, 1981)
Article 13. Newsracks*
*   Article 13, consisting of Sections 7-2.1301 through 7-2.1308, codified from
Ordinance No. 727-NS, effective September 13, 1979 (Sections 7-2.1301 and 7-
2.1304 amended by Ordinance No. 1266-NS, effective September 17, 1996; Section
7-2.1306 amended by Ordinance No. 770-NS, effective February 26, 1981),
repealed by Section 1, Ordinance No. 1312-NS, effective February 12, 1998, and
Sections 7-2.1301 through 7-2.1312 added by Section 2, Ordinance No. 1312-NS,
effective February 12, 1998)
Sec. 7-2.1301. Purpose.
   (a)   The purpose of this article is to establish a comprehensive set of
regulations applicable to newsracks on the public rights-of-way and other
public property. In order to advance, improve and promote aesthetic concerns as
well as the public health, safety and welfare of the City of Thousand Oaks, it
is necessary to control the number, size, construction, placement and
appearance of such newsracks. This article is intended to accomplish these
ends, without restricting the free dispersal of information guaranteed by the
Constitutions of the United States and the State of California, through
regulation of the placement, appearance, and servicing, of newsracks on the
public rights-of-way so as to:
   (1)   Provide sufficient clearance and visibility for safety and convenience
of the pedestrian and driving public;
   (2)   Avoid the unreasonable interference with the flow of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, including ingress or egress from any residence or any place
of business or from the street to the sidewalks by persons crossing or exiting/
entering parked or standing vehicles;
   (3)   Provide reasonable access for the use and maintenance of utility
poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants and mail boxes, and access to
locations used for benches and public transportation purposes;
   (4)   Eliminate poorly maintained newsracks and the lack of uniformity in
the color and style of newsracks which have resulted in a visual blight on the
public rights-of-way, or which may unreasonably detract from the aesthetics of
store window displays, adjacent landscaping, and other improvements;
   (5)   Maintain and protect the values of surrounding properties;
   (6)   Reduce the unnecessary exposure of the City to personal injury and
property damage claims; and
   (7)   Provide for and maintain the freedom of speech for newspapers or news
periodicals using newsracks for distribution purposes.
   (b)   The City Council finds that the competing interests of the public
safety and welfare and for the open distribution of newspapers require
reasonable accommodations, which can only be satisfactorily achieved through
this article, which regulates the place and manner of using newsracks on public
property.
(§ 2, Ord. 1312-NS, eff. March 16, 1998)
Sec. 7-2.1302. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this article are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Blinder rack” shall mean any opaque material placed in front of
printed matter or photographs on public display.
   (b)   “Distributor” shall mean the person responsible for placing, operating
and maintaining a newsrack in a public right-of-way.
   (c)   “Equivalent” shall mean any newsrack which is of the same size,
dimensions and style of the specified newsrack as approved by the Public Works
Director.
   (d)   “Newsrack” shall mean any type of unmanned device placed upon any
public right-of-way or public land for the vending of, or the free distribution
of, newspapers or news periodicals, advertising fliers, or other written or
printed publications.
   (e)   “Public right-of-way” and “public land” shall mean any building, park,
property, street, highway, sidewalk, surface easement, plaza, walkway, parkway
or alley which is owned or held (whether in fee, easement, leasehold or other
interest) by the City of Thousand Oaks.
   (f)   “Public Works Director” shall refer to the City’s Public Works
Director or the designee of the Public Works Director.
(§ 2, Ord. 1312-NS, eff. March 16, 1998)
Sec. 7-2.1303. Permits.
   (a)   Prohibitions. No person, whether as a principal, agent, or employee,
either for itself or any other person, or as an officer of any corporation, or
otherwise, shall place, affix, erect, construct or maintain a newsrack upon any
public right-of-way or public land unless and until an administrative
encroachment permit has been obtained from the Public Works Department.
   (b)   Application. A written application for a newsrack encroachment permit
shall be filed with the Public Works Department on the City's form and shall
include at least the following information:
   (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant, or the
distributor;
   (2)   The name, address and telephone number of a representative of the
applicant or other responsible person whom the City may notify or contact at
any time concerning the applicant’s newsrack or newsracks;
   (3)   Proof that the type or brand of newsrack is consistent with
requirements of this article, including a photograph of the newsrack and mount;
   (4)   A picture or map showing and identifying the number of newsracks, the
exact proposed location of each (herein “site”), and the order of all newsracks
at that location;
   (5)   The name of the newspaper, publication or periodical to be contained
in each newsrack.
   (c)   Fee. Each application for a newsrack encroachment permit shall be
accompanied by a processing fee, which shall not exceed the processing,
inspection and enforcement costs, in an amount set by resolution of the City
Council.
   (d)   Conditions for permit.
   (1)   In issuing the permit or rejecting any site, the Public Works
Department shall be guided solely by the standards and criteria set forth in
this article. In any case where the Public Works Department disapproves of a
particular location, such disapproval shall be without prejudice to the
applicant who may designate a different location or locations.
   (2)   Permits shall be issued for the installation of a newsrack or
newsracks only after City inspection of a proposed site, or sites, and the
installation, use or maintenance thereof shall be conditioned upon compliance
with the provisions of this article.
   (3)   Permits should be issued within ten (10) business days after a
completed application has been filed and upon a finding that the application
complies with the provisions of this article.
   (4)   If an application or a proposed site is denied, the applicant shall be
notified in writing of the specific reason for such denial and the right of a
hearing in accordance with Section 7-2.1310.
   (5)   Insurance and Indemnification as set forth in this article.
   (e)   A single permit may include up to ten (10) proposed sites for
newsracks to be installed within the City.
   (f)   Each permit shall expire on or about the first day of April of each
year, and shall be renewed pursuant to a simplified review process as
established by the Public Works Department.
   (g)   Insurance and indemnification. As part of the permit application, each
applicant shall indemnify, defend and hold the City, its officers, employees
and agents free and harmless from any claim, damage, liability, demand or
judgment in favor of any person or entity, arising out of the location,
operation and use of any newsrack located upon, in or over a public right-of-
way or other public property. The applicant shall provide the City with a
certificate of insurance or other documentation, as required by the City
Attorney, evidencing that a liability insurance policy in minimum amounts set
by the City Attorney has been issued, naming the City as an additional insured,
and containing a provision that the policy cannot be canceled except upon
thirty (30) days written notice to the City of the fact of such cancellation.
If such insurance is canceled at any time during the time the newsrack is
installed or maintained on public property, said newsrack shall be removed at
permittee’s cost in accordance with the provisions of this article.
   (h)   Identification tag. The name, address, and telephone number of a
responsible person who may be contacted at any time concerning the newsrack
shall be displayed on the newsrack in such a manner as to be readily visible
and readable to a prospective customer thereof.
   (i)   Permit Sticker. Upon permit approval, the Public Works Department
shall issue to the applicant a sticker or stickers evidencing the permit, which
shall be affixed to each newsrack on the permit in the manner specified by the
Public Works Department within ten (10) business days thereof.
(§ 2, Ord. 1312-NS, eff. March 16, 1998)
Sec. 7-2.1304. Newsrack requirements.
   Any newsrack which is located, in whole or in part, upon, in or over any
public right-of-way, shall comply with each of the following standards:
   (a)   Newsracks shall be the standard K-Jack Style Model 100, National
Newsvend Style M-10 or equivalent model on a permanently fixed single pedestal
(or multi-pedestal for groupings of newsracks) mount bolted to the paved area.
   (b)   No newsrack with mount or stand shall exceed forty-eight (48”) inches
in height, thirty (30”) inches in width, or twenty-four (24”) inches in
thickness.
   (c)   All opaque surfaces of a newsrack and the mounts shall be painted the
same color.
   (d)   The newsrack shall not be used for advertising or publicity purposes,
except:
   (1)   The name of the printed material dispensed therefrom may be displayed
on the bottom one-third (1/3) of the hood, and
   (2)   Advertising newsrack cards contained in card pans may be attached to,
and inserted and located on, the front of the newsrack. The newsrack cards
shall not exceed fifteen (15”) inches in height and twenty-two (22”) inches in
length. No other card, sign, or advertising device may be attached.
   (e)   Each newsrack shall be maintained in a clean, painted, neat and
attractive condition and in good repair at all times. Specifically, but without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, each newsrack shall be serviced and
maintained so that:
   (1)   It is reasonably free of dirt and grease;
   (2)   It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in
the visible painted areas thereof;
   (3)   It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted
metal areas thereon;
   (4)   The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which the
publications therein are viewed are unbroken and free of cracks, dents,
blemishes and discolorations;
   (5)   The paper or cardboard inserts are free of tears, peeling or fading;
   (6)   The structural parts thereof are not broken or misshapen; and
   (7)   Any and all graffiti, unauthorized stickers or decals are immediately
removed.
(§ 2, Ord. 1312-NS, eff. March 16, 1998)
Sec. 7-2.1305. Sites: location, placement, and number restrictions.
   (a)   No proposed site and no newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or
maintained in the following locations:
   (1)   Within five (5’) feet of any marked crosswalk;
   (2)   Within fifteen (15’) feet of the curb return of any unmarked
crosswalk;
   (3)   Within five (5’) feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call
box or other emergency facility;
   (4)   Within five (5’) feet of any driveway;
   (5)   Within five (5’) feet ahead of and fifteen (15’) feet to the rear of
any sign or pavement marking for a designated bus stop measured parallel to the
flow of traffic;
   (6)   Within five (5’) feet of any bus bench;
   (7)   At any location where the newsrack causes, creates, or constitutes a
line of sight problem or a traffic hazard;
   (8)   At any location where the newsrack unreasonably obstructs or
interferes with the pedestrian access to abutting property;
   (9)   Where the newsrack will endanger persons using the sidewalk or
property;
   (10)    Where the newsrack will unreasonably interfere with or obstruct the
safe flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on the public right-of-way;
   (11)    At any location which creates less than a four (4’) foot wide path
of travel as required by Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations and the
Americans with Disabilities Act;
   (12)    Facing another newsrack when separated or divided only by the width
of a sidewalk or pedestrian walk;
   (13)    On any access ramp or curb cut for disabled persons.
   (b)   All newsracks on sidewalks or walk ways adjacent to or paralleling a
street shall be placed away from the street on the back (side furthest from the
street) of the sidewalk parallel to a curb, or along the wall of a building,
with the front of the newsrack facing the sidewalk and roadway. Newsracks shall
be located in such a manner as is necessary to maintain a clear pedestrian path
of travel of at least four (4’) feet wide. Newsracks placed parallel to the
wall of a building shall be placed with the back not more than six (6”) inches
from the wall.
   (c)   At any site where more than one newsrack is to be located and
maintained, a grouping can be established for mounting all newsracks on a
permanently fixed single, double or triple pedestal multi-unit mount of a type
approved by the City and bolted to the pavement.
   (d)   If eight (8) or more newsracks are placed at a single site, they shall
be grouped in groups of six (6) and each group shall be separated from the next
group by at least forty-eight (48”) inches.
(§ 2, Ord. 1312-NS, eff. March 16, 1998)
Sec. 7-2.1306. Displays of matter harmful to minors prohibited.
   Material which is harmful to minors, as defined in Part 1, Title 9, Chapter
7.6 of the Penal Code (commencing at Section 313), shall not be displayed in a
public place, other than a public place from which minors are excluded, unless
blinder racks are placed in front of the material in such a manner that the
lower two-thirds (2/3) of the materials is not exposed to view.
(§ 2, Ord. 1312-NS, eff. March 16, 1998)
Sec. 7-2.1307. Abandonment.
   (a)   In the event any newsrack installed pursuant to this article does not
contain the publication specified in the application within a period of thirty
(30) days after the release of the current issue, or if no publication is in
the newsrack for a period of more than thirty (30) consecutive days, the Public
Works Department may deem the newsrack abandoned and may remove the newsrack
from the public right-of-way in accordance with the procedures set out in
Sections 7-2.1308 through 7-2.1310.
   (b)   In the event a permittee of a newsrack, owned by the permittee,
desires to voluntarily abandon a newsrack location, such permittee shall notify
the Public Works Director in writing of the date of the proposed removal thirty
(30) days prior to the newsrack’s removal and the permittee shall completely
remove the newsrack and mount on the date set forth in such notice. In addition
the permittee shall restore the sidewalk to good and safe condition leaving no
hole or projection in the sidewalk and using the same type and quality of
construction material as that which exists at the surface of the abutting
sidewalk.
(§ 2, Ord. 1312-NS, eff. March 16, 1998)
Sec. 7-2.1308. Notice to Correct.
   (a)   Upon determination by the Public Works Department that a newsrack has
been installed, used or maintained in violation of this article, a Notice to
Correct shall be issued which shall specify the manner in which this article is
violated and request compliance. Such notice shall state the nature of the
violation, the intention to impound the newsrack if the violation shall not be
corrected or if a hearing is not requested, and the procedure for requesting
such a hearing. The Department may notify the permittee, or person, if known,
either in person, or by mail, or if the owner of the newsrack is not known, by
affixing a notice to the newsrack, that unless the violation is corrected or a
hearing is requested within ten (10) days after the date of the notice, the
newsrack will be removed and impounded.
   (b)   Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, in the case of any
violation of this article which creates an immediate danger to the public
health, safety or welfare, which violation cannot be corrected by moving or
otherwise repositioning an unanchored newsrack, the newsrack may be summarily
removed and impounded by the City.
(§ 2, Ord. 1312-NS, eff. March 16, 1998)
Sec. 7-2.1309. Impoundment.
   (a)   Whenever a newsrack is impounded pursuant to Sections 7-2.1307 and 7-
2.1308, the Public Works Department shall immediately notify the person in
whose name the newsrack is registered, if known. Such notice shall state the
date the newsrack was removed and impounded, the reasons thereof, and the
procedure for claiming the newsrack. If the newsrack was summarily impounded,
such notice shall also state the procedure for requesting a hearing before the
Public Works Department.
   (b)   The permittee or other person who provides satisfactory proof of
ownership of the impounded newsrack may, at any time within thirty (30) days of
the notice of impound obtain the return of the newsrack and its contents upon
paying of removal costs, storage and other costs.
   (c)   The costs of removal and storage of any newsrack shall be borne by the
owner thereof and may be collected by the City in the same manner as it
collects any other civil debt or obligation. No newsrack which has been removed
and stored by the City shall be released to the owner unless the costs of
removal, storage and any necessary repair to the premises on which the newsrack
was placed have been paid. If a newsrack which has been removed and stored
remains unclaimed for a period of thirty (30) days after notice of impoundment
is sent, it shall be deemed to be unclaimed personal property and disposed of
in accordance with the law.
   (d)   If, after a hearing, the impounded newsrack is found not to have been
in violation of this article, the newsrack shall be returned to the permittee
or other claimant without payment of any impound fee or, if an impound fee has
previously been paid, the impound fee is refunded.
(§ 2, Ord. 1312-NS, eff. March 16, 1998)
Sec. 7-2.1310. Hearings.
   (a)   Any person maintaining a newsrack found in violation of this article
may request a hearing before the Public Works Director, or his or her designee,
within ten (10) consecutive calendar days after the giving of such notice of
violation. The request shall be in writing, shall state the basis thereof, and
shall be filed with the Public Works Department.
   (b)   The hearing shall be held within ten (10) working days of the filing
of the request. At the hearing any person may present evidence or argument as
to whether the newsrack has been installed or maintained in violation of this
article. Within five (5) working days after the close of the hearing, the
Public Works Department shall render a decision in writing and shall give such
written decision to the person who requested the hearing.
   (c)   Any person who requested a hearing may, within ten (10) days after the
decision was given, appeal such decision to the City Council. The appeal shall
be in writing, shall state the basis upon which the appeal is made, and shall
be filed with the City Clerk. The City Council shall attempt to hear the appeal
within thirty (30) days of the filing of the request. At the hearing any person
may present evidence or argument as to whether the newsrack has been installed
or maintained in violation of this chapter. Prior to the end of the next
regular meeting of the City Council after the close of the hearing, the council
shall render a decision. Within thirty (30) days after the decision is
rendered, the City Clerk shall give notice thereof to the person who made the
appeal. The decision of the City Council shall be final.
(§ 2, Ord. 1312-NS, eff. March 16, 1998)
Sec. 7-2.1311. Violations.
   Any person, as defined in T.O.M.C. Section 1-3.13, who violates a provision
of this article shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of
this Code.
(§ 2, Ord. 1312-NS, eff. March 16, 1998)
Sec. 7-2.1312. Initial filing, processing and abatement of nonconforming
existing newsracks.
   (a)   Effective date. The effective date of this article shall be March 16,
1998.
   (b)   Initial filing and processing. Any person owning or entitled to
possession, management or control of any newsrack located within the City as of
the effective date of this article shall:
   (1)   Within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this article, remove
the newsrack, or file for a permit or permits required by this article for all
sites.
   (2)   Notwithstanding Section 7-2.1301(d)(3), for the initial processing of
these new permits on existing racks, City shall have up to sixty (60) days to
issue permits upon the receipt of a completed permit application. The initial
permits issued shall expire April 1, 1999.
   (c)   Compliance/abatement. Any person owning or entitled to possession,
management or control of any newsrack located within the City as of the
effective date of this article shall:
   (1)   Relocation of newsracks. Within one hundred eighty (180) days of the
effective date of this article, move the newsracks, pursuant to Section 7-
2.1305(b), to the City approved location consistent with this article, with the
row of newsracks in the same order as previously existed, or pursuant to a
schedule approved by the Public Works Department. At no time or in any manner
may a newspaper change the priority or order of a newsrack within a row of
newsracks; and
   (2)   Size and style. Within one hundred eighty (180) days of the effective
date of this article, conform to all other requirements of this article, (such
as Section 7-2.1304, including, but not limited to, the size and style of the
newsrack.)
   (d)   If any newsrack is not approved by the City under this article within
the time limits specified in this section, the City may attach a Notice to
Correct to the newsrack informing the owner or person entitled to possession of
the requirement, and if the newsrack is not approved within ten (10) days of
affixing the Notice to Correct or if a hearing is not requested, the newsrack
may be removed and stored pursuant to Section 7-2.1309.
(§ 3, Ord. 1312-NS, eff. March 16, 1998)
CHAPTER 3. GRADING*
*   Chapter 3 entitled “Excavations and Grading,” consisting of Sections 7-3.01
through 7-3.39, recodified from Sections 8400 through 8424, T.O.O.C., repealed
in its entirety by Section 1, Ordinance No. 156-NS, effective August 27, 1970.
Sec. 7-3.01. Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard life, limb, health, property,
and the public welfare by establishing minimum requirements for regulating
grading and procedures by which such requirements may be enforced.
(§ 2, Ord. 156-NS, eff. August 27, 1970, as amended by § I, Ord. 534-NS, eff.
June 19, 1975)
Sec. 7-3.02. Scope.
   No person shall make, alter, grade, or maintain any excavation or fill,
except as provided by this chapter.
   Exception: The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to work
accomplished under the auspices of, or on land owned or controlled by, the
United States of America or by the State.
(§ 2, Ord. 156-NS, eff. August 27, 1970, as amended by § I, Ord. 534-NS, eff.
June 19, 1975)
Sec. 7-3.03. Permissive provisions.
   The permissive provisions of this chapter shall not be presumed to waive any
limitations imposed by other statutes or laws of the State or City.
(§ 2, Ord. 156-NS, eff. August 27, 1970, as amended by § I, Ord. 534-NS, eff.
June 19, 1975)
Sec. 7-3.04. California Environmental Quality Act of 1970.
   The provisions of this chapter require compliance with the California
Environmental Quality Act of 1970 (Public Resources Code Sections 21050 et
seq.). All permits or projects authorized pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall have a “certified” Environmental Impact Report (EIR), unless the
project is categorically exempt or a Negative Declaration has been issued by
the Community Development Department.
(§ 2, Ord. 156-NS, eff. August 27, 1970, as amended by § I, Ord. 534-NS, eff.
June 19, 1975)
Sec. 7-3.05. Waivers, hearings, and appeals.
   Upon motion of the Planning Commission or upon payment of the appropriate
fees, as set by Council Resolution, and application of any person or political
entity aggrieved, the Planning Commission may waive or conditionally waive the
compliance with provisions of this chapter where it is determined that the
public health, safety and welfare will not be adversely affected by such a
waiver.
   The procedure governing the hearing on the application and any appeal from
the decision of the Commission shall be in accordance with the procedures set
forth in Article 28 of Chapter 4 of Title 9 of this Code.
(§ 2, Ord. 156-NS, eff. August 27, 1970, as amended by § I, Ord. 534-NS, eff.
June 19, 1975, § II, Ord. 581-NS, eff. August 12, 1976, § II, Ord. 776-NS, eff.
April 16, 1981, and § 1, Ord. 848-NS, eff. December 13, 1983)
Sec. 7-3.06. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Bedrock” shall mean in-place solid rock.
   (b)   “City Engineer” and “Public Works Director” shall mean that person
charged with the responsibility of coordinating all phases of engineering for
the City government. He shall be the custodian of and be responsible for, all
maps, plans, profiles, field notes, and other records and memoranda belonging
to the City and pertaining to his office and the work thereof. It shall also be
his responsibility to enforce all State and City regulations, laws, policies,
standards, and the like pertaining to his office and work and to delegate
authority and responsibilities to subordinates under his jurisdiction. “City
Engineer” and “Public Works Director” shall further mean the officer charged
with the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter or
his duly authorized representative.
   (c)   “Civil engineer” shall mean a civil engineer duly registered by the
State.
   (d)   “Community Development Director” shall mean that person charged with
the responsibility of directing all phases of the Community Development
Department and the enforcement of all State statutes and City laws pertaining
to his office, or his duly authorized representative.
   (e)   “Compaction” shall mean the densification of fill by mechanical means.
   (f)   “Constant” shall mean all times during which grading is in progress.
   (g)   “Continuous” shall mean periodically during the day.
   (h)   “Engineering geologist” shall mean an engineering geologist registered
by the State and capable of applying the geological sciences to engineering
practices for the purpose of assuring that the geological features affecting
the location, design, construction, operation, and maintenance of engineering
works are recognized and adequately provided for.
   (i)   “Existing grade” shall mean the vertical location of the existing
ground surface prior to excavating or filling.
   (j)   “Expansive soil” shall mean that soil with an expansion of four (4%)
percent or more with a sixty (60) pound per square foot load applied under
standard test methods as set forth by the City Engineer.
   (k)   “Fill” shall mean deposits of soil, rock, or other materials placed by
man.
   (l)   “Finished grade” shall mean the final grade or elevation of the
building site, slope, or terrace (0.1 plus or minus feet).
   (m)   “Hillside designation.” For the purposes of this chapter “hillside”
shall be construed to mean all of that area within the City boundary lines as
shown on Exhibit “A,” on file in the office of the City Clerk, and by reference
made a part of this chapter, except any area having slopes less than five (5%)
percent, which slopes shall not be considered “hillside.” It shall be the
prerogative of the Council to designate other areas as “hillside” areas, based
upon the natural topography of the area, supplemented by contours shown on
plans, and submitted in conjunction with an appropriate development permit or
other application or tentative tract map.
   (n)   “Landmark tree” shall have that meaning as defined in Article 43 of
Chapter 4 of Title 9 of this Code.
   (o)   “Landscape architect” shall mean a landscape architect licensed as
such under the laws of the State.
   (p)   “Normal inspection hours” for services provided pursuant to or in
connection with the provisions of this chapter shall mean from 8:00 a.m. to 5:
00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays. Holidays shall be defined as
those week days (exclusive of Saturdays) shown as nonworking days on the
working day calendar of the City.
   (q)   “Rough grade” shall mean the approximate elevation of the ground
surface conforming to the proposed design (0.5 plus or minus feet).
   (r)   “Site” shall mean any lot or parcel of land, or contiguous combination
thereof, under the same ownership where grading is performed or permitted.
   (s)   “Slope” shall mean a stretch of ground forming a natural or artificial
incline, including a retaining wall.
   (t)   “Soil” shall mean all earth material, of whatever origin, which
overlies bedrock.
   (u)   “Soils engineer” shall mean a civil engineer duly registered by the
State who is experienced in soil mechanics and slope stability analysis. His
primary duties shall encompass the investigation of proposed grading sites and
tracts as related to the stability of the finished graded product. The soils
engineer shall have proper laboratory facilities available in which to perform
any and all testing required to properly evaluate materials under
consideration.
   (v)   “Stage grading” shall mean altering the gross contours of the ground,
but shall not involve altering the ground to the precise contours and
elevations suitable for the construction of structures, parking lots,
driveways, permanent drainage structures, curbs, gutters, or other street
improvements, or the construction of such improvements, or the placement of
base materials.
   (w)   “Supervising civil engineer” shall mean a civil engineer, registered
in the State, who has general charge of the design and construction of the
earthwork on the project. The supervising civil engineer on a project shall
have thorough knowledge of the construction so that he will be able to sign the
“as built” plans, both as to line and grade and compliance with the grading
regulations (in conjunction with the soils engineer and geologist) and the
specifications for the job. The engineer of the developer may also be the
supervising civil engineer.
(§ 2, Ord. 156-NS, eff. August 27, 1970, as amended by § I, Ord. 534-NS, eff.
June 19, 1975, § 4, Ord. 1098-NS, eff. April 11, 1991, § 11, Ord. 1217-NS, eff.
October 28, 1994, § III, Ord. 1475-NS, eff. February 22, 2007, and Part 15,
Ord. 1610-NS, eff. January 15, 2016)
Sec. 7-3.07. Permits required.
   No person shall commence or perform any grading or relocation of earth, and
no person shall import or export any earth materials to or from any grading
site without first having obtained a grading permit. No person shall commence
or perform any grading or relocation of earth on land having a natural slope
greater than twenty-five (25%) percent without first obtaining approval from
the Planning Commission or City Council. A separate grading permit shall be
required for each site. Off-site grading may be permitted, if such grading is
approved in conjunction with a development permit or other entitlement.
   Exceptions:
   (a)   An excavation which does not exceed fifty (50) cubic yards or is less
than two (2’) feet in depth, or which does not create a cut slope greater than
five (5’) feet in height and steeper than two (2) horizontal to one vertical,
unless the cut slope is made in an area of adverse geological conditions;
   (b)   A fill less than one (1’) foot in depth and placed on natural terrain
with a slope flatter than five (5) horizontal to one vertical, or less than
three (3’) feet in depth, not intended to support structures, which fill does
not exceed fifty (50) cubic yards on any one lot and does not obstruct a
drainage course;
   (c)   Excavations below the finished grade for basements and footings of
buildings, retaining walls, swimming pools, or other structures authorized by a
valid building permit. This shall not exempt any fill made with materials from
such excavations or exempt any excavation having an unsupported height greater
than five (5’) feet after the completion of such structures;
   (d)   Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing, and the stockpiling of
rock, sand, or gravel aggregate or clay which operations are operated under a
valid special use permit issued by the City pursuant to applicable zoning
regulations;
   (e)   The depositing of rubbish or other materials at any dump or sanitary
fill approved by and operating pursuant to the requirements, rules, applicable
zoning regulations, and other laws adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the
County or by the City. Such exemption shall not extend, however, to surrounding
berms, permanent access roads to the site, permanent building sites, or
protective drainage works;
   (f)   The construction of dams or reservoirs regulated or owned by the State
and the Federal governments;
   (g)   The temporary stockpiling of quarried or mined products or earth for
future processing, disposal, or sale, but only insofar as such operations are
conducted at a distance of more than one hundred (100’) feet inside the outer
property line of any parcel of land held in a single ownership and such
stockpiling is approved by the Planning Commission. The City Engineer shall
decide, subject to an appeal, if a statement of the location of any fill, and
the legal description of the parcel of land over which the fill is to be
placed, shall be filed by the owner of the property for recording in the office
of the County Recorder. If such statement indicates that the fill has been
compacted in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, such statement
shall be certified to by a soils engineer. The City Engineer may waive the
requirements for recording such statement when he believes the purpose of this
chapter does not require such recording;
   (h)   Farming and agricultural grading operations on parcels in a single
ownership which are larger than ten (10) acres and zoned and used primarily for
agricultural and/or soil and water conservation work under the direct control
of the United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service.
Farming and agricultural grading operations shall not be interpreted to
include:
   (1)   The construction of water impounding structures of earth (which are
not under the direct control of the United States Department of Agriculture
Soil Conservation Service) where the maximum depth to which water is or may be
impounded is five (5') feet or greater; or
   (2)   The excavation and/or filling of earth on which a structure requiring
a building permit is to be supported;
   (i)   Grading operations conducted by the City for capital improvement
projects approved by the Council; and
   (j)   Exploratory borings and trenches made for soil engineering and
engineering geological investigations.
(§ 2, Ord. 156-NS, eff. August 27, 1970, as amended by § I, Ord. 534-NS, eff.
June 19, 1975, § I, Ord. 692-NS, eff. November 2, 1978, § V, Ord. 757-NS, eff.
September 4, 1980, § 3, Ord. 1098-NS, eff. April 11, 1991, and § IV, Ord. 1475-
NS, eff. February 22, 2007)
Sec. 7-3.08. Permit requirements.
   (a)   Plans and specifications. With each application for a grading permit
and when required by the City Engineer for the enforcement of any provision of
this chapter, three (3) sets of plans shall be submitted. Except as waived by
the City Engineer for minor grading, the plans shall be prepared and signed by
a civil engineer, soils engineer, and, where applicable, engineering geologist,
and/or landscape architect, and shall show the following:
   (1)   A vicinity sketch or other data adequately indicating the site
location;
   (2)   The property lines and dimensions and bearings of the property on
which the work is to be performed;
   (3)   The location of any existing buildings or structures on the property
where the work is to be performed and the location of any building or structure
on the land of adjacent property owners, which building or structure is within
fifty (50’) feet of the property boundary;
   (4)   On all parcels of land where oak or landmark trees, protected by the
provisions of Article 42 or Article 43 of Chapter 4 of Title 9 of this Code,
are present, grading shall take place in a manner to insure the survival and
health of all such trees, except for those as to which removal is expressly
allowed. The location of any oak or landmark trees shall be precisely depicted
on the plan, indicating the location of the exact center of the trunk after a
field survey by a licensed surveyor. The trees shall be permanently marked with
numbered tags at a location three (3’) feet above the natural grade in a manner
acceptable to the Public Works Director. The plan shall indicate such tag
number for each tree, the diameter of the trunk of each tree, the existing
ground elevation of the downhill side of the tree, a specific reference to its
habit of branching (i.e., low branching restricting movement to the southeast),
and the ground plane projection of the natural drip line of the tree as
determined by a physical survey. The plan shall indicate the proposed
disposition of each such tree. Where any tree, other than one as to which
removal will be permitted, will be affected by grading, the details for
retaining walls, drains, pruning, trimming, and the establishment of a drip
line with respect to each such tree shall be prepared by a licensed landscape
architect and be included with the grading plan. No grading or activity
detrimental to the health of such tree shall take place within an established
drip line of the tree. Prior to the commencement of grading, fences shall be
constructed around the established drip line of all such trees. The purpose of
such fences shall be to prevent grading, heavy equipment work, and the storage
or dumping of materials within the established drip lines of such trees.
Grading or other site work within the established drip line shall be only as
authorized by the approved grading plan and shall be supervised and approved by
a landscape architect in attendance continuously during the progress of the
work. Fences may be temporarily removed or omitted, upon the approval of the
City Engineer, to facilitate such authorized work. All such work shall comply
with the approved details to protect the tree. Where trees could be affected by
a grading operation, a field orientation meeting shall take place prior to the
commencement of the work when deemed necessary or desirable by the City
Engineer. The purpose of such meeting shall be to communicate the approved
methods of grading and tree preservation to all parties involved with the
grading operation. Such meeting should include the City Engineer or his
authorized representative, a representative of the Community Development
Department, the permittee, or his authorized representative, the landscape
architect, and the soils engineer;
   (5)   Accurate topography showing suitable contours of the existing ground.
The contours shall be extended past the boundary lines of any project for a
minimum of one hundred (100’) feet. The City Engineer may require the contours
to be extended to include the watershed area and all other areas influencing
the proposed development;
   (6)   The elevations, dimensions, locations, extent, and slopes of all
proposed grading shown by contours or other means;
   (7)   A certification of the quantity and type of material of the excavation
and fill involved and the estimated starting and completion dates;
   (8)   Detailed plans of all drainage devices, walls, cribbing, dams, or
other protective devices to be constructed in connection with, or as a part of,
the proposed work, together with a map showing the drainage area and estimated
runoff of the area served by the drains. All hydrologic and hydraulic
calculations shall be signed by a civil engineer;
   (9)   Any additional plans, drawings, or calculations required by the City
Engineer; and
   (10)    An indication as to the type of structure to be constructed or
proposed use of the site, such as single-family residence, multiple,
commercial, or industrial.
   (b)   Modifications of approved plans. All modifications of approved grading
plans shall be approved in writing by the City Engineer. All required soils and
geological reports shall be submitted with the revised plans. No grading work
in connection with the proposed modifications shall be permitted without the
prior written approval of the City Engineer.
   (c)   Soils engineering reports. The City Engineer shall require a soils
engineering investigation, based upon the most recent grading plan. Such report
shall include data regarding the nature, distribution, and strength of existing
soils, conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures, design criteria
for corrective measures, or such other criteria as required by the City
Engineer. All such reports shall be prepared and signed by a registered soils
engineer, and all such reports shall be subject to the approval of the City
Engineer.
   (d)   Engineering geological reports. Prior to the issuance of a grading
permit, the City Engineer may require an engineering geological investigation,
based upon the proposed grading plan. The engineering geological report,
prepared and signed by an engineering geologist, shall include an adequate
description of the geology of the site and the conclusions and recommendations
regarding the effect of the geological conditions on the proposed development.
   All such reports shall be subject to approval by the City Engineer.
Supplemental reports and data may be required by the City Engineer if deemed
necessary. The recommendations included in the report and approved by the City
Engineer shall be incorporated into the grading plan. Reports shall be required
for all hillside developments. Other developments designated by the City
Engineer may be required to submit reports.
   (e)   Development permits and tract map requirements. No grading permit
shall be issued unless an appropriate development permit or other development
entitlement has been approved, and a grading plan has been approved. Moreover,
no grading permit shall be issued unless adequate bonds have been approved and
accepted by the Public Works Department guaranteeing completion of the grading.
As a condition of any entitlement to develop land, the decision-making body may
limit the height, angle, and design of any cut or fill slope and may impose
standards, such as contour grading (rounding off the tops of slopes) and
extensive landscaping (above that required by the provisions of Section
7-3.24 of this chapter) to mitigate any adverse environmental impact created by
any project.
   (f)   Hillside exploratory regulations. Surface and subsurface exploratory
work shall be performed by a soils engineer and an engineering geologist
approved by the City Engineer on all hillside grading work, except where waived
by the City Engineer. Such exploratory work shall be performed for the purpose
of obtaining detailed information on which the soils engineer and the
engineering geologist shall base recommendations for grading. The work shall be
based upon a detailed, accurate topographic base map prepared by the registered
civil engineer or land surveyor. The map shall be of suitable scale and shall
cover the area to be graded, as well as adjacent areas which may be affected by
the grading. The map shall include the existing and proposed contours, the
locations of streets, pads, slopes, and structures, and pertinent elevations.
   (1)   The engineering geologist’s and soil engineer’s exploratory work
should be conducted at locations considered most likely to reveal any
subsurface weakness which may lead to landslide, slump, or settlement failures.
It is recommended that an investigation be conducted where the stability will
be lessened by the grading or where any of the following conditions are
discovered or proposed:
   (i)   At fault zones where past land movement is evidenced by the presence
of fault gouge;
   (ii)   At contact zones between two (2) or more geologic formations;
   (iii)    At zones of trapped water or high water table quite often
associated with the conditions set forth in subsections (i) and (ii) of this
subsection;
   (iv)   At bodies of intrusive materials;
   (v)   At historic landslides or where the topography is indicative of
prehistoric landslides;
   (vi)   At adversely sloped bedding planes, short range folding, overturned
folds, and the like;
   (vii)    At locations where a fill slope is to be placed above a cut slope;
   (viii)    At proposed cuts exceeding twenty-five (25’) feet in height,
unless in competent rock or less heights in rock of questionable stability;
   (ix)   At the locations of all proposed fills;
   (x)   Where any side hill fills are proposed;
   (xi)   Wherever water from rainfall, irrigation, private sewage disposal
systems, or other probable sources from both the grading project and adjoining
properties is likely to reduce the subsurface stability;
   (xii)    Where the proposed grading may adversely affect the existing or
future stability of adjoining properties; and
   (xiii)   At known fracture zones.
   The investigation shall be sufficient to outline the problems and solutions
to the problems set forth in this subsection.
   (2)   The soils engineer and engineering geologist shall submit written
reports of their findings to the permittee or the civil engineer. Such reports
should include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following data, based
upon detailed surface and subsurface investigations:
   (i)   The engineering geologist’s report should include a detailed geologic
map showing bedrock, soil, alluvium, faults, shears, prominent joint systems,
lithologic contacts, seeps or springs, soils or bedrock slumps, landslides or
failures, and other pertinent geologic features existing on the proposed
grading site. Geologic cross sections, prepared to reasonably depict
anticipated geologic substructure, shall also be included in sufficient numbers
and details. The report should also include detailed logs of all borings, test
pits, or other subsurface data obtained during the course of the investigation.
The subsurface exploration should extend to sufficient depth into the bedrock
to expose the deepest rock affecting the proposed grading. The report should
include specific details and observations for the soils engineer’s use in the
analysis of the stability of cut slopes in zones of shallow or perched
subsurface waters that may affect slope stability.
   (ii)   The soils engineer’s report should include a map of the proposed
grading site showing the locations of all subsurface exploratory test pits or
borings. Detailed logs of the test pits or borings, including the approximate
locations of all soil or rock samples taken for laboratory testing, should also
be included. In addition, laboratory test results, soil classifications, shear
strength characteristics of the soils, and other pertinent soil engineering
data should be presented.
   Sufficient cross sections and cut and fill slope stability analyses should
be included to substantiate recommendations concerning the vertical height and
angle of all slopes on the project.
   Other aids in exploratory work may be used, but subsurface exploratory work
sufficient to support the findings should be performed. Both the engineering
geologist’s and soil engineer’s reports should describe the grading project as
to its location, topographic relief, drainage, geologic and soils types
present, the grading proposed, and the effects of such grading on the site and
adjoining properties and shall contain specific conclusions concerning the
feasibility and anticipated future stability of the overall project and an
analysis of the property on a lot by lot basis. Specific recommendations for
the correction of all known and/or anticipated geologic hazards on the grading
project shall be included.
   Recommendations included in the report and approved by the City Engineer
shall be incorporated into the grading plan or specifications.
   (g)   Revised grading plans. If the soil or other conditions are not as
stated in the application for a grading permit, the City Engineer may suspend
the grading permit until approval is obtained of a revised grading plan.
   (h)   Waivers. The City Engineer may waive the requirement for a contour map
or subsurface exploration as required by the provisions of this section if it
is determined to be unnecessary, but the work shall conform to the provisions
of this chapter and other relevant laws.
   (i)   Excavations for test purposes. Excavations made for test purposes
shall be restored to a condition reasonably approximating the original
condition, including the replacement of the natural landscaping.
   (j)   Import or export of fill materials. The source of the material to be
used for fill or the location to which excavated material will be removed, or
both, shall be identified.
(§ 2, Ord. 156-NS, eff. August 27, 1970, as amended by § I, Ord. 534-NS, eff.
June 19, 1975, § VI, Ord. 757-NS, eff. September 4, 1980, § 1, Ord. 861-NS,
eff. May 22, 1981, § 1, Ord. 867-NS, eff. October 5, 1984, § V, Ord. 1475-NS,
eff. February 22, 2007, § 31, Ord. 1555-NS, eff. May 13, 2011, and Part 16,
Ord. 1610-NS, eff. January 15, 2016)
Sec. 7-3.09. Permit limitations and conditions.
   (a)   General. The issuance of a grading permit shall constitute an
authorization to do only that work which is described or illustrated on the
application for the permit or on the site plans and specifications approved by
the City Engineer.
   (b)   Responsibility of the permittee and contractor and their agents. The
permittee and contractor and their agents shall carry out the proposed grading
in accordance with the approved plans and specifications, the conditions of the
permit, and the requirements of this chapter and all other applicable laws. The
permittee and contractor and their agents shall maintain all required
protective devices and temporary drainage during the progress of the grading
work and shall be responsible for the observance of the hours of work, dust
control, and methods of hauling. The permittee and contractor and their agents
shall be responsible for the maintenance of the site and the removal of all
debris until such time as a notice of completion has been issued by the City
Engineer. The permittee and contractor and their agents, and each or all of
them, shall become subject to the penalties set forth in this chapter in the
event of failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter and other
applicable laws of the City. No approval shall exonerate the permittee or his
agents from the responsibility of complying with the provisions and intent of
this chapter.
   (c)   Jurisdiction of other agencies. Permits issued pursuant to the
requirements of this chapter shall not relieve the owner of responsibility for
securing the required permits for work to be accomplished which is regulated by
any other law, department, or division of the City, County, or State.
   (d)   Regulation of access or haul routes. The City Engineer may impose
conditions to the permit with respect to access or haul routes to and from
grading sites, the hours of work, methods of controlling dust, and safety
precautions involving pedestrian or vehicular traffic as he shall determine are
required in the interests of the public health, safety, and welfare.
   No permit shall be issued for the export or import of earth materials to or
from a grading site, except upon the following conditions:
   (1)   The size or type of hauling equipment shall be limited in accordance
with the width and conditions of the street.
   (2)   Traffic control devices, including flagmen, signs, and markers, shall
be utilized at appropriate places along the designated routes of access to such
sites.
   (3)   Temporary no parking restrictions may be imposed, with the approval of
the City Engineer, along such routes when determined necessary.
   (4)   Such other conditions as may be determined necessary for the public
health, safety, and welfare shall be imposed.
   (5)   In no event shall any export or import of earth materials to or from a
grading site be undertaken or conducted except by use of equipment which
complies in all respects with the Vehicle Code of the State.
   (6)   All loads shall be properly trimmed and watered or otherwise secured
so as to prevent spilling from the equipment.
   (7)   In all cases where the City Engineer designates the haul routes, such
designation of routes shall take into consideration the most practical means of
transporting the earth materials to or from the grading site consistent with
the safety and welfare of residents along the routes.
   (e)   Time limitations. The permittee shall fully perform and complete all
of the work contemplated to be accomplished pursuant to the grading permit
within the time limit specified in the permit.
   Once grading has commenced, it shall be pursued with diligence so as to
complete the operation within a reasonable period of time. If there is a
cessation of grading activity for a period in excess of sixty (60) days, the
City may utilize the bonds posted to guarantee performance to complete the
grading. In addition, all slopes shall be extensively landscaped and the
appropriate sprinkler system installed in accordance with an approved
landscaping plan prior to the release of a certificate of completion. The
cessation of grading activity between November 1 and April 15 due to heavy
rainfall will not be cause for the City to utilize the bonds to complete the
grading.
   If the permittee is unable to complete the work within the specified time,
he may, prior to the expiration of the permit, submit a written request for an
extension of time in which to complete the work. If, in the opinion of the City
Engineer, sufficient justification is shown, the time specified on the permit
may be extended for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days or as approved by
the City Engineer, but no such extension shall release any surety upon the
bond.
   (f)   Entry upon premises. The City Engineer, the Council, the surety
company, or their duly authorized representatives shall have access to the
premises described in the permit for the purposes of inspecting the progress of
the work. In the event of default in the performance of any term or condition
of the permit, the surety, or any person employed or engaged in his behalf,
shall have the right to go upon the premises to complete the required work,
including the installation of temporary erosion control devices and landscaping
as required by the provisions of this chapter.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or any other person to interfere with the
ingress or egress from such premises of any authorized representative or agent
of any surety company or the City engaged in the work ordered by the City
Engineer or the Council.
   (g)   Consent of adjacent property owners. Whenever any grading operation
requires entry onto adjacent property for any reason, the permit applicant
shall obtain the written consent of the adjacent property owner or his
authorized representative and shall file a copy of such consent with the City
Engineer before a permit for such grading work may be issued.
   (h)   Restrictions during the rainy season.
   (1)   That period between November 1 and April 15 following is hereby
determined to be the period in which heavy rainfall normally occurs in the
City. During this period no grading work in excess of two hundred fifty (250)
cubic yards shall be authorized to start in any single grading site under a
permit where the City Engineer determines that such work will endanger the
public health or safety.
   Whenever it appears that any grading project previously commenced pursuant
to a permit issued by the City Engineer will not be completed prior to the
commencement of the rainy season, the City Engineer may order the installation
of temporary erosion control devices to protect any property adjacent to such
project.
   (2)   Previously authorized grading work which extends into the rainy season
shall be protected by incorporating temporary erosion control devices.
   (3)   Plans for erosion control devices shall be submitted to the City
Engineer and design approval obtained not later than October 1 of the coming
rainy season. The design of desilting basins which discharge into City streets
or natural watercourses shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
   (4)   All persons performing any grading operations during that period
designated as the rainy season shall put into effect all safety precautions
which are necessary in accordance with good engineering practices. All loose
dirt shall be removed from the grading, site, and adequate anti-erosion or
drainage devices, debris basins, or other safety devices to protect the life,
limb, health, and welfare of private and public property or others from damage
of any kind shall be installed. All temporary erosion control devices,
including desilting basins, shall be installed not later than November 1 of
each year and shall be maintained throughout the rainy season. The removal of
temporary erosion control devices during different phases of construction shall
have the prior approval of the City Engineer.
   (5)   No person shall excavate or fill so as to cause falling rocks, soil,
or debris in any form to fall, slide, or flow onto adjoining properties.
   (6)   All constructed desilting basins which are a part of the grading plan
shall be maintained by the applicant unless otherwise accepted for maintenance
by the City.
   (i)   Regulations relating to archaeological, paleontological, and
historical sites.
   (1)   Known sites. Permits to perform grading at or near known
archaeological, paleontological, or similar sites of historical significance
may be conditioned in such a manner as to:
   (i)   Ensure the preservation of the site;
   (ii)   Minimize adverse impacts on the site;
   (iii)    Allow reasonable time for qualified professionals to perform
archaeological investigations at the site; or
   (iv)   Preserve for posterity, in such other manner as may be necessary or
appropriate in the public interest, the positive aspects of the cultural or
historical site involved.
   (2)   Unknown sites. Where a grading permit has been issued with respect to
an area not known at the time of issuance to include an archaeological,
paleontological, or historical site, and where it is subsequently learned,
either by representatives of the City or by any person doing grading pursuant
to a grading permit, that a significant archaeological, paleontological, or
historical site may be encompassed within the area to be graded or being
graded, all grading shall cease, and the grading permit shall be deemed
suspended. The finding of a site which may be a significant archaeological,
paleontological, or historical site shall be reported to the Public Works
Director and the Community Development Director within seventy-two (72) hours
from the time the site is found. The Community Development Director, upon
receiving such a report, shall cause a preliminary investigation of the site to
be made by qualified professionals within five (5) working days after the time
such a report is received. If the preliminary investigation should confirm that
the site is or may be a significant archaeological, paleontological, or
historical site, the grading permit shall remain suspended for a period not to
exceed forty-five (45) days after the date the finding of the site was first
reported to or learned by the City. During the period of suspension, and as
promptly as reasonably possible, the Community Development Director shall
develop conditions to be attached to the grading permit pursuant to the
provisions of subsection (1) of this subsection. When such conditions are
developed and attached to the permit, the permit shall be deemed reissued
subject to such conditions, and the suspension shall be deemed terminated. In
extraordinary circumstances, the suspension may exceed forty-five (45) days if,
upon application of the Community Development Director to the Council, the
Council shall concur.
   (3)   Any condition or conditions imposed pursuant to the provisions of
subsections (1) or (2) of this subsection may be appealed to the Council in the
manner prescribed in this Code, and the determination of the Council of such
appeal shall be final.
(§ 2, Ord. 156-NS, eff. August 27, 1970; as amended by § I, Ord. 534-NS, eff.
June 19, 1975)
Sec. 7-3.10. Exceptions for emergencies.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any grading operation
which is conducted during a period of emergency or disaster and which is
directly connected with or related to the relief of conditions caused by such
emergency or disaster.
(§ 2, Ord. 156-NS, eff. August 27, 1970; as amended by § I, Ord. 534-NS, eff.
June 19, 1975)
Sec. 7-3.11. Conditions of approval.
   In granting any permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the City
Engineer or his authorized representative may attach such conditions as may be
reasonably necessary to prevent the creation of a nuisance or hazard to public
or private property. Such conditions may include, but shall not be limited to:
   (a)   The improvement of any existing grading to bring it up to the
standards of this chapter; and
   (b)   Requirements for fencing excavations or fills which would otherwise be
hazardous.
(§ 2, Ord. 156-NS, eff. August 27, 1970; as amended by § I, Ord. 534-NS, eff.
June 19, 1975)
Sec. 7-3.12. Liability.
   Neither the issuance of a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter,
nor compliance with the provisions of this chapter or with any conditions
imposed in such permit, shall relieve any person from responsibility for
damages to other persons or property, nor impose any liability upon the City
for damages to other persons or property.
(§ 2, Ord. 156-NS, eff. August 27, 1970; as amended by § I, Ord. 534-NS, eff.
June 19, 1975)
Sec. 7-3.13. Denial of permits.
   (a)   A grading permit shall not be issued in any case where it is found
that the work proposed by the applicant is classed as hazardous grading, as
determined by the City Engineer, and is liable to endanger any private property
or result in the deposit of debris on any public way or interfere with any
existing drainage course.
   (b)   If the land area for which grading is proposed is subject to
geological or flood hazard to the extent that no reasonable amount of
corrective work can eliminate or sufficiently reduce the hazard to human life
or property, the grading permit and building permits for habitable structures
shall be denied.
   (c)   If the proposed grading would not comply with the requirements of an
applicable development permit or tentative tract map, or with any provisions of
law, including the provisions of this chapter, a grading permit shall be
denied.
(§ 2, Ord. 156-NS, eff. August 27, 1970; as amended by § I, Ord. 534-NS, eff.
June 19, 1975)
Sec. 7-3.14. Fees.
   Fees for plan-checking and inspection services in connection with grading
permits and retaining walls to be constructed as part of a grading operation
shall be paid to the Public Works Department in accordance with the current fee
schedule adopted by resolution of the Council.
(§ 2, Ord. 156-NS, eff. August 27, 1970; as amended by § I, Ord. 534-NS, eff.
June 19, 1975)
Sec. 7-3.15. Bonds.
   (a)   Required. A permit will not be issued for excavations or fills of more
than fifty (50) cubic yards until the permittee posts with the office of the
City Engineer a bond or cash deposit to insure compliance with the provisions
of this chapter and all conditions imposed on behalf of the City. (The bond or
cash deposit shall be executed by the owner and a corporate surety authorized
to do business in the State as surety in an amount sufficient to cover the cost
of the project in accordance with the provisions of subsection (f) of this
section, including the corrective work necessary to remove and eliminate
geological hazards.) All bonds shall be executed on forms obtainable at the
office of the City Engineer.
   (b)   Cash bonds. In lieu of a surety bond, the applicant may file a cash
bond with the City Engineer upon the same terms and conditions and in an amount
equal to that which would be required in the surety bond. The cash bond may be
in the form of cash or negotiable United States securities.
   (c)   Application of bonds to adjacent property. Where grading is required
on property adjacent to the grading site under permit to complete a project
satisfactorily, the owner of such adjacent property need not provide an
additional grading bond if the original is of sufficient amount to include such
additional grading.
   (d)   Conditions of bonds. Every bond required by the provisions of this
chapter shall be conditioned that the permittee shall:
   (1)   Comply with all of the provisions of this chapter and all other
applicable laws and ordinances;
   (2)   Comply with all of the terms and conditions of the permit for
excavation and fill to the satisfaction of the City Engineer;
   (3)   Complete all of the work described by the permit, and the plans and
specifications relative thereto, within the time limit specified in the permit.
Upon an application by the permittee, the City Engineer may, for sufficient
cause, extend the time specified in the permit, but no such extension shall
release any surety upon the bond; and
   (4)   Install temporary erosion control devices when required to do so by
the provisions of this chapter.
   (e)   Period and termination of bonds or cash deposits. The term of each
bond shall begin upon the date of filing and shall remain in effect until the
completion of the work to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, plus an
additional period of one year. In the event of failure to complete the work or
of failure to comply with any of the conditions and terms of the permit, the
City Engineer may order the work to be completed as required by the permit. The
surety executing such bond or such deposit shall continue to be firmly bound
under a continuing obligation for the payment of all necessary costs and
expenses which may be incurred or expended by the City in causing any and all
of such required work to be completed and accomplished, and such surety or the
depositor shall assent to any lawful extensions of time within which to
construct and complete such work. In the case of a cash deposit, such deposit
or any unused portion thereof shall be refunded to the permittee.
   The City Engineer may release, reduce, or exonerate the bond or cash deposit
under appropriate conditions when the public health and welfare is not
jeopardized.
   (f)   Amount of bond. The amount of the bond shall be based upon the
estimated cost of the work, plus twenty-five (25%) percent. The estimated cost
shall be established on the basis of the number of cubic yards of material in
either excavations or fills (whichever is the greater amount) at the rate per
yard as set forth in the fee schedule adopted by Council resolution.
(§ 2, Ord. 156-NS, eff. August 27, 1970, as amended by § I, Ord. 534-NS, eff.
June 19, 1975, and § II, Ord. 778-NS, eff. June 11, 1981)
Sec. 7-3.16. Hazardous soil and earth conditions.
   Whenever the City Engineer determines by inspection that any land or any
existing excavation or fill, from any cause, has become a menace to life or
limb, endangers public or private property, or adversely affects the safety,
usability, or stability of a public way, the owner or other person in legal
control of the property concerned, upon the receipt of written notice thereof
from the City Engineer, shall correct such condition in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and the requirements and conditions set forth in
such notice to eliminate the undesirable condition. The owner or other person
in legal control of such property shall immediately commence the work required
by such notice and shall complete the work within a maximum time of one hundred
twenty (120) days after the date of such notice, unless a shorter period of
time for completion has been specified in the notice, in which case the owner
or other person shall comply within such time as specified.
(§ 2, Ord. 156-NS, eff. August 27, 1970; as amended by § I, Ord. 534-NS, eff.
June 19, 1975)
Sec. 7-3.17. General excavating and grading requirements.
   (a)   Supervision. The permittee shall provide sufficient supervisory
control during the grading operations to insure compliance with the approved
plans and with the provisions of this Code. The permittee shall avail himself
of geological and/or soils engineering services to implement the supervisory
control of the permittee’s registered civil engineer. The engineering geologist
and/or soils engineer shall be properly qualified, in accordance with the
provisions of Section 7-3.06 of this chapter, and qualified to perform such
services within the City. Periodic reports as required by the City Engineer
shall be submitted by the soils engineer and/or engineering geologist.
   (b)   Safety precautions during grading. If, at any stage of work on an
excavation or fill, the City Engineer determines by inspection that further
work as authorized by an existing permit is likely to endanger any property or
public way, the City Engineer may require that plans for such affected area be
amended to include adequate safety precautions as a condition to allow the work
to continue. The City Engineer may cause the work on the affected area to be
halted and may require that plans be amended to include adequate safety
precautions as a condition to allow the work to continue.
   Safety precautions may include, but shall not be limited to, specifying a
flatter exposed slope or construction of additional drainage facilities, berms,
terracing, compaction, cribbing, retaining walls or buttress fills, slough
walls, desilting basins, check dams, benching, wire mesh and guniting, rock
fences, revetments, or diversion walls.
   (c)   Supervised grading. Where necessary, the City Engineer shall require
the permittee to employ:
   (1)   A registered civil engineer to supervise all grading;
   (2)   A soils engineer to provide either constant or continuous soils
inspections: and
   (3)   An engineering geologist to provide either constant or continuous
geological inspections as suit the job.
   The employment of such persons shall not be deemed to render unnecessary
inspections described in this chapter, except that on any work requiring the
continuous supervision and inspection of a registered civil engineer, the
inspections required by this section may be delegated to the registered civil
engineer by the City Engineer.
   If the registered civil engineer, soils engineer, or engineering geologist,
fulfilling his responsibility pursuant to the provisions of this section, finds
that work is not being done in conformance with the provisions of this chapter
or the plans and specifications approved by the City Engineer, the registered
civil engineer, soils engineer, or engineering geologist shall immediately
notify the person in charge of the grading work, and if the nonconformity is
not corrected, the City Engineer shall be notified in writing of the
nonconformity and of the corrective measures to be taken. Such notice shall be
delivered to the office of the City Engineer within twenty-four (24) hours
except in the case of mass grading, which is more than 10,000 cubic yards per
day, when the time limit shall be eight (8) hours.
   If, for any reason, the services of any of the three (3) professional
persons are terminated during the progress of the grading work, such
professional person and the permittee shall immediately notify the City
Engineer in writing. Such termination may result in temporary delays in the
grading operations until satisfactory arrangements are made to assure the City
Engineer that competent professional supervision is provided. When the services
of one or all three (3) of the professionals of record are terminated, the
professional whose services have been terminated shall submit to the City
Engineer certification of work performed under his supervision, along with
deficiencies to be corrected. The new professional shall submit to the City
Engineer a letter of certification that the previous professional’s design,
reports, and recommendations have been reviewed, that all provisions the City
Engineer required as conditions of the grading permit will be complied with
during the course of the work, and that he shall review the detailed grading
plans and thus assume his responsibility as set forth in this chapter for all
future grading on the project. The letters shall be referenced to the approved
grading plans prepared by the design civil engineer.
   The certification shall state that the job was constructed as indicated by
the “as built” plant, that the soils engineer and engineering geologist’s
reports and certifications have been submitted, that they have provided their
services in accordance with good practices, and that all drainage provisions
and safety features have been incorporated in the grading of the site.
   (d)   Hillside grading. The rules and regulations set forth in this
subsection shall apply to all hillside grading in the City which shall be
considered supervised grading.
   The permittee shall employ a registered civil engineer to prepare the design
of grading plans for all hillside grading. The design civil engineer shall
prepare his design in accordance with good planning practices and applicable
codes and to the restrictions imposed as determined by detailed studies of the
site and materials to be graded. Such studies shall be performed by a soils
engineer and an engineering geologist approved by the City Engineer and shall
be submitted prior to the issuance of permits. The civil engineer shall furnish
sufficient supervision during construction to obtain compliance with the plans
as approved.
   The permittee shall employ a soils engineer and an engineering geologist
whose duties shall be to work closely with the civil engineer, to examine
surface and subsurface conditions in accordance with the provisions of
subsection (f) of Section 7-3.08 of this chapter, and to submit reports
thereon. Such reports, in conjunction with the provisions of this chapter,
shall form the basis for the design of the grading project. Such reports shall
be based upon a detailed topographic base map of the area to be graded and
shall include specific conclusions and recommendations for avoidance or
correction of all known existing or anticipated geologic hazards and any
adverse soil conditions on or affecting the site or contiguous property.
   The soils engineer, in addition to his pregrading exploratory work, shall
provide inspections during the placement of all compacted fill in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter, the approved plans, and good engineering
practices. In addition, he shall follow the progress of the job sufficiently
close to determine that the recommendations of his pregrading report are
followed. If conditions which require the modification of plans are encountered
during grading, he shall submit a report of his findings and recommendations
for a change of plans to the permittee and the civil engineer, the engineering
geologist, and the City Engineer. Periodic reports may be required as set forth
in subsection (a) of this section.
   The engineering geologist, in addition to his pre-grading exploratory work,
shall provide inspections during the actual grading process at least as often
as determined to be appropriate by the City Engineer. Such grading inspections
by the engineering geologist are to determine that the conditions of his
pregrading reports are as anticipated. If conditions which require the
modification of plans are encountered during grading, he shall submit a report
of his findings and recommendations to the permittee, the civil engineer, the
soils engineer, and the City Engineer. Periodic reports may be required as set
forth in subsection (a) of this section.
   The soils engineer, at the completion of the grading, shall submit a
certified report of compaction tests for all fill located within the limits of
the tract and/or off-site grading areas. The soils engineer’s final report
shall also include a statement that all subdrains were installed, his
professional opinion of the suitability of the fill placement area and the
ability of the natural materials to support the compacted fill without
excessive settlement of the fill or potential damage to structures erected
thereon, and a statement to the effect that he has inspected all cuts and fills
and that, in his opinion, they meet the design requirements. The report shall
be referenced to a dated “as built” plan prepared by the design civil engineer.
   The engineering geologist, at the completion of grading, shall submit a
final geologic report stating that he has maintained the required in-grading
inspection, that the recommendations of his pregrading report have been
followed, that in his professional opinion all known adverse geologic
conditions have been corrected or provided for, that future adverse geologic
conditions are not anticipated, and that all lots or sites are geologically
suitable and safe for construction. The report shall include the geologist’s
certification that he has inspected all cut slopes and sidehill fill placement
areas prior to the placement of fill. He shall also certify that all subdrain
placement areas were inspected prior to the installation of the subdrains. The
report shall be referenced to a dated “as built” plan prepared by the design
civil engineer.
   Upon completion of the grading, the civil engineer responsible for the
design shall submit an “as built” plan to the City Engineer for the approval of
all work covered by the grading permit and shall include the following:
   (1)   The plan shall be one inch equals forty (40’) feet scale, unless
otherwise approved by the City Engineer, and shall show the locations of
streets, pads, slopes, structures, pertinent elevations, original contours and
finished elevations, and other pertinent information required to show the as-
built condition, and shall be dated.
   (2)   The plan shall bear the signature of the design civil engineer who
shall certify that he has inspected the site, reviewed the plans, and that the
work shown and completed is substantially in accordance with his design.
   (3)   The plan shall also bear the signatures of the soils engineer and the
engineering geologist who shall certify that they have reviewed the plans and
that the work shown and completed is in accordance with their recommendations.
(§ 2, Ord. 156-NS, eff. August 27, 1970, as amended by § I, Ord. 534-NS, eff.
June 19, 1975)
Sec. 7-3.18. Inspections of excavations and fills.
   (a)   Requirements. All construction or work for which a permit is required
shall be subject to inspections by authorized employees of the City, and
certain types of work to be determined by the City Engineer shall have either
continuous or constant inspection and supervision by a registered civil
engineer, and/or other appropriate consultants, soils engineer, and engineering
geologist as a condition of the issuance of the grading permit. Prior to
issuing a grading certificate, a final inspection shall be made of all
construction or work for which a permit has been issued.
   (b)   Exposure of work. Whenever any work on which called inspections are
required, as specified in this section, is covered or concealed by additional
work without having first been inspected, the City Engineer may require, by
written notice, that such work be exposed for examination. The work of exposing
and recovering shall not entail expense to the City.
   (c)   Notices. The permittee or his agent shall notify the City Engineer
twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the time when the grading operation is
ready for each of the following inspections:
   (1)   Initial inspections. When the permittee is ready to begin work but
before any grading or brushing is started;
   (2)   Toe inspections. After the natural ground is exposed and prepared to
receive fill but prior to the placing of any fill. Approval for placing fill
shall not be made until all debris and unsuitable material has been removed
from the site to an approved location;
   (3)   Subdrain inspections. Inspections shall be required on all subdrains
after the installation but prior to the placement of any fill;
   (4)   Excavation inspections. After the excavation is started but before the
vertical depth of the excavation exceeds ten (10’) feet;
   (5)   Fill inspections. After the fill emplacement is started but before the
combined vertical height of the lift exceeds ten (10’) feet;
   (6)   Drainage device inspections. After the forms, steel reinforcement, and
pipe are in place but before any concrete is placed;
   (7)   Rough grading. When all the rough grading has been completed. This
inspection may be called for at the completion of the rough grading without the
necessity of the City Engineer having previously reviewed and approved
applicable reports;
   (8)   Rough grading certification. A conditional interim certificate may be
issued to the Public Works Department to allow the issuance of building
permits. This certificate shall in no way exonerate the applicant from
completing the grading;
   (9)   Final certification. When all work, including the installation of all
drainage structures, other protective devices, the compaction of trench
backfill, and planting and slope stabilization, has been completed and the “as
built” plan and required reports have been submitted;
   (10)    Other inspections. In addition to the called inspections provided by
this section, the City Engineer may make any other inspections of any work to
ascertain compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other laws; and
   (11)    Interrupted grading. When the permittee is ready to resume work, but
before any grading or brushing is started, the permittee or his agent shall
notify the City Engineer twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the time when the
grading operation is ready.
   (d)   Certification. The City Engineer shall certify to the Building
Official, upon the completion of the grading work, that all grading work has
been done in compliance with all approved grading plans and reports and that
all applicable Building Code regulations shall be administered by the office of
the Building Official thereafter.
   (e)   Issuance of certificates. Upon the final inspection when it is found
that the work authorized by the grading permit, including the installation of
all drainage structures, has been satisfactorily completed in accordance with
the requirements of this chapter, a grading certificate covering such work
shall be issued to the permittee by the City Engineer.
   (f)   Final reports. Upon the completion of the work, the City Engineer may
require the following reports and information:
   (1)   A report from a registered civil engineer certifying that all grading,
lot drainage, and drainage facilities have been completed in conformance with
the approved plans and the provisions of this chapter and that the graded site
will support residential or commercial type structures, whichever is
applicable;
   (2)   A soils engineering report including, but not limited to,
certification of the soil bearing capacity, summaries of field and laboratory
tests, locations of tests, expansive soil classification lot by lot, and slope
tests taken in the fills showing the limits of compacted fill on an “as built”
grading plan;
   (3)   An engineering geology report by the engineering geologist, based on
the final contour map, including specific approval of the grading as affected
by geological factors. Where necessary, a revised geologic map, cross sections,
and any recommendations necessary shall be included; and
   (4)   When “as built” grading plans are required, as determined by the City
Engineer, such plans shall be signed by the supervising civil engineer, the
soils engineer, and the engineering geologist, when applicable, for their
portions of the work.
(§ 2, Ord. 156-NS, eff. August 27, 1970, as amended by § I, Ord. 534-NS, eff.
June 19, 1975)
Sec. 7-3.19. Excavations.
   (a)   Height. Cut slopes shall not exceed a vertical height of twenty-five
(25’) feet unless approved by the Planning Commission or City Council. If a cut
slope is permitted above such height, a horizontal bench with a minimum width
of twenty-five (25’) feet may be required to be installed at each one hundred
(100’) feet of vertical height, and intervening terraces may also be required
as set forth in subsection (e) of this section. Slope height shall be measured
by taking the difference in the elevation of the top of slope and the toe of
slope. The top of slope height shall be measured at the center of the radius
where slope rounding to blend with natural terrain is employed.
   (b)   Slope. Excavations shall not be made with a cut face steeper in slope
than two (2) horizontal to one vertical.
   Exceptions.
   (1)   The City Engineer may authorize a cut slope which is steeper in slope
than two (2) horizontal to one vertical, and has a slope height of less than
six (6') feet, if:
   (i)   The applicant can demonstrate that because of special circumstances
applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location, or
surroundings, the strict application of this section would deprive such
property of the ability to be reasonably developed; and
   (ii)   The applicant produces sufficient data from a soils engineer, an
engineering geologist, and a landscape architect to demonstrate that the
material of which the slope is composed and that the material underlying the
slope is capable of permanent stability on a steeper slope, and that the
required slope planting can be adequately maintained.
   (2)   The Planning Commission or City Council may authorize a cut slope
which is steeper in slope than two (2) horizontal to one vertical and which
exceeds six (6’) feet in height if:
   (i)   The applicant can demonstrate that because of special circumstances
applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location, or
surroundings, the strict application of this section would deprive such
property of the ability to be reasonably developed; and
   (ii)   The applicant produces sufficient data from a soils engineer, an
engineering geologist, and a landscape architect to demonstrate that the
material of which the slope is composed and that the material underlying the
slope is capable of permanent stability on a steeper slope, and that the
required slope planting can be adequately maintained.
   (c)   Unstable material. If the material of the slope is of such composition
and character as to be
unstable, considering all types of anticipated loading and moisture conditions,
the engineering geologist and soils engineer shall, by testing and analysis,
provide specific criteria for the stabilization of such material by the
reduction of the slope angle, by buttressing, or by a combination of these or
other means.
   (d)   Cut slope limits. Tops of cut slopes shall not be made nearer than one
(1’) foot plus one-fifth (1/5) the height of the cut to the project boundary
but need not exceed a horizontal distance of ten (10’) feet. Cut slopes shall
not be divided horizontally by property lines, and cut slopes occurring on a
side or rear lot line shall be made a part of the downhill lot. If the City
Engineer determines that such requirement is unnecessary because of special
conditions, he may make adjustments as a condition of the grading permit.
   (e)   Intervening terraces. Terraces shall be paved (concrete or gunite)
terraces on cut slopes, shall have a minimum width of six (6’) feet, shall be
extensively landscaped in accordance with an approved landscaping plan, and
shall be spaced at intervals of thirty (30’) feet measured vertically. Where
only one terrace is utilized, it shall be placed at approximate mid-height. For
slopes flatter than two (2) to one, or where soil conditions warrant,
additional intervening terraces may be required.
   (f)   Temporary excavations and shoring. Excavations shall not remove the
lateral support from a public way or from an existing structure. For the
purposes of this section, the lateral support shall be considered to have been
removed when any of the following conditions exist:
   (1)   The excavation exposes any adverse geological formations which would
affect the lateral support of a public way or of an adjacent structure.
   (2)   The excavation extends below a plane extending downward at an angle of
forty-five (45) degrees from the edge of the public way.
   Exception: Normal footing excavations not exceeding two (2’) feet in depth
shall not be construed as removing lateral support.
   (3)   The excavation extends below a plane extending downward at an angle of
forty-five (45) degrees from the bottom of a footing of an existing structure.
   (g)   Excavations adjacent to an existing structure or public way.
Excavations adjacent to an existing structure or public way may be steeper than
one horizontal to one vertical where either:
   (1)   A foundation investigation by a soils engineer recommending that the
slope may be steeper than one to one has been approved by the City Engineer; or
   (2)   Temporary shoring is designed to support the excavation and plans are
approved and a permit is issued by the City Engineer.
   (i)   The temporary shoring shall be designated for an earth pressure
equivalent to that erected by a fluid weighing not less than thirty (30) pounds
per cubic foot, plus all surcharge loads, or as recommended by a soils engineer
and approved by the City Engineer.
   (ii)   The soil bearing values shall be those recommended by a soils
engineer and approved by the City Engineer.
   (iii)    The design of the required temporary shoring and necessary
underpinning shall include a sequence of construction and installation.
   (iv)   The allowable stresses used in the design of the temporary shoring
may be increased thirty-three and one-third (33-1/3%) percent for structural
and reinforcing steel and twenty-five (25%) percent for wood. No increase shall
be permitted for concrete.
   No action of the Council, Planning Commission, or City Engineer shall be
construed to waive the requirements of the General Safety Orders of the
Department of Industrial Relations of the State.
(§ 2, Ord. 156-NS, eff. August 27, 1970, as amended by § I, Ord. 534-NS, eff.
June 19, 1975, and § 1, Ord. 1098-NS, eff. April 11, 1991)
Sec. 7-3.20. Fills.
   (a)   Height. No finished fill slope shall exceed a vertical height of
twenty-five (25') feet unless approved by the Planning Commission or City
Council. If a fill slope is permitted above such height, a horizontal bench
with a minimum width of twenty-five (25’) feet may be required to be installed
at each one hundred (100’) feet of vertical height, and intervening terraces
also may be required as set forth in subsection (e) of this section.
   (b)   Slope. No fill shall be made which creates any exposed surface steeper
in slope than two (2) horizontal to one vertical.
   Exceptions:
   (1)   The City Engineer may authorize a fill slope which is steeper in slope
than two (2) horizontal to one vertical and is less than six (6’) feet in
height, if:
   (i)   The applicant can demonstrate that because of special circumstances
applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location, or
surroundings, the strict application of this section would deprive such
property of the ability to be reasonably developed; and
   (ii)   The applicant produces sufficient data from a soils engineer, an
engineering geologist, and a landscape architect to demonstrate that the
material of which the slope is composed and that the material underlying the
slope is capable of permanent stability on a steeper slope, and that the
required slope planting can be adequately maintained.
   (2)   The Planning Commission or City Council may authorize a fill slope
which is steeper in slope than two (2) horizontal to one vertical and which
exceeds six (6’) feet in height, if:
   (i)   The applicant can demonstrate that because of special circumstances
applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location, or
surroundings, the strict application of this section would deprive such
property of the ability to be reasonably developed; and
   (ii)   The applicant produces sufficient data from a soils engineer, an
engineering geologist, and a landscape architect to demonstrate that the
material of which the slope is composed and that the material underlying the
slope is capable of permanent stability on a steeper slope, and that the
required slope planting can be adequately maintained.
   (c)   Unstable material. The City Engineer may require that the fill be
constructed with an exposed surface flatter than two (2) horizontal to one
vertical if, under the particular conditions, such flatter surface is necessary
for stability or safety.
   (d)   Fill slope limits. Toes of fill slopes shall not be made nearer to a
project boundary line than one-half (1/2) of the height of the fill but need
not exceed a horizontal distance of twenty (20’) feet. Fill slopes shall not be
divided horizontally by property lines, and fill slopes occurring on a side or
rear lot line shall be made a part of the downhill lot. If the City Engineer
determines such requirement is unnecessary because of special conditions, he
may make adjustments as a condition of the grading permit.
   (e)   Intervening terraces. Terraces shall be paved terraces, shall have a
minimum width of six (6’) feet, shall be extensively landscaped in accordance
with an approved landscaping plan, and shall be spaced at vertical intervals of
thirty (30’) feet; provided, however, for slopes less than forty (40’) feet in
vertical height, the terraces shall be approximately at mid-height. For slopes
flatter than two (2) horizontal to one vertical, or where soil conditions
require, additional intervening terraces may be required.
   (f)   Compaction. All fills shall be placed, compacted, inspected, and
tested in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. If the strict
enforcement of the provisions of this subsection is determined by the City
Engineer to be unnecessary because of the proposed or probable use of the land,
he may waive the requirements. The requirements of this subsection shall not be
waived when structures are to be supported by the fill, or if the fills are
being placed in areas to be designated as hillside, or where they are necessary
as a safety measure to aid in preventing the saturation, settling, slipping, or
erosion of the fill.
   (1)   The natural ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill by
removing vegetation, noncomplying fill, top soil, and/or porous, compressible
soil. Where natural slopes are five (5) horizontal to one vertical or
steeper, and the height of the fill is twenty (20') feet or greater, benching
into sound bedrock or other competent material shall be required. Fill slopes
which toe on natural slopes shall be provided with adequate drainage.
   (2)   No deleterious material shall be permitted in fills. Except as
otherwise permitted by the City Engineer, no rock or similar irreducible
material with a maximum dimension greater than eight (8”) inches shall be
buried or placed in fills.
   Upon recommendations made by a soils engineer and approved by the City
Engineer prior to the grading of any project, rock with dimensions from eight
(8”) inches to thirty-six (36”) inches may be placed in compacted fill. Such
oversized rocks shall not be in the upper ten (10’) feet of compacted fill or
nearer than twenty (20’) feet to the surface of any fill slope. Such rock areas
shall be shown on “as built” plans and certified to be compacted by the soils
engineer.
   (3)   The fill shall be spread in a series of layers, each not exceeding
eight (8”) inches in thickness, and shall be compacted by an approved method
after each layer is spread.
   (4)   The moisture content of the fill material shall be controlled at the
time of spreading and compacting to obtain the required relative compaction and
avoid excessive pore pressure as the fill increases in depth.
   (5)   All fills shall be compacted to a minimum of ninety (90%) percent of
the maximum density as determined by A.S.T.M. D 1557-66T, Method A or C,
modified to three (3) layers. If the required degree of relative compaction
cannot be attained on sloped surfaces, the slope shall be cut back until the
compacted inner core is exposed.
   The field density shall be measured in accordance with the procedure
specified in A.S.T.M. D 1556-58T, or a later revision, using the optional base
plate and making a suitable adjustment for volumes of rocks in the test hole or
other approved testing methods giving equivalent test results.
   (6)   A field density test, as set forth in subsection (5) of this
subsection, shall be taken for each eighteen (18”) inches of fill, or portion
thereof, measured vertically from the lowest point of the area to be filled, or
for each one thousand (1,000) cubic yards of fill placed. In addition, in the
case of subdivisions, at least one field density test shall be taken on each
lot which receives fill.
   (7)   All fills regulated by the provisions of this chapter shall be tested
for relative compaction by the soils engineer. A certificate of compliance with
the terms of this section and the grading permit, setting forth densities,
relative compaction, the expansive soil report, allowable bearing value, and
other soil characteristics, shall be prepared and signed by the soils engineer.
Such report shall be submitted to, and be approved by, the City Engineer before
any final approval of the fill is given and before any foundation construction
begins.
   (8)   If building is not commenced within one year following the final
certification and approval by the City Engineer, a reevaluation as to the
adequacy of the intended use and a report shall be filed with the City Engineer
for approval. Such report shall contain data on compaction, stabilization, and
expansive soils.
   (g)   Fills toeing out on natural slopes. Fills toeing out on natural slopes
which are steeper than two (2) horizontal to one vertical shall not be
permitted.
   (h)   Combined cut and fill slopes. Combined cut and fill slopes shall meet
the requirements of subsections (a), (b), (c), and (d) of this section insofar
as steepness, height, and benching are concerned except that, where the slope
exceeds twenty-five (25’) feet in height, the required drainage bench shall be
placed at the top of the cut slope.
   Fill placed on or above the top of an existing or proposed cut or natural
slope steeper than three (3) horizontal to one vertical shall be set back from
the top of the slope a minimum distance of six (6’) feet.
   (i)   Existing fills. All existing man-made fills on any and all sites shall
be properly evaluated, and, if deficiencies exist, recommendations and design
criteria for corrective measures shall be included within the soils engineering
report.
   (j)   Progress reports.
   (1)   Periodic soils reports by a soils engineer certifying the compaction
or acceptability of all fills may be required. Such reports shall include, but
need not be limited to, the inspection of cleared areas and benches prepared to
receive fill and the removal of all soil and unsuitable materials, the bearing
capacity of the fill to support structures, the placement and compaction of
fill materials, and the inspection of buttress fills, subdrains, and similar
devices. The frequency of such reports shall be at the discretion of the City
Engineer and shall be a condition of the grading permit.
   (2)   The City Engineer may require sufficient inspections by an engineering
geologist to ensure that all geologic conditions have been adequately
considered. Where geologic conditions warrant, the City Engineer may require
periodic geologic reports. Such inspections and reports may be required to
include, but need not be limited to, the inspection of cut slopes, canyons
during clearing, operations for groundwater and earth material conditions,
benches or keys prior to the placement of fill, and possible underground water
spring locations.
   (k)   Measure of settlement. On fills of forty (40') feet or more, if
recommended by the soils engineer, the City Engineer or the Building Official
may require the determination of the settlement characteristics of such fills
to establish that any movements have substantially ceased.
   In such cases, a system of bench marks shall be installed by a civil
engineer or land surveyor at critical points on the fill, and accurate
measurements of both horizontal and vertical movements shall be taken and
evaluated by the soils engineer for a period of time sufficient to define the
settlement behavior. The evaluation period shall in all cases include the
period from November 1 through April 15 (the rainy season).
(§ 2, Ord. 156-NS, eff. August 27, 1970, as amended by § I, Ord. 534-NS, eff.
June 19, 1975, and § 2, Ord. 1098-NS, eff. April 11, 1991)
Sec. 7-3.21. Erosion control and drainage devices.
   (a)   Intervening terraces. Paved (reinforced concrete or gunite)
intervening terraces shall have a minimum width of six (6') feet and may be
installed on the face of all cut and fill slopes at intervals not to exceed
thirty (30') feet measured along a vertical plane.
   The longitudinal slope of intervening terraces shall not be less than two
(2%) percent or more than twelve (12%) percent, and any change in the rate of
grade within these allowable slopes shall increase the grade in the direction
of the flow.
   A single run of an intervening terrace shall not exceed two hundred (200')
feet to a downdrain.
   If soil in paved terrace areas is termed "expansive", the paved terraces
shall be designed by a registered civil engineer to resist the expansive
characteristics of the area.
   (b)   Diverter terraces. Where recommended by a soils engineer, paved
(concrete or gunite) diverter terraces, a minimum of thirty (30") inches in
width and one (1') foot in depth, shall be installed at the top of all cut
slopes where the tributary drainage area above has a slope exceeding ten (10)
horizontal to one vertical and a horizontal projection greater than fifty (50')
feet. The diverter terrace design shall be shown on each plan for City
approval, based on the recommendations of the soils engineer and engineering
geologist to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.
   (c)   Vee channels. Where a slough wall is required at the toe of the slope,
the City Engineer may require a vee channel to be constructed behind the wall
to carry off the slope waters.
   (d)   Inlet structures, downdrains, and outlet structures.
   (1)   Inlet structures. Inlet structures shall be of concrete, galvanized
iron hot-dipped in asphalt, or equivalent. The inlet shall be grated or grilled
or of such entry shape as to prevent the entry of objects of greater than four
(4") inches dimension and permit objects of a maximum of two (2") inches
dimension. Inlet structures shall be placed on the bench and shall be so shaped
as to provide small entry losses. An overflow structure into the "vee" down-
drains shall be provided.
   (2)   Downdrains. Downdrains shall be of concrete, corrugated galvanized
iron hot-dipped in asphalt, or equivalent. Pipe downdrains shall have a
diameter of a size required by runoff calculations but not less than twelve
(12") inches. Open channel downdrains shall be designed by a civil engineer and
shall have a minimum capacity equal to four (4) times the capacity of the
required pipe size. The alignment of downdrains shall be such as to maintain a
constant velocity head.
   (3)   Cleanouts. Cleanouts shall be provided at all points of severe change
in grade and at points of entry to public rights-of-way.
   (4)   Outlet structures. Outlet structures shall be of concrete, galvanized
iron hot-dipped in asphalt, or equivalent.
   Where outletting into streets, the structure shall be of City standards or a
design approved by the City Engineer. Where outletting into natural
watercourses or other approved locations, the structure shall be provided with
adequate velocity reducers, diversion walls, riprap, concrete aprons, or any
similar energy dissipator. All slope drainage shall be collected and disposed
of in the drainage device.
   (e)   Runoff computations. Runoff shall be based upon the proper fifty (50)
year isohyetal map, and the runoff calculation shall be based upon the latest
methods adopted by the City Engineer.
   (f)   Drainage dispersal walls. A drainage dispersal device shall be
constructed whenever it is necessary to convert channel flow to sheet flow, and
the structure shall be of a design approved by the City Engineer.
   (g)   Subdrains. Subdrains shall be installed to collect any active or
potential springs or seeps which will be covered by the fill. Subdrains shall
be installed after any watercourse has been excavated to firm material in
preparation for receiving the fill. Individual design shall be shown on each
plan for the City Engineer's approval. Upon the recommendation of the soils
engineer and engineering geologist, and upon the approval of the City Engineer,
the installation of subdrains may be eliminated.
   (h)   Site drainage. All building pads with cut or fill shall be constructed
to carry surface waters to the nearest practical street, storm drain, or
natural watercourse approved by the City Engineer and/or appropriate
governmental agency as a safe place to deposit such waters. At least a two (2%)
percent grade toward the approval disposal area shall be required for building
pads. Where recommended by the soils engineer, eave or ground gutters shall be
provided to receive all roof water and deliver it through a non-erosive device
to a street or watercourse. Compacted fill berms shall be required to be
constructed at the top of all slopes where diverter terraces are not required
by the City Engineer.
(§ 2, Ord. 156-NS, eff. August 27, 1970; as amended by § I, Ord. 534-NS, eff.
June 19, 1975)
Sec. 7-3.22. Buttress fills.
   (a)   General. A buttress fill is a designed compacted earth fill used for
providing lateral support to an unstabilized earth or rock mass. All buttress
fills shall be designed in accordance with the recommendations and design
criteria, including the subdrain system, submitted by the soils engineer or
engineering geologist with the approval of the City Engineer.
   (b)   Foundation. The ability of the foundation soil to support the buttress
shall be investigated, and additional benching shall be required to what is
otherwise specified for ordinary fills. The soils engineer shall provide
specifications for keying the base of the buttress and for bonding the buttress
to the natural ground.
   (c)   Subdrains. Subdrains which blanket the entire back face of the
buttress or which occur at intervals shall be provided to prevent the buildup
of hydrostatic pressure. The details of subdrains shall be provided by the
soils engineer.
   (d)   Safety factor. The buttress fill shall be designed for a minimum
safety factor of 1.50 based upon the smaller value of yield or ultimate shear
strength of the fill material.
(§ 2, Ord. 156-NS, eff. August 27, 1970, as amended by § I, Ord. 534-NS, eff.
June 19, 1975)
Sec. 7-3.23. Areas subject to slides and unstable soil.
   An evaluation in detail of all areas subject to slides or unstable soils
shall be required from a soils engineer and engineering geologist and shall
include design criteria for corrective measures.
(§ 2, Ord. 156-NS, eff. August 27, 1970; as amended by § I, Ord. 534-NS, eff.
June 19, 1975)
Sec. 7-3.24. Planting and irrigation of cut and fill slopes.
   All cut and fill slopes greater than three (3’) feet in height shall be
planted and irrigated with a sprinkler system in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
   (a)   The permittee, or his authorized representatives, shall be responsible
for installing all landscaping in accordance with an approved landscape
planting plan, for a sprinkler system, and for maintaining all cut and fill
slopes. The installation of the landscaping and of the required sprinkler
system shall be complete within six (6) months after the date of the
termination of the grading. Deviations from the requirements of this section
may be permitted in exceptional circumstances or where unavoidable hardship
would result from a strict application of these requirements when a waiver has
first been obtained from the Planning Commission. Applications for waivers and
the processing thereof shall be in accordance with the procedures specified in
Article 28 of Chapter 4 of Title 9 of this Code. A separate bond or cash
deposit shall be posted with the Public Works Director to guarantee such
landscaping, sprinkler system, and the maintenance thereof, and such bond or
cash deposit, or portions thereof, shall not be released until the landscaping
has been established for at least ninety (90) days after planting and permanent
responsibility for the landscape maintenance has been established.
   (b)   Landscaping planting plan. A landscaping planting plan shall be
prepared and submitted for approval by the Public Works Director and the
Community Development Director immediately upon the completion of the grading
and in no event less than within ninety (90) days after the date the grading is
commenced, whichever first occurs. In the event the grading should take over
ninety (90) days to complete when diligently pursued, the Public Works Director
may grant a reasonable extension of time for the submission of the landscape
plan required herein, providing the plan is submitted in time to comply with
the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. A soil test shall be made to
determine the plant materials which are suitable for the slopes, and the plant
materials utilized on the slopes shall be compatible with the soils report and
in accordance with the approved planting schedule or as required by a condition
of a development permit, tentative tract map, or land division. There shall be
a variety of ground covers, trees, and shrubs incorporated into the landscaping
plan and utilizing plants from the “Approved Planting Schedule” set forth in
subsection (d) of this section. Other plant materials may be substituted for
the “Approved Planting Schedule” if submitted and recommended by a registered
landscape architect and approved by the Public Works Director and the Community
Development Director.
   (c)   Irrigation plan. An irrigation plan for the sprinkler system to be
installed on all cut and fill slopes shall be submitted to and approved by the
Public Works Director and the Community Development Director prior to the
issuance of the grading permit. On slopes conveniently located to a proposed
hose bib connected to a house plumbing installation, where the slope does not
exceed eight (8’) feet in height or a maximum area of one thousand (1,000)
square feet, a hand sprinkling system may be utilized if development on the lot
has commenced and is being diligently pursued within six (6) months after the
completion of the grading.
   (d)   Approved planting schedule. All plants required by the provisions of
this section shall be selected from the planting pallets provided within the
Forestry Master Plan, the following City Approved Planting Schedule or as
approved by the Public Works Director and the Community Development Director or
their respective designees. Additionally, the use of drought-resistant plants
shall be maximized to the greatest extent possible in any approved planting.
   APPROVED PLANTING SCHEDULE
   A. Ground covers.
      (1)   Hydromulched mixtures shall be acceptable as ground covers under
the provisions of this section and may include:
         (i)   A flower hydromulched mixture which shall contain:
 
Dimorphotheca Sinuata            Cape Marigold 2#/ac
Eschscholzia Californica         California Poppy 2#/ac
Calendula Officinalis Variety    Pacific Beauty 6#/ac
Tagetes Patula                   French Marigold 2#/ac
Lobularia Maritima and varieties Sweet Alyssum 1#/ac
 
         (ii)   Native plant hydromulched mixtures which shall contain:
 
Atriplex Semibaccata   Australian Saltbush 15#/ac
Eriogonum Fasciculatum California Buckwheat 4#/ac
Mimulus Aurantiacus    Bush Monkey Flower 1/4#/ac
Pennisetum Setaceum    Fountain Grass 1/2#/ac
 
 
Artimesia Californica California Sagebrush 1/2#/ac
Melica Imperfecta     Coast Range Melic 1/2#/ac
Nasella Pulchra       Purple Needle Grass 1/2#/ac
Nasella Lepida        Foothill Needle Grass 1/2#/ac
Lupinus Succulentus   Succulent Lupine 1/2#/ac
Lotus Scoparius       Deerweed 1/2#/ac
 
      (2)   The following ground covers from rooted cuttings shall be planted
at eighteen (18") inches on center:
         (i)   Rosemarinus Officinalis    Rosemary
         (ii)   Gazania Uniflora   Trailing Gazania
         (iii)   Hedera Varieties   Ivy
         (iv)   Osteospermum sp. African Daisy
         (v)   Hypericum Calycinum   Aaron's Beard
         (vi)   Achillea Millefolium   Yarrow
         (vii)Epilobium Canum   California Fuchsia
         (viii) Eriogonum Cinereum   Ashy-Leaf Buckwheat
   B. Trees.
      (1)   Juglans California   California Black Walnut
      (2)   Shinus Molle   Peruvian Pepper
      (3)   Plantanus Racemosa   California Sycamore
      (4)   Pinus Halepensis   Aleppo Pine
      (5)   Quercus Agrifolia   Coast Live Oak
      (6)   Quercus Lobata   Valley Oak
      (7)   Eucalyptus Saligna   Sydney Blue Gum
      (8)   Eucalyptus Cornuta   Yate Eucalyptus
   C. Shrubs for hillside planting.
      (1)   Acacia Longifolia   Sydney Golden Wattle
      (2)   Baccharis Pilularis   Coyote Brush
      (3)   Acacia Cyclopis   Cyclops Acacia
      (4)   Arctostaphylos ssp. Manzanita
      (5)   Atriplex Lentiformis   Quail Bush
      (6)   Callistemon Rigidus   Stiff Bottlebrush
      (7)   Ceanothus Griseus Variety   California Lilac
      (8)   Cystisus Genista, Spartium   Broom
      (9)   Dodonaea Viscosa "Purpurea"   Purple Hopseed
      (10)   Eleagnus Pungens   Silverberry
      (11)   Eriogonum Fasciculatum    California Buckwheat
      (12)   Fremontodendron Californica    Flannelbush
      (13)   Grevillea Lanigera   Wooly Grevillia
      (14)   Juniperus Chinensis Varieties    Juniper
      (15)   Nerium Oleander   Oleander
      (16)   Rhamnus Californica   California Coffeeberry
      (17)   Malosma Laurina   Laurel Sumac
      (18)   Rhus Integrifolia   Lemonadeberry
      (19)   Rhus Ovata   Sugar Bush
      (20)   Heteromeles Arbutifolia   Toyon
      (21)   Pyracantha "Santa Cruz"   Santa Cruz Pyracantha
      (22)   Encelia Californica   California Sunflower
      (23)   Isomeris Arborea   Bladderpod
      (24)   Salvia spp.     Sage
(§ 2, Ord. 156-NS, eff. August 27, 1970, as amended by § I, Ord. 534-NS, eff.
June 19, 1975, §12, Ord. 1217-NS, eff. September 27, 1994, and § 4, Ord. 1372-
NS, eff. February 8, 2001)
Sec. 7-3.25. Rules and regulations.
   The Council may enact rules and regulations not in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter to accomplish the purpose and intent of this
chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 156-NS, eff. August 27, 1970; as amended by § I, Ord. 534-NS, eff.
June 19, 1975)
Sec. 7-3.26. Violations.
   (a)   Violations enumerated. No person shall fail, refuse, or neglect to
comply with the following provisions:
      (1)   All orders issued by the City Engineer or the Building Official
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   All conditions imposed on grading permits pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter; and
      (3)   All rules and regulations of the office of the City Engineer with
respect to grading which were in effect at the time the grading permit was
issued.
   (b)   Penalties. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Code
pursuant to Section 1-2.01 of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code, and each such
person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day, or
portion thereof, during which any violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter is committed, continued, or permitted.
   (c)   Letters of noncompliance. Whenever any construction or work is being
done contrary to the provisions of this chapter or any other law, the City
Engineer or his duly authorized representative may issue a letter of
noncompliance. The letter of noncompliance shall be issued to the developer,
the civil engineer, and the contractor immediately on that portion of the work
on which the noncompliance has occurred. If the portion of the work on which
the noncompliance has occurred is not remedied, a stop work order shall be
issued; or if the portion of the work on which the noncompliance has occurred
is corrected, a letter shall be issued stating that the noncompliance has been
rectified, and such letter shall be distributed to the developer, the civil
engineer, and the contractor. The issuance of a letter of noncompliance shall
not be a prerequisite for the issuance of a stop work order by the City
Engineer or his authorized representative.
   (d)   Stop work orders. Whenever any construction or work is being done
contrary to the provisions of this chapter or any other law, or public or
private property is endangered, the City Engineer may issue a written notice to
the responsible party to stop work on that portion of the work on which the
violation has occurred or upon which the danger exists. The notice shall state
the nature of the violation or the danger, and no work shall be done on that
portion until the violation has been rectified and approval obtained from the
City Engineer or until, as a condition for the continuance of the work, special
precautions to eliminate the hazards have been approved by the City Engineer.
(§ 2, Ord. 156-NS, eff. August 27, 1970, as amended by § I, Ord. 534-NS, eff.
June 19 1975, and § XXIX, Ord. 770-NS, eff. February 26, 1981)
CHAPTER 4. SEPARATION OF WATER AND SEWER FACILITIES
Sec. 7-4.01. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Cesspool” shall mean any device for the treatment of sewage, which
device discharges treated or untreated sewage into the surrounding ground.
   (b)   “Facility” shall mean any conduit, structure, or feature used in the
supply of water or the collection and disposal of sewerage.
   (c)   “Horizontal separation” shall mean the least horizontal distance
between the center lines of pipelines laid approximately parallel to one
another at their closest point of approach and the least horizontal distance
between the center lines of pipelines and the nearest edge of the facilities
set forth in Section 7-4.04 of this chapter.
   (d)   “Seepage pit” shall mean any pit used for the leaching of treated or
untreated sewage into the surrounding ground.
   (e)   “Septic tank” shall mean any device for the treatment of sewage, which
device does not directly discharge sewage into the surrounding ground.
   (f)   “Sewage disposal field” shall mean any system of pipelines, which
system provides for the leaching of treated sewage into the surrounding ground.
   (g)   “Sewer line” shall mean any conduit carrying sewage or industrial
waste as defined in Section 5410(a) of the Health and Safety Code of the State;
any conduit carrying the effluent of treated sewage or industrial waste; or any
conduit carrying any agricultural waste or effluent of any treated agricultural
waste, including, but not limited to, interceptors, outfalls, force mains,
laterals, and house connections.
   (h)   “Vertical separation” shall mean the difference in elevation between
the outside bottom of the higher pipe and the outside top of the lower pipe.
   (i)   “Water line” shall mean any conduit carrying water which is planned to
be used for human consumption or sanitation, including, but not limited to,
water mains and service laterals.
   (j)   “Water well” shall mean any hole or excavation used to obtain water
from under the surface of the ground and any other such hole or excavation
providing communication for contamination from a sewerage facility to the
underground water, but not including to, wells properly sealed through water-
bearing stratum and water wells properly sealed and abandoned.
(§ 8604, T.O.O.C.) (As amended by part 19, Ord. 1437-NS, eff. July 7, 2005)
Sec. 7-4.02. Purpose and extent of regulations.
   In order to minimize the hazards to public health which may occur due to the
accidental contamination of water supply facilities by sewage, the location and
construction of water supply facilities and sewerage facilities in close
proximity to one another shall be regulated. The regulations provided in this
chapter are sufficient to provide reasonable protection to the public health
under ordinary conditions. If, in the opinion of the Health Officer, the Public
Works Director, or the civil engineer designing and/or supervising the
construction of the facilities, the regulations in this chapter are
insufficient to provide reasonable protection to the public health due to
unusual circumstances, including, but not limited to, extremely permeable soil,
water lines which operate at or below atmospheric pressure, and severe exposure
to forces which may rupture lines the Health Officer, Public Works Director, or
civil engineer shall prescribe more effective separation and/or protection of
the lines.
(§ 8600, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 7-4.03. Water and sewer lines.
   Except as provided in Section 7-4.05 of this chapter, water lines and sewer
lines shall be located as follows:
   (a)   The horizontal separation between a water line and a sewer line laid
approximately parallel to one another shall not be less than ten (10’) feet.
   (b)   When a water line and a sewer line cross, the water line shall be
higher than the sewer line, and the vertical separation shall not be less than
three (3') feet.
(§ 8601, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 7-4.04. Water supply and sewer facilities.
   Except as provided in the standards of construction approved by the Public
Works Director, the following minimum horizontal separations shall be provided
between water supply facilities and sewerage facilities:
   (a)   A water well and a sewer line, fifty (50') feet;
   (b)   A water well and a septic tank, fifty (50') feet;
   (c)   A water well and a sewage disposal field, fifty (50') feet;
   (d)   A water well and a seepage pit or cesspool, one hundred one hundred
(100') feet;
   (e)   A water line and a septic tank, ten (10') feet;
   (f)   A water line and a disposal field, ten (10') feet; and
   (g)   A water line and a seepage pit or cesspool, ten (10') feet.
(§ 8602, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 7-4.05. Exceptions.
   If, in any case, it is impractical to locate sewerage facilities and water
supply facilities with the separations required by the provisions of Section 7-
4.03 and 7-4.04 of this chapter, they may be located closer to one another
provided:
   (a)   The joints of the lines in the reaches of each line where the required
separations are not maintained shall possess the necessary strength and
durability to prevent the escape of the contents of the lines under such
adverse conditions as corrosion, strains due to temperature changes,
settlement, and superimposed loads; and
   (b)   The designs of the facilities, where required separation is not
maintained, are approved by the Public Works Director. The Public Works
Director shall issue standards of design for facilities which are acceptable
within the required separation area. Facilities meeting such standards may be
located within the required separation area without the specific approval
required by this subsection.
(§ 8603, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 7-4.06. Violations.
   It shall be a violation of this Code pursuant to Section 1-2.01 of Chapter 2
of Title 1 of this Code for any person to construct or maintain water lines or
sewer lines in violation of the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 8605, T.O.O.C., as amended by § XXX, Ord. 770-NS, eff. February 26, 1981)
CHAPTER 5. UTILITY LINES
Article 1. Removal and Undergrounding of Existing Overhead Facilities
Sec. 7-5.101. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and. phrases used in this article are defined as
follows:
   (a)   “Commission” shall mean the Public Utilities Commission of the State.
   (b)   “Underground Utility District” or “District” shall mean that area in
the City within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures
are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to
the provisions of Section 7-5.104 of this article.
   (c)   “Person” shall mean and include individuals, firms, corporations,
partnerships, and their agents and employees.
   (d)   “Poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures” shall mean
poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms,
braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits,
appliances, attachments, and appurtenances located aboveground within a
District and used or useful in supplying electric, communication, or similar or
associated service.
   (e)   “Utility” shall include all persons or entities supplying electric
communication, or similar or associated service by means of electrical
materials or devices.
(§ 1, Ord. 213)
Sec. 7-5.102. Public hearings by Council.
   The Council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether
the public necessity, health, safety or welfare require the removal of poles,
overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of
the City and the underground installation of wire and facilities for supplying
electric, communication or similar or associated service. The City Clerk shall
notify all affected property owners, as shown on the last equalized assessment
roll, and utilities concerned, by mail of the time and place of such hearings
at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall
be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such
hearing, all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The
decision of the Council shall be final and conclusive.
(§ 2 a, Ord. 213, as amended by § 20, Ord. 1250-NS, January 9, 1996)
Sec. 7-5.103. Report by City Engineer.
   Prior to holding such public hearing the City Engineer shall consult with
all affected utilities and shall prepare a report for submission at such
hearing containing, among other information, the extent of such utilities’
participation and estimates of the total costs to the City and affected
property owners. Such report shall also contain an estimate of the time
required to complete such underground installation and removal of overhead
facilities.
(§ 2 b, Ord. 213)
Sec. 7-5.104. Council may designate Underground Utility Districts by
resolution.
   If, after any such public hearing, the Council finds that the public
necessity, health, safety, or welfare requires such removal and such
underground installation within a designated area, the Council shall, by
resolution, declare such designated area an Underground Utility District and
order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include
a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time
within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished
and within which affected property owners shall be ready to receive underground
service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground
installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials, and
equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such
underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby.
(§ 3, Ord. 213)
Sec. 7-5.105. Unlawful acts.
   Whenever the Council creates an Underground Utility District and orders the
removal of poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures therein as
provided in Section 7-5.104 of this article, it shall be unlawful for any
person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ,
or operate poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures in the
District after the date when such overhead facilities are required to be
removed by such resolution, except as such overhead facilities may be required
to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance
by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or
occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 7-5.110
of this article, and for such reasonable time required to remove such
facilities after such work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided
in this article.
(§ 4, Ord. 213)
Sec. 7-5.106. Exceptions: Emergencies or unusual circumstances.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, overhead facilities may be
installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed thirty (30) days, without
authority of the City Engineer in order to provide emergency service. The City
Engineer may grant special permission, on such terms as he may deem
appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to
any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use, or operate
poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures.
(§ 5, Ord. 213)
Sec. 7-5.107. Other exceptions.
   The provisions of this article and any resolution adopted pursuant to the
provisions of Section 7-5.104 of this article, unless otherwise provided in
such resolution, shall not apply to the following:
   (a)   Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision
and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer;
   (b)   Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;
   (c)   Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any
portion of a District within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or
connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a District, where such wires
originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead
structures are not prohibited;
   (d)   Poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures used for the
transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500 volts;
   (e)   Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means
of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building
to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without
crossing any public street;
   (f)   Antennae, associated equipment, and supporting structures for
furnishing communication services for the utility company use;
   (g)   Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-
mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and
concealed ducts; and
   (h)   Temporary poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures
used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects.
(§ 6, Ord. 213)
Sec. 7-5.108. Notices to property owners and utility companies.
   Within ten (10) days after the effective date of a resolution adopted
pursuant to the provisions of Section 7-5.104 of this article, the City Clerk
shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within
the District thereby created of the adoption of the resolution. The City Clerk
shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if
they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive
electric, communication, or similar or associated service, they or such
occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as
to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at
a new location.
   Notification by the City Clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the
resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 7-5.104 of this
article, together with a copy of the provisions of this article, to affected
property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to
the affected utilities.
(§ 7, Ord. 213)
Sec. 7-5.109. Responsibility of utility companies.
   If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a
District created by any resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of
Section 7-5.104 of this article, the supplying utility shall furnish that
portion of the conduits, conductors, and associated equipment required to be
furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs on file
with the Commission.
(§ 8, Ord. 213)
Sec. 7-5.110. Responsibility of property owners.
   (a)   Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying, or renting a
building or structure within a District shall construct and provide that
portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities
referred to in Section 7-5.109 of this article and the termination facility on
or within such building or structure being served.
   (b)   In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or
renting such property does not comply with the provisions of subsection (a) of
this section within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to
the provisions of Section 7-5.104 of this article, the City Engineer shall post
written notice on the property being served and thirty (30) days thereafter may
authorize the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires
and associated facilities supplying utility service to such property.
   (c)   The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given
either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of
such persons, the notice shall be deposited in the United States mail in a
sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of
such premises at such premises, and the notice shall be addressed to the owner
thereof as such owner’s name appears, and shall be addressed to such owner’s
last known address as the same appears, on the last equalized assessment roll
and, when no address appears, to General Delivery, City of Thousand Oaks,
California. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have
been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty-eight (48)
hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner
or occupant of such premises, the City Engineer shall, within forty-eight (48)
hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not
less than eight (8”) inches by ten (10”) inches in size, to be posted in a
conspicuous place on such premises.
   (d)   The notice given by the City Engineer to provide the required
underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be
done and shall state that if such work is not completed within thirty (30) days
after receipt of such notice, the City Engineer shall provide such required
underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof shall be
assessed against the property benefitted and become a lien upon such property.
   (e)   If, upon the expiration of the thirty (30) day period, the required
underground facilities have not been provided, the City Engineer shall
forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are
unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished
thereto, the City Engineer may, in lieu of providing the required underground
facilities, authorize the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead
service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to such
property. Upon completion of the work by the City Engineer, he shall file a
written report with the Council setting forth the fact that the required
underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a
legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed.
The Council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against
the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which time shall
not be less than ten (10) days thereafter.
   (f)   The City Engineer shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such
protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in
possession of such premises and a notice in writing thereof to the owner
thereof, in the manner provided in subsection (c) of this section for the
giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the
time and place the Council will pass upon such report and will hear protests
against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the
proposed assessment.
   (g)   Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the Council
shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any, and then
proceed to affirm, modify, or reject the assessment.
   (h)   If any assessment is not paid within five (5) days after its
confirmation by the Council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien
upon the property against which the assessment is made by the City Engineer,
and the City Engineer is hereby directed to turn over to the Assessor and Tax
Collector a notice of lien on each of such properties on which the assessment
has not been paid, and the Assessor and Tax Collector shall add the amount of
the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises
upon which the assessment was not paid. Such lien shall be due and payable at
the time as property taxes are due and payable, and, if not paid when due and
payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six (6%) percent per annum.
(§ 9, Ord. 213)
Sec. 7-5.111. Responsibility of City.
   The City shall remove at its own expense all City-owned equipment from all
poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or
user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the
resolution enacted pursuant to the provisions of Section 7-5.104 of this
article.
(§ 10, Ord. 213)
Sec. 7-5.112. Extension of time.
   In the event any act required by the provisions of this article or by a
resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 7-5.104 of this
article cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of
materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances,
civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor,
then the time within which such act shall be accomplished shall be extended for
a period equivalent to the time of such limitation.
(§ 11, Ord. 213)
Article 2. Undergrounding Installations
Sec. 7-5.201. Purposes.
   The Council hereby finds and determines that the public interest requires,
except as otherwise provided in this article, that all facilities and wires for
the supply and distribution of electric energy and service, television cable
service, and telephone and telegraph service for all new construction and land
developments shall be placed underground in order to promote and preserve the
health, safety, and general welfare of the public and to assure the orderly
development of the City.
   The Council also hereby finds that the public interest requires, except as
otherwise provided in this article, that all facilities and wires for the
supply and distribution of electric energy and service, television cable,
service, and telephone and telegraph service adjacent to new construction and
land development shall be placed underground in order to promote and preserve
the health, safety, and general welfare of the public and to assure the orderly
development of the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 31, as amended by § I, Ord. 507-NS, eff. December 12, 1974)
Sec. 7-5.202. Required: Exceptions.
   (a)   Required. The subdivider, developer, and landowner shall make the
necessary cost and other arrangements with each of the public utility companies
for the installation of underground facilities and appropriate relocation and
the undergrounding of existing adjacent facilities in conformance with the
respective operating company’s rules and regulations then on file and approved
by the Public Utilities Commission of the State. If such rules and regulations
provided to the City preclude the undergrounding of certain facilities, then,
in that event, the undergrounding of those facilities shall not be required,
and no formal waiver hearing, as set forth in Section 7-5.203 of this article,
shall be necessary, except that adequate security for possible future
undergrounding may be required.
   (b)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
   (1)   Overhead facilities approved by the Community Development Director to
be installed and maintained for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days in
order to provide emergency service;
   (2)   Temporary poles, overhead wires, and associated structures used, or to
be used, in conjunction with construction projects; and
   (3)   Power transmission lines of 66,000 volts or more if it is determined
by the Community Development Director that such undergrounding is not
technically or economically feasible at the time the development is to take
place.
(§ 2, Ord. 31, as amended by § 1, Ord. 147-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, and § I, Ord.
507-NS, eff. December 12, 1974)
Sec. 7-5.203. Waivers.
   Upon the application of a subdivider, developer, landowner, or utility
company, and after paying a fee as prescribed by Council resolution, the
provisions of Section 7-5.202 may be waived pursuant the procedures set forth
in Article 28 of Title 9 of this Code, if it is found that the requirements of
an underground installation of utility lines would be unreasonable or
impractical considering, but not limited to, any of the following:
   (a)   The geological or soil condition;
   (b)   The topographical conditions;
   (c)   The existence of overhead utility lines in an adjacent subdivision or
development;
   (d)   The use which shall be made of the property, but only if the use is
other than a single-family residential subdivision; and
   (e)   The cost of installing underground lines compared with the cost of the
final development of the property.
   The Community Development Director may impose such conditions as he deems
necessary to carry out the purposes and intent of the provisions of this
article.
(§ 4, Ord. 31, as amended by Ord. 76, § I, Ord. 162-NS, eff. August 27, 1970, §
III, Ord. 219-NS, eff. August 19, 1971, § III, Ord. 581-NS, eff. August 12,
1976, § III, Ord. 776-NS, eff. April 16, 1981 and § 3, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April
27, 1993)
Sec. 7-5.204. Compliance with provisions prerequisite to issuance of building
permits.
   No building permit shall be issued for any new construction and land
development unless the applicant’s plans comply with the provisions of this
chapter or until the applicant has obtained a waiver of the requirements of
this chapter.
(§ 6, Ord. 31, as added by § 1, Ord. 92)
Sec. 7-5.205. Aboveground equipment.
   For the purposes of this chapter, appurtenances and associated equipment,
including, but not limited to, surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted
terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts in an underground
system, may be placed aboveground.
(§ 3, Ord. 31)
Sec. 7-5.206. Appeals: Hearings.
   (a)   Filing. Within ten (10) calendar days after the date of the rendition
of a decision by the Planning Commission, an appeal to the Council may be taken
by the applicant, or by any person or political entity aggrieved, or by any
officer, department, board or commission of the City affected by the decision.
An appeal may be commenced only by filing within the Community Development
Department a notice of appeal which specifies the grounds of appeal and the
action which the appellant requests the Council to take. Appeals shall be
submitted on forms provided for that purpose by the Community Development
Department, and shall be accompanied by the applicable fee as specified in the
City’s Master Fee Resolution. Prior to and as a prerequisite to filing a notice
of appeal, an appellant shall obtain certification from the Community
Development Department that an appeal is in order for Council consideration and
that, when applicable, all information and maps required in connection with the
appeal have been filed with the City. The Department shall note the date and
time such notice is filed and forthwith sent a copy to the City Attorney. No
filing fee shall be charged or collected for any application or appeal filed by
a City officer, employee, board or commission on behalf of the city.
   (b)   Hearings. Following the filling of an appeal, the City Clerk shall
consider the pending City Council agenda requests and shall fix the date, time,
and place for the hearing on the appeal. Said hearing shall be held not more
than ninety (90) calendar days following the filling of the appeal.
   (c)   Hearings: Decisions: Voting. Any decision on an appeal to the Council
reversing or modifying the decision of the Planning Commission shall require
the concurrence of at least a majority of those voting. In the event a motion
fails to receive a majority vote, the appeal shall be deemed denied.
(§ 5.1, Ord. 31, and §§ 5.2 and 5.3, Ord. 31, as amended by Ord. 108; as
amended by § 1, Ord. 603-NS, eff. December 16, 1976, and 1556-NS, eff. July 1,
2011)
CHAPTER 6. REPRODUCTION MACHINE FEES
Sec. 7-6.01. Fee schedule.
   Fees for the reproduction of City maps for private parties shall be paid to
the Public Works Department in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by
Council resolution.
(§ 2, Ord. 350-NS, eff. March 8, 1973, as amended by § III, Ord. 778-NS, eff.
June 11, 1981)
Sec. 7-6.02. Liability.
   Each officer or employee of the City receiving documents for reproduction
shall inform the person submitting a document for reproduction that there is a
possibility of a document being lost, destroyed, or otherwise made unusable by
reason of the reproduction process. The invoices for the services shall clearly
show thereon that the person offering the document for reproduction assumes the
risk of loss or destruction of the document and will not hold the City
responsible for any loss or damage which may occur through the processing.
(§ 2, Ord. 350-NS, eff. March 8, 1973)
CHAPTER 7. OVERTIME CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION FEES
Sec. 7-7.01. Fee schedule.
   Construction inspection fees for Saturdays, Sundays, holidays, and beyond
normal working hours in connection with the enforcement or supervision of
provisions of the subdivision regulations and grading regulations shall be paid
to the Department of Public Works in accordance with the fee schedule adopted
by Council resolution.
(§ 3, Ord. 350-NS, eff. March 8, 1973, as amended by § IV, Ord. 778-NS, eff.
June 11, 1981)
Sec. 7-7.02. Overtime construction inspections: Applications.
   An application to perform an overtime construction inspection shall be filed
with the City Engineer twenty-four (24) hours in advance of commencing the
work. The application shall set forth the days and hours of overtime requested
and the fees provided for in Section 7-7.01 of this chapter.
(§ 3, Ord. 350-NS, eff. March 8, 1973)
CHAPTER 8. STORMWATER DISCHARGES AND STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT
Article 1. General Provisions
Sec. 7-8.101. Purpose and intent.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish local regulations, as mandated
by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (referred to as the Clean Water
Act), 33 U.S.C. Sections 1251 et seq. (as amended) and the California Water
Code, to prohibit certain acts and nonstormwater discharges into the storm
drain system and watercourses, and to require certain conduct and the
implementation of best management practices, by property owners or those in
possession of any land within the City, in order to reduce the discharge of
pollutants in stormwater to the maximum extent practicable.
(§ 1, Ord. 1343-NS, eff. October 14, 1999)
Sec. 7-8.102. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section. Words and phrases
not ascribed a meaning by this section shall have the meanings as defined in
the NPDES permit, if defined therein, and if not, the meanings ascribed by the
regulations complementing the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System,
Clean Water Act Section 402, and Division 7 of the California Water Code, as
amended from time to time.
   “Best management practices (BMPs)” means the collection of written
activities, practices, policies and procedures prepared and proposed by a
responsible party, and then approved by the Director, to prevent or reduce, to
the maximum extent that is technologically and economically feasible, the
discharge of pollutants to the storm drain system which might be generated from
any site in the City on land under the possession or control of that
responsible party, or those written standardized activities, practices,
policies and procedures for the same purpose, as prepared and approved by the
Director but without regard to any specific site and kept on file by the Public
Works Department for guidance, reference or incorporation by any person not
required to prepare an individualized Best Management Practices Manual. In
addition to other matters, a Best Management Practices Manual may be required
to include a description of: educational efforts, planning of development
projects, treatment facilities to capture and remove pollutants from
stormwater; operation, monitoring, cleanup and maintenance procedures;
discharge notification steps; the schedule for construction of needed
preventative or protective devices, and the prohibition of specific activities,
practices, and procedures which could cause a discharge.
   “City” means the City of Thousand Oaks.
   “Development” means any grading, digging, construction, rehabilitation,
redevelopment, addition to, or reconstruction of any private structure, or
connected with any residential (whether single-family, multi-unit or planned
unit development), industrial, commercial, or retail project; or mass grading
for any future construction or project, for which either a City land use
approval or any type of City permit is required.
   “Director” means the Public Works Director of the City and any person(s)
designated by the Director to fulfill any of the duties or powers of the
Director as set forth in this chapter.
   “Discharge” when used without qualification, means the discharge of a
pollutant.
   “Discharge of a pollutant” means any addition of any pollutant to waters of
the United States or the storm drain system.
   “Discharge permit” means an authorization, license or equivalent control
document issued by the U.S. EPA, the State Water Resources Control Board or the
Regional Board, and includes NPDES general permits and the NPDES permit.
   “Discharger” means any person causing, or failing to take reasonable steps
to stop, a discharge.
   “EPA” means the Environmental Protection Agency of the United States of
America.
   “Illicit connection” means any man-made conveyance or drainage system
pipeline, graded channel, conduit, inlet or outlet, or condition of property
whether on the surface or subsurface through which the discharge of any
pollutant to the storm drain system occurs or may occur. The term “illicit
connection” shall not include a connection to the storm drain system that is
approved and authorized by the City.
   “Illicit discharge” means any discharge to the storm drain system or an
upstream flow, which is tributary to the storm drain system that is not
composed entirely of stormwater except discharges pursuant to a discharge
permit and discharges that are exempt in accordance with any applicable order
of the Regional Board. The term “illicit discharge” shall not include the
following types of non-stormwater discharges, unless the Regional Board
determines that these discharges cause specific receiving water limitation
violations:
   (1)   Water line flushing;
   (2)   Landscape irrigation;
   (3)   Diverted stream flows;
   (4)   Rising ground waters;
   (5)   Uncontaminated ground water infiltration (as defined at 40 CFR 35.2005
(20)) to separate storm sewers;
   (6)   Uncontaminated pumped ground water;
   (7)   Discharges from potable water sources;
   (8)   Foundation drains;
   (9)   Air conditioning condensation;
   (10)    Irrigation water;
   (11)    Natural springs;
   (12)    Water from crawl space pumps;
   (13)    Footing drains;
   (14)    Lawn watering;
   (15)    Individual residential car washing;
   (16)    Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
   (17)    Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges;
   (18)    Discharges or flows from emergency fire fighting activities;
   (19)    Other types of discharges as approved by the Executive Officer of
the Regional Water Quality Control Board.
   With written concurrence of the Regional Board, the City may issue an
exemption in writing of non-stormwater discharges in addition to (1) through
(19) above, which discharge is found not to be a source of pollutants to the
storm drain system or watercourses.
   “Invoice for costs” means the actual costs and expenses of the City,
including, but not limited to administrative overhead, salaries, attorney fees,
expert fees, testing and monitoring expenses, and other expenses recoverable
under state law, incurred during any inspection or investigation conducted
pursuant to this chapter, where a notice of violation, administrative
compliance order or other enforcement option was utilized to obtain compliance
with this chapter.
   “National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit” means the
municipal discharge permit(s) issued by the Regional Board and entitled Waste
Discharge Requirements for Stormwater Management / Urban Runoff Discharges for
VCFCD, County of Ventura, and the cities of Ventura County (including the City
of Thousand Oaks), Order No. 94-082, NPDES Permit No. CAS 063339, as may be
amended from time to time.
   “Person” means any individual, firm, association, corporation, partnership,
or subdivision, trust, estate, cooperative association, joint venture, business
entity, or other similar entity, or the agent, employee or representative of
any of the above.
   “Pollutant” means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar
dirt, and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water.
“Pollutant” shall not mean uncontaminated stormwater, potable water or
reclaimed water generated by a lawfully permitted water treatment facility, or
any substance, the discharge of which into the City’s storm drain system,
through best management practices, has been reduced to the maximum extent
practicable, and shall not include those non-stormwater discharges set forth in
the definition of “illicit discharge,” unless the Regional Water Control Board
determines that these discharges cause specific receiving water limit
violations.
   “Regional Board” means the California Regional Water Quality Control Board,
Los Angeles Region.
   “Responsible party” means the person(s) identified in and responsible for
compliance with the provisions of a storm water pollution prevention plan,
stormwater pollution control plan, or stormwater quality master plan.
   “State general permit” means a permit issued by the State of California or
the Regional Board to regulate a category of point sources. The term “state
general permit” includes, but is not limited to, the general permit for
stormwater discharges associated with construction activity and the general
industrial activities stormwater permit and the terms and requirements of both.
In the event the EPA revokes the in-lieu permitting authority of the State
Water Resources Control Board, then the term state general permit shall also
refer to any EPA administered stormwater control program for industrial and
construction activities.
   “Stormwater” means any surface flow, runoff, and/or drainage associated with
rain storm events and/or snow melt.
   “Storm drain system” means a conveyance or system of conveyances including
streets, gutters, channels, artificial drains, lined diversion structures, wash
areas, inlets, outlets or any other flood control or drainage facility, which
is owned, operated, maintained or controlled by the city, the Ventura County
Flood Control District or other public entity and used for the purpose of
collecting, storing, conveying, or disposing of stormwater to waters of the
United States, and also shall mean any natural channel, arroyo, or creek which
is a tributary to or located in the watercourse.
   “Stormwater pollution control plan” means a plan prepared by a responsible
party identifying potential pollutant sources from a development construction
site and describing proposed design, placement and implementation of that
responsible party’s best management practices to effectively prohibit non-
stormwater discharges and reduce pollutants in stormwater discharges to the
storm drain system coming from that site or development to the maximum extent
practicable during all construction activities.
   “Storm water pollution prevention plan” means the plan prepared by a
responsible party as required by the state general permit identifying potential
pollutant sources and describing the design, placement and implementation of
that responsible party's best management practices to effectively prohibit non-
stormwater discharges and reduce pollutants in stormwater discharges during
activities covered by the general permit.
   “Stormwater quality master plan” shall mean a plan prepared by a responsible
party as required by the director for larger projects in order to define the
strategy and describe the design, placement and implementation of best
management practices to effectively prevent non-stormwater discharges and
reduce pollutants in stormwater discharges to the maximum extent practicable,
for post-construction discharges to the storm drain.
   “Stormwater quality management plan” means the Ventura Countywide Stormwater
quality management plan, which includes descriptions of programs, collectively
developed by the co-permittees (being the City and other governmental
agencies), in accordance with provision of the NPDES permit, to comply with
applicable federal and state law, as the same is amended from time to time.
   “Watercourse” means any natural or artificial channel for passage of water
within the City, including the Ventura County Flood Control District (“VCFCD”)
jurisdictional channels, or “red line channels” (as described in the “list of
channels” within the comprehensive plan of the VCFCD, October 4, 1994, and its
amendments).
(§ 1, Ord. 1343-NS, eff. October 14, 1999)
Article 2. Prohibition of Illicit Connections and Illicit Discharges: Reduction
of Pollutants
Sec. 7-8.201. Prohibition of illicit connections, improper property
maintenance, and illicit discharges, and other prohibited acts.
   (a)   The unauthorized discharge of a pollutant into the storm drain system
is unlawful and prohibited. All discharges of material other than stormwater
must be in compliance with NPDES Permit No. CAS063339 or any other NPDES permit
issued by the State of California.
   (b)   Unless in full compliance with a discharge permit, it is unlawful to
and no person shall:
   (1)   Construct, use, maintain, operate and/or continue to utilize an
illicit connection. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation,
illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
   (2)   Cause, allow or facilitate the continuing existence of an illicit
discharge.
   (3)   Act, cause, or permit any agent, employee, or contractor to construct,
maintain, operate or utilize an illicit connection, or cause, allow or
facilitate an illicit discharge.
   (4)   Use the City’s storm drain system for the discharge or disposal of
wastes (including, but not limited to yard trimmings, cut grass or paint clean-
up).
   (5)   Block or modify the natural flow of water in the City’s storm drain
system or alter, enlarge, change or remove any part of the City’s storm drain
system.
   (6)   Place any loose or unconsolidated material along the side of or within
the storm drain system, or placed so close to the side of a storm drain system
channel or facility as to cause a diversion of flow, or to create a reasonable
probability such material will be removed by or transported by stormwaters
passing through the storm drain system.
   (7)   Throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown,
deposited, kept, or maintained, in or upon any public or private driveway,
parking area, street, alley, sidewalk, or component of the storm drain system,
any refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects,
articles and accumulations, so that the same may cause or contribute to a
pollutant entering the storm drain system or watercourse.
   Any owner, occupant, or person in charge of day-to-day operations of any
private property who fails to remove pollutants within a reasonable time, as
determined by the director, may be charged with a violation of this section.
   (c)    It is unlawful to, and no person shall, fail to take every reasonable
step, consistent with or as set forth in an approved individualized best
management practices manual, or if none, the written standardized City best
management practices manual on file by the Public Works Department, to reduce
to the maximum extent practicable the discharge of stormwater containing any
pollutant.
   (d)    It is unlawful to, and no person shall, engage in any activity which
will, or may, result in a pollutant or pollutants entering the storm drain
system or watercourses, unless, after notice from the City, all practicable
measures to reduce such pollutants have been undertaken.
   (e)   It is unlawful for an owner of real property subject to, and their
successors or assigns, or a named responsible party in, a City approved
stormwater quality master plan or a stormwater pollution control plan to fail
to implement and adhere to the terms, conditions and requirements of such a
plan.
(§ 1, Ord. 1343-NS, eff. October 14, 1999)
Article 3. Control of Urban Runoff
Sec. 7-8.301. Development, stormwater quality master and stormwater pollution
control plans.
   (a)   On and after September 1, 1999, all development activity within the
City shall be undertaken in accordance with all of the following:
   (1)   The conditions and requirements established by the NPDES permit or
other permit which are reasonably related to the reduction or elimination of
pollutants in stormwater from the project site.
   (2)   A stormwater pollution prevention plan, which shall be prepared in
accordance with state general permit requirements.
   (3)   A stormwater pollution control plan (if applicable), which shall be
prepared in accordance with City requirements.
   (4)   Any condition and requirement of a stormwater quality master plan
covering the development site. A stormwater quality master plan shall be
required to be submitted by the property owner in accordance with the City’s
requirements when the director determines that the development may result in
the discharge of significant levels of any pollutant to the storm drain system,
such as, but not limited to, the cases of specific plans, multi-phased
subdivisions, redevelopment plans and larger planned developments.
   (5)   The conditions and/or requirements established by the City to protect
specific watersheds or drainage basins.
   (b)   Prior to issuance by the City of any permit authorizing grading or
construction for a development, the property owner of the site for such
contemplated activity shall submit to and obtain the approval of the Director
for a stormwater pollution control plan.
   (c)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, a stormwater pollution control plan
shall not be required for construction by a property owner of only one single
family detached residential unit, for a room addition to any existing
residential unit, or for projects that require a grading permit and result in
soil disturbance of less than one acre of surface area and which is not part of
a larger common plan of development, unless the Director determines that the
grading may result in the discharge of significant levels of a pollutant into
the storm drain system. This exemption shall not apply to a phased project with
construction of one home at a time but more than one dwelling unit is to be
constructed over the full course of that residential project by any person.
   (d)   Each stormwater pollution control plan or stormwater quality master
plan shall name a responsible party for the project and compliance with the
plan.
   (e)   A City processing fee, in an amount determined by a City Council
resolution, for its costs and expenses incurred in the review, approval, or
revision of any stormwater pollution control plan and/or stormwater quality
master plan shall be charged to the property owner or responsible party and
shall be due and payable to the City at the time the plan is submitted to the
City for review.
   (f)   Compliance with the conditions and requirements of a stormwater
pollution control plan and/or stormwater quality master plan shall not exempt
any person from the requirement to comply independently with each provision of
this chapter.
   (g)   Proof of compliance with the state general permit for stormwater
discharges associated with construction activity (NPDES Permit No. CAS000002)
may be required in a form acceptable to the City prior to issuance by the City
of any permit authorizing grading or construction; upon inspection of the
construction site; during any enforcement proceeding or action; or for any
other reasonable cause.
(§ 1, Ord. 1343-NS, eff. October 14, 1999)
Sec. 7-8.302. Best management practices and requirements.
   (a)   Any person engaged in any land use, activities or operations, or
owning facilities or property, which may result in pollutants entering the
storm drain system, as determined by the director, shall prepare, be subject to
or obtain a best management practices manual and then implement those best
management practices to the maximum extent practicable to prevent or reduce
such discharge of pollutants to the City’s storm drain system or watercourses.
   (b)    The Director may adopt requirements identifying appropriate terms,
obligations and minimum content of a best management practices manual (“BMPs”)
for any land use, activity, business, operation, or facility which may cause or
contribute the discharge of a pollutant to, or contamination of, the storm
drain system. If relevant, certain BMPs have been prepared and promulgated by
the City or any Federal, State, and/or regional agency for certain activities,
operations, or facilities, which could cause the discharge of pollutants to the
City’s storm drain system or watercourses, and every person undertaking such a
designated activity or operation, or owning or operating such facility shall
comply with such BMPs.
(§ 1, Ord. 1343-NS, eff. October 14, 1999)
Sec. 7-8.303. Notification of intent and compliance with general permits.
   Each responsible party, owner or discharger associated with any development
or nonexempt construction activity, or any other discharger described in any
NPDES or NPDES general permit as may be adopted by the EPA, the State Water
Resources Control Board, or the Regional Water Quality Control Board, shall
provide notice of intent, comply with, and undertake all other activities
required by such permit applicable to such discharges.
(§ 1, Ord. 1343-NS, eff. October 14, 1999)
Sec. 7-8.304. Elimination of illicit discharge and illicit connections.
   (a)   After written notification is mailed, personally delivered or posted,
the Director may require any person responsible for an illicit discharge to
immediately, or by a specified date, eliminate or discontinue the illicit
discharge, and the Director, if necessary as the result of an imminent or
pending storm event, may take immediate measures to eliminate the source of the
illicit discharge. If the discharge is not discontinued in the time specified,
the Director may take any enforcement measure described in this chapter and
steps reasonably necessary to eliminate the source of the illicit discharge or
to prevent the reoccurrence of future illicit discharges.
   (b)   After written notification is mailed, personally delivered or posted,
the Director may require a person in control of or responsible for an illicit
connection to the storm drain system to secure approval for the connection by a
specified date, regardless of whether or not the connection or discharges to it
had been established or approved prior to the effective date of this chapter.
If, subsequent to eliminating a connection found to be in violation of this
chapter, the person can demonstrate that an illicit discharge will no longer
occur, said person may request approval to reconnect. The reconnection or
reinstallation of the connection shall be at the director's discretion and
shall be subject to such conditions as the Director may determine; such
reconnection or reinstallation shall be at the requesting person’s sole
expense.
(§ 1, Ord. 1343-NS, eff. October 14, 1999)
Article 4. Inspections
Sec. 7-8.401. Scope of inspections.
   (a)   Right to enter to inspect. Upon presenting identification and an oral
request to enter made to any person who appears to be in possession or control
of any operation, business or real property, or where no such person is
present, after a written request to enter is mailed, personally delivered, or
faxed to the person in possession or control of any operation, business or real
property, the Director has the right to, and is hereby granted the power and
right to, enter onto the exterior/out-of-doors (or areas not being within a
fully enclosed structure) of private property within the City solely for the
purpose to inspect, monitor or investigate as to the possible source or
potential source of a discharge to the storm drain system or watercourses.
Except for occupied residential property, such right to enter shall be
exercisable at any time. For an occupied residential property, such entry shall
be made only during daylight hours.
   (b)   Compliance assessments. The Director may inspect property for the
purpose of verifying compliance with this chapter, including but not limited
to:
   (1)   Identifying products produced, processes conducted, chemicals used and
materials stored on or contained within the property;
   (2)   Identifying point(s) of discharge of all wastewater, process water
systems and pollutants;
   (3)   Investigating the natural slope at the location, including drainage
patterns and man-made conveyance systems (including roads with drainage
systems, catch basins, curbs, gutters, channels and storm drains);
   (4)   Establishing the location of all points of discharge from the
property, whether by surface runoff or through a storm drain system;
   (5)   Locating any illicit connection or the source of any illicit
discharge;
   (6)   Evaluating compliance with any stormwater pollution control plan; and
   (7)   Evaluating compliance with any permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
   (c)   Records review. The director may demand the production of such records
as is necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter and
for the purpose of examination and copying.
   (d)   Sample and test. The Director may inspect, sample and test any area
runoff, soils within the source property, liquids, discharge, or materials
within any storage area (including any container contents), and/or treatment
system discharge for the purpose of determining the potential for contribution
of pollutants to the storm drain system. The Director may investigate the
structural integrity and condition of all storm drains, sanitary sewer
facilities/systems or other tanks, reservoirs or pipelines on the property
using appropriate tests, including but not limited to smoke and dye tests or
video surveys. The Director may take photographs or videotape, make
measurements or drawings, and create any other record reasonably necessary to
document conditions on the property.
   (e)   Monitoring. For the purpose of measuring any discharge or potential
source of discharge to the storm drain system, the Director may undertake a
monitoring program and other analysis, which may include both the installation
and maintenance of monitoring devices, or require the owner or person in charge
of day-to-day operations of the property to undertake the installation, record
keeping and maintenance of such monitoring devices, at the owner’s/operator’s
expense.
   (f)   Test results. The owner or person in charge of day-to-day operations
of the property subject to inspection shall provide copies of test results to
the City and, on submission of a written request to the Director, be entitled
to a copy of the test results conducted by the Director.
   (g)   Unreasonable delays. Unreasonable delays by the owner, occupant or
person in charge of day to day operations of private property in allowing the
Director access to the premises, or in the production of any demanded records,
beyond the date set forth in a written request shall be a violation of this
chapter.
   (h)   Inspection/search warrants. If the Director has been refused access to
a building, structure, property or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or
that there is a need to inspect, monitor and/or sample as part of a routine
inspection and sampling program of the City designed to verify compliance with
this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall
public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the Director may seek
issuance of an administrative inspection or criminal search warrant from any
court of competent jurisdiction.
(§ 1, Ord. 1343-NS, eff. October 14, 1999)
Article 5. Enforcement and Penalties
Sec. 7-8.501. Administrative remedies.
   (a)   Notice of violation. When the director has probable cause to believe
that there may be a violation of this chapter, the Director may issue and
deliver to the owner, occupant or person in charge of day-to-day operations of
any public or private property, or to any person responsible for an illicit
connection or illicit discharge a notice of violation. The notice of violation
shall:
   (1)   Identify the provision(s) of this chapter, the best management
practices, the applicable storm water pollution prevention plan, stormwater
pollution control plan, stormwater quality management plan or permit alleged to
have been, or are then being, violated and describe the manner of compliance or
abatement required;
   (2)   State that continued noncompliance may result in additional penalties
and enforcement actions against the owner, person in charge, and/or occupant;
and
   (3)    State a compliance date that must be met by the owner, person in
charge and/or occupant;
   (b)   Administrative compliance orders. When the Director has probable cause
to believe that there may be a continuing or repeated violation of this
chapter, the Director may issue and deliver to the owner, occupant or person in
charge of day to day operations of any property, or to any person responsible
for an illicit connection or illicit discharge, an administrative compliance
order. The administrative compliance order may include the following terms and
requirements:
   (1)   Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as reasonably
necessary to prevent continued or threatened illicit discharges;
   (2)   Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as reasonably
necessary to discontinue any illicit connection;
   (3)   Specific requirements for containment, remediation, cleanup, removal,
storage, installation of overhead covering, or proper disposal of any pollutant
having the potential to contact stormwater runoff;
   (4)   Any other terms or requirements reasonably calculated to prevent
continued or threatened violations of this chapter, including, but not limited
to requirements for compliance with best management practice guidance documents
promulgated by any federal agency, the State of California or the City; and
   (5)   Any other terms or requirements reasonably calculated to achieve full
compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements of the stormwater
quality management plan, stormwater pollution prevention plan, stormwater
pollution control plan, stormwater quality master plan or permit issued
pursuant to this chapter.
   (c)   Cease and desist orders. If the Director determines that the public
health and safety requires the same, may issue a cease and desist order
directing the owner and/or person in charge of day-to-day operations of the
private property and/or any other person responsible for a violation of the
chapter to:
   (1)   Immediately discontinue any illicit connection or illicit discharge to
the storm drain system;
   (2)   Immediately contain or divert any flow of non-stormwater off the
property, where the flow is occurring in violation of any provision of this
chapter;
   (3)   Immediately discontinue any other violation of this chapter;
   (4)   Clean up the area affected by the violation as a condition of removal
of the order.
   (d)   Recovery of city’s costs; invoice of costs. When a notice of
violation, administrative compliance order, cease and desist order or any other
enforcement option is utilized to obtain compliance with this chapter, all
actual costs and expenses incurred by or of the City for City administrative
overhead, City salaries, attorney fees, expert fees, testing and monitoring
expenses, and other expenses incurred as a result of or during any inspection,
investigation, monitoring or administrative enforcement action conducted
pursuant to this chapter shall be a debt of, charged to and paid by the person
found to be violating this chapter. The Director may deliver an invoice for
costs to the owner, occupant or person in charge of day-to-day operations of
private property, any permittee or any responsible party, or any other person
who becomes subject to a notice of violation, administrative compliance order,
or cease and desist order. An invoice for costs shall be immediately due and
payable to the City and if not paid within thirty (30) days shall earn interest
at the rate of 1.5 percent per month until fully paid. If any owner, occupant,
person in charge of day-to-day operations, permittee or responsible party, or
any other person fails to either pay the invoice for costs or have the amount
of the invoice for costs reduced on appeal to the City Council in accordance
with this chapter, then the City may institute collection proceedings.
   (e)   Delivery of notice. Any notice of violation, administrative compliance
order, cease and desist order or invoice of costs to be “delivered” pursuant to
the requirements of this chapter shall:
   (1)   Include the address of the affected property and be mailed to the
address of the owner, as that address is shown on the most recently issued
equalized assessment roll released to the City for the affected property and
mailed or faxed to the occupant, if any, at the address of the affected
property; or
   (2)   If the address for the owner, occupant or person in charge of day-to-
day operations of any private property cannot be located after the reasonable
efforts of the Director, a notice of violation, administrative compliance
order, or cease and desist order shall be deemed delivered after posting on the
property at least ten (10) days prior to the date any order is to be complied
with.
   (f)   Judicial abatement. In the event the owner of the property, the
operator of a facility, a permittee, a responsible party or any other person in
possession or with authority to act fails to comply with any provision of a
compliance schedule of any notice of violation, administrative compliance
order, or cease and desist order issued pursuant to this chapter, the Director
may request the City to obtain appropriate judicial authorization to enter the
property, abate the condition and restore the area to its pre-violation
condition. Any costs incurred by the City in obtaining and carrying out the
judicial authorization may be recorded as lien against the affected property
and recovered by the City in a foreclosure action on that lien and/or in any
collection procedure authorized by law.
(§ 1, Ord. 1343-NS, eff. October 14, 1999)
Sec. 7-8.502. Appeals of administrative remedies.
   Any property owner subject to, or any person aggrieved by the issuance of a
notice of violation, administrative compliance order, or cease and desist order
issued pursuant to this chapter, may appeal to the City Council that
administrative action and issuance by the Director, provided the appeal is
filed on the City’s form with the City Clerk, and a copy provided to the
director, within fourteen (14) days of the issuance of such notice or order.
The appropriate appeal fee shall be paid at that time and the appeal processed
and heard in accordance with the provisions of Title 1, Chapter 4 of this Code.
During the City Council’s consideration of such an appeal, any requested
abatement actions shall be complied with, and the order is not stayed by reason
of such an appeal.
(§ 1, Ord. 1343-NS, eff. October 14, 1999)
Sec. 7-8.503. Public nuisance.
   Any condition in violation of the prohibitions of this chapter shall
constitute a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a public nuisance pursuant per se.
(§ 1, Ord. 1343-NS, eff. October 14, 1999)
Sec. 7-8.504. Infraction or misdemeanor: Separate offenses.
   (a)   Infractions. Any person believed to be in violation of any provision
of this chapter may be charged or cited with an infraction.
   (b)   Misdemeanor. Any person who negligently or knowingly violates any
provision of this chapter, undertakes to conceal any violation of this chapter,
continues any violation of this chapter beyond the date set for compliance
after delivery of notice thereof; or has previously violated the same provision
of this chapter, or repeatedly violated the terms, conditions and requirements
of any approved best management practices manual, storm water pollution
prevention plan, stormwater pollution control plan, stormwater quality master
plan or discharge permit, may be charged with criminal misdemeanor for such
violation.
   (c)   Separate offenses. Each pollution source found to be in violation of
this chapter is a separate offense and separate violation. Each day a violation
continues unabated as ordered by the director is a separate offense and
separate violation.
(§ 1, Ord. 1343-NS, eff. October 14, 1999)
Sec. 7-8.506. Violations of other laws.
   Any Person acting in violation of this chapter also may be acting in
violation of the Federal Clean Water Act or the State Porter-Cologne Act and
other laws and also may be subject to sanctions including civil liability.
Accordingly, the city is authorized to file a citizen suit pursuant to Federal
Clean Water Act Section 505(a), seeking penalties, damages, and orders
compelling compliance, and other appropriate relief. The City may notify EPA
Region IX, the Regional Board, or any other appropriate state or local agency,
of any alleged violation of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1343-NS, eff. October 14, 1999)
Sec. 7-8.507. Civil remedies: Injunctions.
   (a)   The Director may request that the City file a civil action seeking an
injunction against any threatened or continuing noncompliance with the
provisions of this chapter. Any temporary, preliminary or permanent injunction
issued pursuant hereto may include an order for reimbursement to the City of
all costs incurred in enforcing this chapter, including costs of inspection,
investigation and monitoring, the costs of abatement undertaken at the expense
of the City, costs relating to restoration of the environment, attorney fees,
court costs, and all other expenses as authorized by law.
   (b)   The Director may request the City to file an action for civil damages
in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking recovery of:
   (1)   All costs incurred in enforcement of this chapter, including but not
limited to costs relating to investigation, sampling, monitoring, inspection,
administrative expenses, attorney fees and court costs, and all other expenses
as authorized by law, and consequential damages;
   (2)   All costs incurred in mitigating harm to the environment or reducing
the threat to human health;
   (3)   Damages for irreparable harm to the environment;
   (4)   Damages resulting from any trespass or nuisance occurring on public
land or to the storm drain system from any violation of this chapter.
   (c)   The remedies available to the City pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall not limit the right of the City to seek any other remedy that may
be available by law.
(§ 1, Ord. 1343-NS, eff. October 14, 1999)
TITLE 8. BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1. BUILDING CODE
      
8-1.01–Amendments: California Building Code
      
8-1.02–Adoption of California Building Code
      
8-1.03–Purpose
      
8-1.04–City
      
8-1.05–Amendments: Volume 1, Chapter 1, Division II
      
8-1.06–Reserved
      
8-1.07–Reserved
      
8-1.08–Reserved
      
8-1.09–Amendments: Chapter 1, Division II, Section 110: Inspections
      
8-1.10–Reserved
      
8-1.11–Reserved
      
8-1.12–Reserved
      
8-1.13–Reserved
      
8-1.14–Amendments: Chapter 15, Section 1505 Fire Classification
      
8-1.15–Reserved
      
8-1.16–Reserved
      
8-1.17–Amendments: Chapter 18: Soils and Foundations
      
8-1.18–Amendments: Chapter 23: Wood
      
8-1.19–Reserved
      
8-1.20–Reserved
      
8-1.21–Reserved
      
8-1.22–Reserved
      
8-1.23–Violations
      
8-1.24–Amendments: Appendix J - Grading
      
8-1.25–Small Residential Rooftop Solar Energy System Review Process
      
8-1.26–Electrical Vehicle Charging Stations
      
8-1.27–Amendments: Appendix P - Emergency Housing
CHAPTER 2. CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FEES
      
8-2.01–Purpose
      
8-2.02–Definitions
      
8-2.03–Collection of fees
      
8-2.04–Use of Police Facilities Development Fee
      
8-2.05–Refund of fee
CHAPTER 3. BUILDING NUMBERING
      
8-3.01–Scope
      
8-3.02–System established
      
8-3.03–Maps
      
8-3.04–Administration
      
8-3.05–Notices to place numbers
      
8-3.06–Placement of numbers
      
8-3.07–Multiple entrances
      
8-3.08–Violations
      
8-3.09–Numbering buildings for others: Permits required
CHAPTER 4. CODE ADMINISTRATION
      
8-4.01–Code Administration for Building Standards
      
8-4.02–Scope and Intent
      
8-4.03–Applicability
      
8-4.04–Purpose
      
8-4.05–City
      
8-4.06–Notice of Noncompliance
      
8-4.07–Power of Citation
      
8-4.08–Delegates
      
8-4.09–Permits
      
8-4.10–Application for Permit
      
8-4.11–Time Limitation of Application
      
8-4.12–Time Limitation of Permit
      
8-4.13–Demolition Permits
      
8-4.14–Noticed Code Violations
      
8-4.15–Fees
      
8-4.16–Reinspection
      
8-4.17–Certificate of Occupancy
      
8-4.18–Unsafe Conditions
CHAPTER 5. INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
      
8-5.01–Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code
      
8-5.02–Deletions
      
8-5.03–Applicability of Other Codes
      
8-5.04–Amendments
      
8-5.05–Amendments: Heating Facilities
CHAPTER 6. MECHANICAL CODE
      
8-6.01–Adoption of the California Mechanical Code
      
8-6.02–Amendments: California Mechanical Code
      
8-6.03–Jurisdiction
      
8-6.04–Amendments: Chapter 1, Division II, Administration
CHAPTER 7. CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE
      
8-7.01–Adoption of the California Residential Code
      
8-7.02–Amendments: California Residential Code
      
8-7.03–Reserved
      
8-7.04–Amendments: Foundations
      
8-7.05–Amendments: Concrete floors (on ground)
      
8-7.06–Amendments: Roof assemblies
      
8-7.07–Amendments: Masonry fireplaces
      
8-7.08–Amendments: Patio Covers
      
8-7.09–Amendments: Appendix AZ - Emergency Housing
CHAPTER 8. PLUMBING CODE
      
8-8.01–Adoption of the California Plumbing Code
      
8-8.02–Amendments: California Plumbing Code
      
8-8.03–Amendments: Fees
      
8-8.04–Amendments: Appendix Chapter D, Table D101.1: Maximum Rates of Rainfall
CHAPTER 9. SIGNS
Article 1. Freeway Signs
      
8-9.101–Definitions
      
8-9.102–Advertising displays adjacent to freeways
      
8-9.103–Advertising displays adjacent to freeways: Exceptions
      
8-9.104–Removal of prohibited displays
Article 2. Sign Code
      
8-9.201–Adoption of Uniform Sign Code
      
8-9.202–Purpose
      
8-9.203–Amendments: Section 301: Permits
      
8-9.204–Amendments: Section 304: Fees
      
8-9.205–Amendments: Section 401: Design
      
8-9.206–Violations
CHAPTER 10. ELECTRICAL CODE
      
8-10.01–Adoption of the California Electrical Code
      
8-10.02–Amendments: California Electrical Code
      
8-10.03–Amendments: Administration
      
8-10.04–Amendments: Article 90.4: Enforcement
      
8-10.05–Amendments: Article 110.8: Wiring Methods
      
8-10.06–Amendments: Article 240.24(E): Location in or on premises
      
8-10.07–Reserved
      
8-10.08–Amendments: Table 310.106(A) Minimum Size of Conductors
      
8-10.09–Reserved
      
8-10.10–Reserved
CHAPTER 11. HOURS FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES
      
8-11.01–Construction activities restricted to certain hours
      
8-11.02–Exceptions
CHAPTER 12. (Repealed)
CHAPTER 13. CONSUMER INFORMATION: NEW RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION SALES
      
8-13.01–Purpose and intent
      
8-13.02–Model homes
      
8-13.03–Furnishing of planning and zoning information, and received notices of
hearing
      
8-13.04–Furnishing of information relative to schools, parks, common areas, and
street improvements
      
8-13.05–Administration of provisions
      
8-13.06–No liability of public entitles in furnishing information
      
8-13.07–No conflict with State laws intended: Severability
      
8-13.08–Violation: Penalties
CHAPTER 14. ENERGY CODE
      
8-14.01–Adoption of California Energy Code
      
8-14.02–Amendments
CHAPTER 15. DISABLED ACCESS APPEALS AND ADVISORY BOARD
      
8-15.01–Purpose
      
8-15.02–Disabled Access Appeals and Advisory Board
      
8-15.03–Appointment, terms and vacancies
      
8-15.04–Powers
      
8-15.05–Appeal process
      
8-15.06–Establishment of Board rules and procedures
      
8-15.07–Compensation of Appeals and Advisory Board
CHAPTER 16. GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS
      
8-16.01–Adoption of California Green Building Standards Code
      
8-16.02–Amendments: California Green Building Standards Code
CHAPTER 17. EXISTING BUILDING CODE
      
8-17.01–Adoption of California Existing Building Code
      
8-17.02–Amendments: California Existing Building Code
      
8-17.03–Safety Assessment Placards
CHAPTER 1. BUILDING CODE*
*   Sections 8-1.01 through 8-1.25, codified by § 2 Ordinance No. 1494-NS,
effective December 27, 2007 were repealed by Ordinance No. 1546-NS, effective
January 1, 2011. Sections 8-1.01 through 8-1.23, codified by § 2 Ordinance No.
1546-NS, effective January 1, 2011 were repealed by Ordinance No. 1591-NS,
effective January 1, 2014. Sections 8-1.01 through 8-1.26, codified by § 2
Ordinance No. 1591-NS, effective January 1, 2014 were repealed by Ordinance No.
1624-NS, effective January 1, 2017. Sections 8-1.01 through 8-1.25, codified by
§ 2 Ordinance No. 1624-NS, effective January 1, 2017 were repealed by Ordinance
No. 1669-NS, effective January 10, 2019. Section 8-1.26, codified by § 3
Ordinance No. 1632-NS, effective October 27, 2017 was repealed by Ordinance No.
1669-NS, effective January 10, 2019. Sections 8-1.01 through 8-1.24, codified
by § 2, Ord. 1669-NS, effective January 10, 2020, were repealed by Ordinance
No. 1707-NS, effective January 1, 2023.
Sec. 8-1.01. Amendments: California Building Code.
   The City Council, after due consideration, finds and determines that due to
the geographical location of the City and the unusual climatic, geological, and
topographical conditions prevailing within the City, the public health, safety,
and welfare would best be served by adopting and amending the 2022 California
Building Codes.
(§ 2, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-1.02. Adoption of California Building Code.
   Those certain Codes designated as the 2022 Edition of the California
Building Codes, based upon the 2021 Edition of the International Building
Codes, published by the International Code Council, as amended herein are
adopted and incorporated by reference, including Appendices I, J, and P, except
as herein amended. Said California Building Codes are hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this chapter as though set forth in this chapter
in full, subject, however, to the amendments, additions, and deletions set
forth in this chapter, and said California Building Codes, including Chapter 1,
Division II, Scope and Administration as amended herein, shall be known as the
Building Code of the City.
   At least one (1) copy of the 2022 Edition of the California Building Codes
is on file in the office of the Building Official for public record and
inspection.
(§ 2, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-1.03. Purpose.
   The purpose of said California Building Codes is to provide minimum
standards to safeguard life or limb, property, and public health, safety, and
welfare, by regulation and control of the design, construction, addition,
alteration, conversion, erection, installation, location, relocation,
demolition, repair, maintenance, occupancy, and use of all structures and
buildings located within the City and equipment regulated therein.
(§ 2, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-1.04. City.
   The name "City of Thousand Oaks" is hereby inserted in any and all blank
spaces provided in said California Building Standards Codes for the name of the
jurisdiction adopting said Codes, and wherever the word "city" or
"jurisdiction" appears in said Codes or is otherwise used, it shall mean and
refer to the City of Thousand Oaks.
(§ 2, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-1.05. Amendments: Volume 1, Chapter 1, Division II.
   Chapter 1, Division II of said California Building Code is hereby amended by
amending Section 101.2 Scope., to read as follows:
   101.2 Scope.
   The provisions of this code and Title 8, Chapter 4, the City of Thousand
Oaks Code Administration shall apply to the construction, alteration,
relocation, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy,
location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or
any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures.
   Exception: Detached one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses not more
than three stories above grade plane in height with a separate means of egress,
and their accessory structures not more than three stories above grade plane in
height, shall comply with this code or the California Residential Code.
   101.2.1   Appendices.
   Provisions in the appendices shall not apply unless specifically adopted.
(§ 2, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-1.06. Reserved.
Sec. 8-1.07. Reserved.
Sec. 8-1.08. Reserved.
Sec. 8-1.09. Amendments: Chapter 1, Division II, Section 110 Inspections.
   Section 110.3.6 “Lath and gypsum board inspection” is hereby amended by
removing the Exception and is to read as follows:
   110.3.6 Lath, Gypsum Board and Gypsum Panel Product Inspection.
   Lath, gypsum board and gypsum panel product inspections shall be made after
lathing, gypsum board and gypsum panel products, interior and exterior, are in
place, but before any plastering is applied or gypsum board and gypsum panel
product joints and fasteners are taped and finished.
(§ 2, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-1.10. Reserved.
Sec. 8-1.11. Reserved.
Sec. 8-1.12. Reserved.
Sec. 8-1.13. Reserved.
Sec. 8-1.14. Amendments: Chapter 15, Section 1505 Fire Classification.
   Section 1505.1 “General” is amended by removing the reference to Class B and
C roof assemblies and roof coverings.
   Table 1505.1 “Minimum Roof Covering classification for Types of
Construction” is amended as follows:
   For all types of construction, the Minimum Roof Covering Classification is
Class A.
   Section 1505.1.2 “Roof covering within all other areas” is amended by
changing the reference from Class C to Class A.
   Sections 1505.3, 1505.4, and 1505.5 of the California Building Code are
deleted.
   Section 1505.6 “Fire-retardant treated wood shingles and shakes” is amended
by removing the reference to Class B and C roof assemblies and roof coverings.
Only Class A roof are allowed.
(§ 2, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-1.15. Reserved.
Sec. 8-1.16. Reserved.
Sec. 8-1.17. Amendments: Chapter 18 Soils and Foundations.
   A new Section 1803.8 is added to read as follows:
   1803.8 Additional Tests and Reports.
   The Building Official may require further tests where the type and class of
soil is in question. The Building Official may require an engineering
geotechnical or geologic report, submitted by a State certified engineering
geologist, on all sites as a condition precedent to the permit issuance to
construct a building or structure.
   Section 1804.1 “Excavation near foundations” is hereby amended to read as
follows:
   1804.1 Excavation Near Foundations
   Excavation for any purpose shall not reduce vertical or lateral support for
any foundation or adjacent foundation without first underpinning or protecting
the foundation against detrimental lateral or vertical movement, or both, in
accordance with Section 1803.5.7.
   Refer to Title 8 Section 8-1.24 and Title 7, Chapter 3 of the Thousand Oaks
Municipal Code for grading regulations administered by the Public Works
Department, and for requirements governing excavation, grading, and earthwork
construction, including fills and embankments.
   Section 1807.1.4 “Permanent Wood Foundation Systems” is amended by to read
as follows:
   1807.1.4 Permanent Wood Foundation Systems.
   [OSHPD 1R, 2 & 5] Not permitted by OSHPD. Permanent wood foundation systems
shall not be used for structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F.
Permanent wood foundation systems shall be designed and installed in accordance
with AWC PWF. Lumber and plywood shall be preservative treated in accordance
with AWPA U1 (Commodity Specification A, Special Requirement 4.2) and shall be
identified in accordance with Section 2303.1.9.1.
   Section 1808.6 “Design for Expansive Soil” is amended, with adoption of
subsections 1808.6.1 thru 1808.6.4 as published, to read as follows:
   1808.6 Design for Expansive Soils.
   Foundations for buildings and structures founded on expansive soils shall be
designed in accordance with Section 1808.6.1 or 1808.6.2.
   Exceptions: Foundation design need not comply with Section 1808.6.1 or
1808.6.2 where one of the following conditions is satisfied:
   1.   The soil is removed in accordance with Section 1808.6.3.
   2.   The building official approves stabilization of the soil in accordance
with Section 1808.6.4.
   3.   Foundations for buildings and structures with shallow foundations may
be designed in accordance with Section 1809 as amended herein.
   Section 1808.7.1 “Foundations on or adjacent to slopes” is amended to read
as follows.
   1808.7.1 Building Clearance From Ascending Slopes
   In general, buildings below slopes shall be set a sufficient distance from
the slope to provide protection from slope drainage, erosion and shallow
failures. Except as provided in Section 1808.7.5 and Figure 1808.7.1, the
following criteria will be assumed to provide this protection. Where the
existing slope is steeper than one unit vertical in one unit horizontal (100-
percent slope), the toe of the slope shall be assumed to be at the intersection
of a horizontal plane drawn from the top of the foundation and a plane drawn
tangent to the slope at an angle of 45 degrees (0.79 rad) to the horizontal.
Where a retaining wall is constructed at the toe of the slope, the height of
the slope shall be measured from the top of the wall to the top of the slope.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5db25de1c73418e6f4353e3c90932c315a871cae/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6362.png]
 
For SI: 1 foot = 304.8m m
FIGURE 1808.7.1
FOUNDATION CLEARANCES FROM SLOPES
   The footings of all structures shall be setback from the tops and toes of
slopes as far as necessary for adequacy of footing/foundation support and to
prevent damage as a result of water runoff or erosion of the slopes. Unless
otherwise recommended in an approved soil engineering and/or engineering
geology report, setbacks shall be no less than shown in Figure 1808.7.1
“Foundation Clearances from Slopes” or five (5') feet, whichever is greater.
The setbacks given in that table are minimum requirements, and may be increased
by the Building Official if considered necessary for safety or stability.
   Exceptions:
   1.   Retaining walls may be used to reduce the required slope setback when
approved by the Building Official.
   2.   Footings for freestanding garden walls may be founded on three (3')
feet minimum from the face of any slope.
   3.   The Building Official may waive the setback requirement for any
structure where it is determined because of special design or unique
circumstances.
   No building or structure, or portion thereof, governed by this Code shall be
constructed on any slope greater than 5:1 without a finding by the Building
Official that the site is safe for its intended use. The Building Official may
require a geological investigation, soil engineer's report, and/or the footing/
foundation to be designed by a civil or structural engineer registered as such
by the State of California.
   Section 1808.7.3 “Pools” is amended to read as follows:
   1808.7.3 Pools.
   The setback between pools regulated by this code and slopes shall be equal
to one-half the building footing setback distance required by this section but
not less than five (5’) feet. That portion of the pool wall within a horizontal
distance of 7 feet (2134 mm) from the top of the slope shall be capable of
supporting the water in the pool without soil support.
   Table 1808.8.1 is amended to read as follows:
   TABLE 1808.8.1
   MINIMUM SPECIFIED COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH f'c OF CONCRETE OR GROUT
FOUNDATION ELEMENT OR CONDITION SPECIFIED COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH, f'c
FOUNDATION ELEMENT OR CONDITION             SPECIFIED COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH, f'c
1. Foundations for structures assigned to
Seismic Design Category A, B or C. [OSHPD   2,500 psi
1R, 2 & 5] Not permitted by OSHPD.
2a. Foundations for Group R or U
occupancies of light-frame construction,
two stories or less in height, assigned to  3,000 psi
Seismic Design Category D, E or F. [OSHPD
1R, 2 & 5] Not permitted by OSHPD.
2b. Foundations for other structures
assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or 3,000 psi
F
3. Precast nonprestressed driven piles      4,000 psi
4. Socketed drilled shafts                  4,000 psi
5. Micropiles                               4,000 psi
6. Precast prestressed driven piles         5,000 psi
 
For SI: 1 pound per square inch = 0.00689 MPa.
   Section 1809.1 “General” is amended as to read as follows:
   Shallow foundations shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
Sections 1809.2 through 1809.13. All footing/foundation and/or slab designs
shall be predicated upon a soil analysis. Said design shall not be less than
those minimum requirements set forth in Table 1809.7(1) for each soil expansion
range.
   Post-tensioned slab design, when recommended by the soils engineer, may be
used in lieu of the requirements when approved by the Building Official.
   In areas where the soil is determined to be of an expansive range index over
twenty (20), the soil under the footings and slabs shall be pre-saturated in
accordance with Table 1809.7(1).
   Section 1809.3 “Stepped Footings” is amended to read as follows:
   1809.3 Stepped Footings.
   The top surface of footings shall be level. The bottom surface of footings
shall be permitted to have a slope not exceeding 1 unit vertical in 10 units
horizontal (10-percent slope). Footings shall be stepped where it is necessary
to change the elevation of the top surface of the footing or where the surface
of the ground slopes more than 1 unit vertical in 10 units horizontal (10-
percent slope).
   [OSHPD 1R, 2 & 5] Individual steps in continuous footings shall not exceed
18 inches (457 mm) in height and the slope of a series of such steps shall not
exceed 1 unit vertical to 2 units horizontal (50-percent slope) unless
otherwise recommended by a geotechnical report. The steps shall be detailed on
the drawings. The local effects due to the discontinuity of the steps shall be
considered in the design of the foundation.
   For structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F, the stepped
requirement footing/foundation wall shall also apply to the top surface of
grade beams, and supporting walls. Footings shall be reinforced with four (4)
one-half (1/2”) inch diameter minimum deformed reinforcing bars. Two
reinforcement bars shall be placed at the top and bottom of the footings in
accordance with Figure 1809.1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5db25de1c73418e6f4353e3c90932c315a871cae/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5863.jpg]
 
   Section 1809.4 “Depth and width of footings” is amended to read as follows:
   1809.4 Depth and Width of Footings.
   The minimum depth of footings below the undisturbed ground surface shall be
12 inches (305 mm). Where applicable, the requirements of Section 1809.5 shall
be satisfied. The minimum width of footings shall be 12 inches (305 mm).
   Footings for buildings and structures on expansive soils shall have a depth
and width not less than the minimum requirements set forth in Table 1809.7 (1).
   Section 1809.7 “Prescriptive footings for light-frame construction” is
amended to read as follows:
   1809.7 Prescriptive Footings for Light-Frame Construction.
   [OSHPD 1R, 2 & 5] Not permitted by OSHPD. When a specific design is not
provided, concrete or masonry-unit footings supporting walls of light-frame
construction shall be permitted to be designed in accordance with Table 1809.7
(1).
   Table No. 1809.7 is hereby deleted and all Code references to Table 1809.7
shall now refer to Table 1809.7(1).
   A new Table No. 1809.7(1) entitled “MINIMUM FOOTING AND SLAB REQUIREMENTS”
is hereby added as follows:
   Table 1809.7(1)
   MINIMUM FOOTING AND SLAB REQUIREMENTS a
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5db25de1c73418e6f4353e3c90932c315a871cae/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6364.png]
 
   Section 1809.8 “Plain concrete footings” is amended, deletes exception and
is to read as follows:
   1809.8 Plain Concrete Footings
   [OSHPD 1R, 2 & 5] Not permitted by OSHPD. Plain concrete footings shall not
be utilized in structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F. The
edge thickness of plain concrete footings supporting walls of other than light-
frame construction shall be not less than 8 inches (203 mm) where placed on
soil or rock.
   Section 1809.12 “Timber footings” is amended to read as follows:
   1809.12 Timber Footings.
   [OSHPD 1R, 2 & 5] Not permitted by OSHPD. Timber footings shall not be
utilized in structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F. Timber
footings shall be permitted for buildings of Type V construction and as
otherwise approved by the building official. Such footings shall be treated in
accordance with AWPA U1 (Commodity Specification A, Use Category 4B). Treated
timbers are not required where placed entirely below permanent water level, or
where used as capping for wood piles that project above the water level over
submerged or marsh lands. The compressive stresses perpendicular to grain in
untreated timber footings supported on treated piles shall not exceed 70
percent of the allowable stresses for the species and grade of timber as
specified in the ANSI/AWC NDS.2022 S-66   446
   Building Regulations   Sec. 8-1.17
   Sections 1809.15, 1809.16, and 1809.17 are added to read as follows:
   1809.15 Slabs.
   1809.15.1 Reinforcement.
   All slabs founded on soils determined to be of an expansive index of over
fifty (50) shall be doweled into foundation walls with No. 3 reinforcement
steel bars minimum bent twelve (12") inches into the wall and thirty-six (36")
inches minimum into the slab at twenty-four (24") inches on center maximum.
Interior walls with continuous footings/foundations shall have similar floor
ties. Slab floors shall be reinforced as set forth in Table 1809.7 (1). All
reinforcement in slab floors shall be positioned above the center of the slab.
   Exception: An alternate design, such as a floating slab that eliminates the
requirement for dowels, may be submitted to the Building Official for approval.
   1809.15.2 Nonresidential Structures: Perimeter grade beams.
   For all nonresidential structures which have isolated footings at their
perimeters to carry vertical or horizontal loads, and at private garage door
openings, a perimeter grade beam eight (8") inches minimum wide and conforming
to the depth and reinforcement requirements in accordance with Table 1809.7(1)
shall be constructed between discontinuous footing/foundation elements.
   1805.15.3 Continuous Footings.
   Whenever a daylight line between the cut or natural ground and the compacted
fill falls within a proposed building area, continuous footings shall be
reinforced with two (2) No. 4 minimum continuous deformed steel bars, one
placed at the top and one placed at the bottom. Alternate designs may be
submitted to the Building Official by a geotechnical engineer that include due
allowances for dissimilar footing/foundation materials.
   1809.15.4 Fine Grading.
   Property sites shall be graded to drain to the public way or to a disposal
area approved by the Building Official and/or City Engineer.
   1809.15.5 Residential Accessory Buildings.
   Residential accessory buildings not attached to the main structure need not
have soil tests as required above; provided, however, the slab and footing/
foundation standards as set forth for soil in the zero to twenty (0-20)
expansive index range in Table 1809.7(1) shall be followed.
   1809.15.6 Soil Tests: Alternatives.
   In lieu of the required soil tests: At the discretion of the Building
Official, footings/foundations for residential one-and two-family dwellings and
additions to existing residences, where the expansive qualities of the soil are
unknown, may use the requirements of the ninety-one to one hundred-thirty (91-
130) expansive index set forth in Table 1809.7(1); provided, however, that
should there be reasonable belief by the Building Official that the soil has
expansive qualities exceeding the one hundred-thirty (130) index, a special
engineered design shall be submitted.
   1809.16 Drainage.
   1809.16.1 Roof Gutters and Downspouts.
   When a building is located on expansive soil having an expansion index
greater than fifty (50), gutters, downspouts, piping and/or other non-erosive
devices shall be provided to collect and conduct rainwater to a street, storm
drain or other approved watercourse or disposal area.
   1809.16.2 Roof Waters.
   Eave gutters and downspouts may be required in any location where it appears
reasonably necessary to protect buildings, structures, properties, and/or
slopes, or portion thereof. Concentrated roof waters from gutter downspouts may
be required to be conducted by an approved non-erosive drainage device to a
point five (5') feet minimum in distance from the building footings/foundations
and shall connect to swale or other means of yard drainage.
   1809.16.3 Planters.
   The design of planters in and/or immediately adjacent to buildings shall be
submitted to, and be subject to the approval of, the Building Official prior to
installation. Due consideration shall be given to the means or method employed
in said design to prevent intrusion of water to the soils under the footing/
foundation and/or slab.
   1809.17 Adjacent Loads.
   Where footings are placed at varying elevations, the effect of adjacent
loads shall be included in the footing/foundation design.
   Section 1810.3.2.4 is amended to read as follows:
   1810.3.2.4 Timber.
   [OSHPD 1R, 2 & 5] Not permitted by OSHPD. Timber deep foundation elements
shall not be used in structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F.
Timber deep foundation elements shall be designed as piles or poles in
accordance with ANSI/AWC NDS. Round timber elements shall conform to ASTM D25.
Sawn timber elements shall conform to DOC PS-20.
   1810.3.2.4.1 Preservative Treatment.
   Timber deep foundation elements used to support permanent structures shall
be treated in accordance with this section unless it is established that the
tops of the untreated timber elements will be below the lowest groundwater
level assumed to exist during the life of the structure. Preservative and
minimum final retention shall be in accordance with AWPA U1 (Commodity
Specification E, Use Category 4C) for round timber elements and AWPA U1
(Commodity Specification A, Use Category 4B) for sawn timber elements.
Preservative-treated timber elements shall be subject to a quality control
program administered by an approved agency. Element cutoffs shall be treated in
accordance with AWPA M4.
(§ 2, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-1.18. Amendment Chapter 23 Wood.
   Section 2304.10.2 "Fastener requirements" is amended with adoption of
subsections 2304.10.2.1 as published, and add footnote "h" to Table 2304.10.2,
is to read as follows:
   2304.10.2 Fastener Requirements.
   Connectors and fasteners shall comply with the applicable provisions of
Sections 2304.10.1 through 2304.10.8. Staple fasteners in Table 2304.10.2 shall
not be used to resist or transfer seismic forces in structures assigned to
Seismic Design Category D, E or F.
   A new footnote h is added to Table 2304.10.2, as follows:
   h.   Staples shall not be used to resist or transfer seismic forces in
structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F.
   Section 2304.12.2.8 "Wood used in retaining walls and crib walls" is amended
to read as follows:
   2304.12.2.8 Wood Used in Retaining Walls and Cribs.
   Wood installed in retaining or crib walls shall be preservative treated in
accordance with AWPA U1 for soil and fresh water use. Wood shall not be used in
retaining or crib walls for structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E
or F.
(§ 2, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-1.19. Reserved.
Sec. 8-1.20. Reserved.
Sec. 8-1.21. Reserved.
Sec. 8-1.22. Reserved.
Sec. 8-1.23. Violations.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, company or corporation to
violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this
Code. Any person, firm, company or corporation violating any of such provisions
or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this Code shall
be guilty of a violation of this Code and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable as set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of the Thousand Oaks Municipal
Code.
   (b)   Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this
Code shall be punishable by a fine of not more than One Thousand and no/100ths
($1000.00) Dollars or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not
exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such
person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any
portion of which any violation of any provision of this Code, or the provisions
of any code adopted by reference by this Code, is committed, continued, or
permitted by such person and shall be punishable accordingly.
   (c)   In addition to the penalties provided by this section, any condition
caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this
Code, or the provisions of any code adopted by reference by this Code, shall be
deemed a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by this City, and each day
such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense.
(§ 2, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-1.24. Amendments: Appendix J - Grading.
   The California Building Code, 2022 Edition, Appendix J is hereby amended as
follows:
   Section J101.1 “Scope” is amended to read as follows:
   The provisions of this chapter apply to grading, excavation and earthwork
construction, including fills and embankments. Where conflicts occur between
the City’s Municipal Code, the Geotechnical Report, and the technical
requirements of this Chapter, the governing order of precedence shall be as
follows: the City’s Municipal Code followed by the Geotechnical Report and then
the technical requirements of this Chapter.
   Section J101 “General” is amended by adding a new subsection J101.3 to read
as follows:
   J101.3 Additional Provisions.
   Grading related work shall comply with the requirements of this code and the
requirements of Thousand Oaks Municipal Code Title 7, Chapter 3.
   Section J103.1 “Permits Required” is amended to read as follows:
   J103.1 Permits required. Grading related work shall comply with the
requirements of this code and the requirements of Thousand Oaks Municipal Code,
Title 7, Chapter 3, Section 7.3.07 and Section 7-3.08 for permit requirements.
   Section J103.2 “Exemptions” is hereby deleted.
   Section J104 “Permit Application and Submittals” is amended by deleting
subsections J104.1, J104.2, and J104.3
   Section J104.5 “Additional provisions” is hereby added and is to read as
follows:
   J104.5 Additional Provisions.
   Grading related work shall comply with the requirements of this code and the
requirements of Thousand Oaks Municipal Code Title 7, Chapter 3.
   Section J105.1 “General” is amended to read as follows:
   J105.1 General.
   Inspections shall be governed by Section 110, Chapter 1, Division II of this
code. Grading related work shall comply with the requirements of this code and
the requirements of Thousand Oaks Municipal Code Title 7, Chapter 3.
   Section J106.1 “Maximum Slope” is amended to read as follows:
   J106.1 Maximum slope.
   The slope of cut surface shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended
use and shall be no steeper than two units horizontal to one unit vertical
[fifty (50%) percent slope] unless the owner or authorized agent furnishes a
geotechnical report justifying a steeper slope in accordance with the
exceptions listed in the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code Section 7-3.19 for slope
requirements.
   Exceptions:
   1.   A cut surface shall be permitted to be at a slope of 1.5 units
horizontal to 1 unit vertical (67-percent slope) provided that all of the
following are met:
   1.1.   It is not intended to support structures or surcharges.
   1.2.   It is adequately protected against erosion.
   1.3.   It is not more than 8 feet (2438 mm) in height.
   1.4.   It is approved by the City Engineer.
   1.5.   Ground water is not encountered.
   2.   A cut surface in bedrock shall be permitted to be at a slope of 1 unit
horizontal to 1 unit vertical (100-percent slope).
   Section J106 is amended by adding a new subsection J106.2 to read as
follows:
   J106.2 Additional Provisions.
   Grading related work shall comply with the requirements of this code and the
requirements of Thousand Oaks Municipal Code Section 7-3.19(b) for additional
cut slope requirements.
   Grading related work shall comply with the requirements of this code and the
requirements of Thousand Oaks Municipal Code Section 7-3.19(c) for unstable
material requirements.
   Section J107.1 “General” is amended to read as follows:
   J107.1 General.
   Unless otherwise recommended in the geotechnical report, fills shall comply
with the provisions of this section and the requirements of Thousand Oaks
Municipal Code Section 7-3.20 for Fill Requirements.
   Grading related work shall comply with the requirements of this code and the
requirements of Thousand Oaks Municipal Code Section 7-3.22 for Buttress Fills.
   Section J108.3 “Slope Protection” is to read as follows:
   J108.3 Slope Protection.
   Where required to protect adjacent properties at the toe of a slope from
adverse effects of the grading, additional protection, approved by the City
Engineer, shall be included. Examples of such protection include but are not be
limited to:
   1.   Setbacks greater than those required by Figure J108.1.
   2.   Provisions for retaining walls or similar construction.
   3.   Erosion protection of the fill slopes.
   4.   Provision for the control of surface waters.
   Section 109.3 “Interceptor Drain” is amended to read as follows:
   J109.3 Interceptor Drains.
   Interceptor drains shall be installed along the top of cut slopes receiving
drainage from a tributary width greater than 40 feet (12 192 mm), measured
horizontally. They shall have a minimum depth of 1 foot (305 mm) and a minimum
width of 3 feet (915 mm). The slope shall be approved by the City Engineer, but
shall be not less than one unit vertical in 50 units horizontal (2-percent
slope). The drain shall be paved with concrete not less than 3 inches (76 mm)
in thickness, or by other materials suitable to the application. Discharge from
the drain shall be accomplished in a manner to prevent erosion and shall be
approved by the City Engineer.
   Section J110 “Erosion Control” is amended by adding a new subsection J110.3
to read as follows:
   J110.3 Additional Provisions.
   Grading related work shall comply with the requirements of this code and the
requirements of Thousand Oaks Municipal Code Title 7, Chapter 3.
(§ 2, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-1.25. Small Residential Rooftop Solar Energy System Review Process.
   Section 8-1.25.6(?) is added to the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code to read in
full as follows:
   (a)   This section implements Section 65850.5 of the California Government
Code which provides that, on or before September 30, 2015, every city, county,
or city and county shall adopt an ordinance that creates an expedited,
streamlined permitting process for small residential rooftop solar energy
systems.
   (b)   The following words and phrases as used in this section are defined as
follows:
   (1)   "Electronic submittal" means the utilization of e-mail, the internet,
and/or facsimile to file an application.
   (2)   "Small residential rooftop solar energy system" means all of the
following:
   (i)   A solar energy system that is no larger than 10 kilowatts alternating
current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal.
   (ii)   A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire,
structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the
City and paragraph (iii) of subdivision (c) of Section 714 of the Civil Code,
as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from
time to time.
   (iii)   A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family
dwelling.
   (iv)   A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal
building height within the zone in which it is located as defined by Chapter 4
of Title 9 of this Code.
   (3)   "Solar energy system" has the same meaning set forth in paragraphs (1)
and (2) of subdivision (a) of Section 801.5 of the Civil Code, as such section
or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time.
   (c)   Section 65850.5 of the California Government Code provides that in
developing an expedited permitting process, the city shall adopt a checklist of
all requirements with which small rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to
be eligible for expedited review. The Building Official is hereby authorized
and directed to develop and adopt such checklist.
   (d)   The checklist shall be published on the City's internet website. The
applicant may submit the permit application and associated documentation to the
Building Division of the Community Development Department by personal, mailed,
or electronic submittal together with any required permit processing and
inspection fees. In the case of electronic submittal, the electronic signature
of the applicant on all forms, applications and other documentation may be used
in lieu of a wet signature.
   (e)   Prior to submitting an application, the applicant shall:
   (1)   Verify to the applicant's reasonable satisfaction through the use of
standard engineering evaluation techniques that the support structure for the
small residential rooftop solar energy system is stable and adequate to
transfer all wind, seismic, and dead and live loads associated with the system
to the building footing/foundation; and
   (2)   At the applicant's cost, verify to the applicant's reasonable
satisfaction using standard electrical inspection techniques that the existing
electrical system including existing line, load, ground and bonding wiring as
well as main panel and subpanel sizes are adequately sized, based on the
existing electrical system's current use, to carry all new photovoltaic
electrical loads.
   (f)   For a small residential rooftop solar energy system eligible for
expedited review, only one inspection shall be required, which shall be done in
a timely manner and may include a consolidated inspection by the Building
Official and fire chief. If a small residential rooftop solar energy system
fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized; however, the
subsequent inspection need not conform to the requirements of this subsection.
   (g)   An application that satisfies the information requirements in the
checklist, as determined by the Building Official, shall be deemed complete.
Upon receipt of an incomplete application, the Building Official shall issue a
written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any
additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance.
   (h)   Upon confirmation by the Building Official of the application and
supporting documentation being complete and meeting the requirements of the
checklist, the Building Official shall administratively approve the application
and issue all required permits or authorizations. Such approval does not
authorize an applicant to connect the small residential rooftop energy system
to the local utility provider's electricity grid. The applicant is responsible
for obtaining such approval or permission from the local utility provider.
(§ 2, Ord. 1669-NS, eff. January 10, 2020)
Sec. 8-1.26. Electrical Vehicle Charging Stations.
   (a)   This section implements Section 65850.7 of the California Government
Code relating to a streamlined permitting process for electric vehicle (EV)
charging stations.
   (b)   The following words and phrases used in this section are defined as
follows:
   (1)   "Electronic submittal" means the utilization of e-mail, the internet
and/or facsimile to file an application.
   (2)   "Electric vehicle charging station" means any level of electric
vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with
Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, as it reads on the effective
date of this Section, and delivers electricity from a source outside an
electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle.
   (3)   "Specific adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct
and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified and written public
health or safety standards, policies or conditions as they existed on the date
the application was deemed complete.
   (4)   "A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific,
adverse impact" includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method,
condition, or mitigation imposed by a city, county, or city and county on
another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a
permit.
   (c)   An electric vehicle charging station shall meet all applicable health
and safety standards and requirements imposed by local and State permitting
authorities.
   (d)   An electric vehicle charging station shall meet all applicable safety
and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the
Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers
Association, and accredited underwriters' laboratories, and, where applicable,
rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability.
   (e)   Section 65850.7 of the California Government Code provides that EV
charging stations shall be approved ministerially through a nondiscretionary
building permit unless the City makes a finding, based on substantial evidence,
that the EV charging station would have a specific, adverse impact on public
health or safety, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or
avoid the specific, adverse, impact. A use permit may be required pursuant to
such a finding.
   (f)   In accordance with Government Code Section 65850.7, the Building
Official shall establish a checklist of all requirements with which electrical
vehicle charging stations shall comply in order to be eligible for expedited
review. The City's checklist shall be published on the City's website. The
Building Official shall implement an expedited administrative permit review
process for electrical vehicle charging stations, in which completed
applications meeting all checklist requirements shall require residential
permits to be issued within one business day, and commercial permits to be
issued within ten business days.
   (g)   The applicant may submit the permit application and associated
documentation to the Building Division of the Community Development Department
by personal appearance, regular mail, or electronic submittal, with required
permit processing fees as adopted by City Council Resolution. In the case of
electronic submittal, the electronic signature of the applicant on all forms,
applications and other documentation may be used in lieu of a wet signature.
   (h)   Prior to submitting an application for processing, the applicant shall
verify that the installation of an electric vehicle charging station will not
have any specific, adverse impact on public health and safety. Verification by
the applicant includes but is not limited to: electrical systems capacity and
loads; electrical system wiring, bonding, and overcurrent protection; building
infrastructure affected by charging station equipment and associated conduits,
and; areas of charging station equipment and vehicle parking.
   (i)   A permit application that satisfies the information requirements in
the City's adopted checklist shall be deemed complete. Upon confirmation by the
Building Official that the permit application and supporting documents meet
requirements of the adopted checklist and is consistent with all applicable
laws and health and safety standards, the Building Official shall, consistent
with Government Code Section 65850.7, approve the application and issue the
necessary permits. Such approval does not authorize an applicant to energize or
utilize the electric vehicle charging station until all necessary inspections
have been completed and approved. If the Building Official determines that the
permit application is incomplete, he or she shall issue a written correction
notice to the applicant, detailing all deficiencies in the application and any
additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance.
   (j)   It is the intent of this section to encourage the installation of
electric vehicle charging stations by removing obstacles to permitting charging
stations so long as the action does not supersede the Building Official's
authority to address the higher priority life-safety situations. If the
Building Official makes a finding based on substantial evidence that the
electric vehicle charging station could have a specific adverse impact upon the
public health or safety, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily
mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact as defined in this section, the
applicant shall apply for a use permit.
   (k)   The decision of the Building Official pursuant to subdivision (i)
above may be appealed to the Planning Commission pursuant to Article 18,
Chapter 4, of Title 9 of the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code.
   (l)   In accordance with Government Code Section 65850.7(h), the Building
Official shall not condition approval for any electrical vehicle charging
station permit on the approval of such charging station by an association, as
that term is defined in Section 4080 of the Civil Code.
(Part 2, Ord. 1676-NS, eff. February 28, 2020)
Sec. 8-1.27. Amendments: Appendix P - Emergency Housing.
   Section P103.3 “Occupant Load” is amended to read as follows:
   P103.3 Occupant Load.
   Except as otherwise stated in this appendix, the maximum occupant load
allowed in buildings and structures used as emergency housing shall be
determined by the enforcing agency, but the interior floor area shall not be
less than 64 square feet (5.9 m2) for one occupant. Where more than one person
occupies the building/structure, the required floor area shall be increased at
the rate of 50 square feet (4.65 m2) for each occupant in excess of one.
   Exceptions:
   1.   Tents.
   2.   Recreational vehicles and park trailers designed for human habitation
that meet the requirements in the Health and Safety Code, Sections 18009.3 and
18010, as applicable.
   3.   For emergency housing, including emergency sleeping cabins, the minimum
interior floor area may be reduced to 53 square feet (4.9 m2) if the enforcing
agency determines that 53 square feet (4.9 m2) is adequate space for a single-
occupancy sleeping unit.
   Section P104.1 “General” is amended to read as follows:
   P104.1 General.
   Emergency sleeping cabins shall have an interior floor area of not less than
64 square feet (5.9 m2) for one occupant. Where more than one person occupies
the cabin, the required floor area shall be increased at the rate of 50 square
feet (4.65 m2) for each occupant in excess of one. The interior floor area
shall not exceed 400 square feet (37 m2), excluding lofts.
(§ 2, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
CHAPTER 2. CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FEES
Sec. 8-2.01. Purpose.
   On August 30, 1983, the County adopted a Police Facilities Development Fee
in order to relieve the overextension of police station facilities caused by
new development. These facilities are impacted by development in the City. The
City contracts with the County Sheriff’s Department to provide police services
to the incorporated limits of the City. In order to mitigate this impact and to
provide for the collection of the Police Facilities Development Fee, the City
enacts this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 852-NS, eff. February 14, 1984)
Sec. 8-2.02. Definitions.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   (a)   Floor space. “Floor space” means “floor area” as the latter term is
defined in Section 407 of the Uniform Building Code.
   (b)   Mobile home. “Mobile home” means a structure transportable in one or
more sections, designed to be used as a dwelling unit. This definition does not
include recreational vehicles, commercial coaches, or factory-built modular
housing.
   (c)   Multiple-family unit. A “multiple-family unit” is located in a
building designed for occupancy by two or more families. This definition
includes duplexes (which do not meet the criteria for a single-family unit as
defined below), condominiums for which ownership only applies to air space
occupied by the unit, and apartments in which units are not individually owned
and utility services are shared.
   (d)   New construction. “New construction,” when applied to construction of
residential buildings or the installation of mobile homes, means the
construction or installation which increases the number of dwelling units on a
given lot. “New construction,” when applied to the construction or
installation of nonresidential buildings, means construction or installation
which increases the amount of floor space for nonresidential building purposes
on a given lot.
   (e)   Single-family residence. “Single-family residence” is a unit designed
for the occupancy of one family. This definition includes both single-family
detached and single-family attached units when the attached unit is subject to
separate ownership and entitlement to the land on which the unit sits, the
utility services are independent for that unit, and each unit is separated from
the other dwelling units either by open space or a vertical wall extending from
the ground to the roof.
(§ 2, Ord. 852-NS, eff. February 14, 1984)
Sec. 8-2.03. Collection of fees.
   Prior to the issuance of any building permit for the new construction of any
single-family residence, multiple-family unit, the construction of new
nonresidential structures or addition of square footage of floor space to
existing nonresidential structures, and prior to the issuance of City water or
wastewater permit for any new construction of a mobile home unit, a Police
Facilities Development Fee shall be paid to and collected by the City. The fee
shall be in an amount as established by resolution of the City Council for each
type of unit or facility constructed.
(§ 1, Ord. 852-NS, eff. February 14, 1984)
Sec. 8-2.04. Use of Police Facilities Development Fee.
   All fees collected pursuant to Section 8-2.03 shall be deposited in a
restricted account within the City Treasury and the fees and any interest
earned thereon shall be used only for the purposes of acquiring or improving
the police facilities used in providing police services to the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 852-NS, eff. February 14, 1984)
Sec. 8-2.05. Refund of fee.
   Any fee erroneously collected pursuant to this chapter shall be refunded
without interest to the payer if, within one year after the date on which the
fee was deposited into the City Treasury, the payer files a written application
for refund with the City Clerk and provides proof of such error satisfactory to
the City. Any Police Facilities Development Fee collected pursuant to this
chapter for any structure where the building permit is subsequently canceled or
expires prior to the commencement of construction authorized thereby shall be
refunded without interest after deducting a refund processing fee, as set by
Councilmanic Resolution, provided the payer files a written application for
refund within one hundred eighty (180) days of such cancellation or expiration.
(§ 1, Ord. 852-NS, eff. February 14, 1984)
CHAPTER 3. BUILDING NUMBERING
Sec. 8-3.01. Scope.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to require the
numbering of any premises whereon no building exists but shall be construed to
require the numbering of all buildings and of all entryways to all premises
whereon any house or other structure to be occupied by persons or any place of
business exists.
(§ 8314, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 8-3.02. System established.
   There is hereby established a system for the uniform numbering of premises
fronting on streets in the City.
(§ 8311, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 8-3.03. Maps.
   (a)   Authority. The system for the numbering of premises shall be contained
and set forth on the maps entitled “House Numbering,” which maps are on file in
the office of the City Clerk, and a copy of each of such maps is on file in the
office of the City Engineer.
   (b)   Preparation. The City Engineer is hereby directed to prepare, from
time to time as required, maps for the purpose of determining and displaying
the numbering system provided for in subsection (a) of this section, and when
such maps are filed with the City Clerk, they shall constitute the numbering
system for the portion of the City thereon depicted.
(§§ 8311.1 and 8312, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 8-3.04. Administration.
   (a)   City Engineer. The City Engineer shall have charge of numbering
premises under the system provided for in Section 8-3.02 of this chapter and
shall, upon the request of the owner or occupant thereof, inform him of the
number of his premises.
   (b)   Community Development Director. The Community Development Director
shall have charge of numbering all premises erected subsequent to the filing of
the maps provided for in this chapter and, upon the issuance of a building
permit within the areas depicted on such maps, shall issue a number for the
premises.
(§§ 8312.1 and 8313, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 8-3.05. Notices to place numbers.
   (a)   City Engineer. It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to notify
property owners and other interested persons to place proper numbers where
required. Such notices shall state the numbers required.
   (b)   Community Development Director. It shall be the duty of the Community
Development Director to notify the owner of any proposed building to place the
proper numbers where required. Such notices shall state the numbers required.
(§§ 8312.2 and 8313.1, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 8-3.06. Placement of numbers.
   All premises shall be numbered pursuant to the provisions of this chapter,
and the numbers shall be placed in a conspicuous position immediately over,
upon, or adjacent to each and every door and entryway to any such premises. A
suitable metallic or other printed plate bearing the correct number for such
entryway shall be used.
(§§ 8312.5 and 8312.51, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 8-3.07. Multiple entrances.
   If more than one door or entryway to any premises for which a number is
required by the provisions of this chapter exists, such door or entryway shall
be numbered by adding a proper fractional number to the number assigned for the
premises, or, if more than one number has been assigned to the parcel of land
upon which the premises are located, the next consecutive number so assigned
shall be used.
(§ 8312.52, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 8-3.08. Violations.
   (a)   Any person who shall fail to place the numbers provided for in this
chapter within thirty (30) days after receiving the notice provided for in
subsection (a) of Section 8-3.05 of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation
of this Code pursuant to Section 1-2.01 of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code
and shall be liable, upon conviction, to a penalty of not less than Five and
no/100ths ($5.00) Dollars and not more than Ten and no/100ths ($10.00) Dollars.
   (b)   Any person who shall fail to place such numbers in their proper places
within thirty (30) days after the completion of the building, as provided in
subsection (b) of Section 8-3.05 of this chapter, or when notified, shall be
liable to the penalty provided for in subsection (a) of this section.
(§§ 8312.3 and 8313.2, T.O.O.C., as amended by § XXXII, Ord. 770-NS, eff.
February 26, 1981)
Sec. 8-3.09. Numbering buildings for others: Permits required.
   (a)   Approval: Preference permittees. No person shall place numbers on
buildings or immediately over, upon, adjacent to, in front of, on the curb
fronting, or anywhere else on premises not belonging to the person placing such
numbers without first having obtained a permit to do so from the Business
License Inspector. Such permit shall contain the approval of the Public Works
Director and the Building Official. Preference in the issuance of such permits
shall be given to nonprofit organizations which use the proceeds or
contributions for the work performed for charitable, educational, civic, or
public purposes and have otherwise qualified by law as an organization designed
for such purposes.
   (b)   Applications: Form: Term. Applications for the permits required by the
provisions of this section shall show the following:
   (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
   (2)   The names and addresses of all persons who will act as solicitors,
employees, or associates of the applicant;
   (3)   A statement of whether or not the applicant proposes to engage in such
activity for profit or for charitable or other purposes set forth in subsection
(a) of this section; and
   (4)   Such other information as may be reasonably related to the information
necessary to issue the permit.
   Permits issued pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be for a
period of one year and may be renewed. No permit fee shall be required where
the applicant qualifies as a nonprofit organization for one of the purposes set
forth in subsection (a) of this section. The Council may by resolution limit
the number of such permits issued in one year if it finds that the public
welfare and safety will be best served by such limitation.
(§ 1, Ord. 181-NS, eff. December 31, 1970)
CHAPTER 4. CODE ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 8-4.01. Code Administration for Building Standards.
   This chapter shall be known as the Technical Codes, may be cited as such,
and will be referred to herein as "Thousand Oaks Code Administration" or "the
building code" or "these regulations" or "these building standards", the
"code", or "this code".
(§ 3, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-4.02. Scope and Intent.
   (a)   Scope: This Chapter shall serve as the administrative, organizational
and enforcement rules and regulations for the technical codes and other
building and property health and safety regulations within this title which
regulate property maintenance and site preparation, construction, alteration,
relocation, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy,
location, maintenance, grading, removal and demolition of every building or
structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings and
structures.
   When conflicting provisions or requirements occur within this article or
other codes or laws, provisions of Title 8, Chapter 4 shall govern.
   Except as hereinafter changed or modified, the building standards, which are
published in the California building standards code, are applicable to all
occupancies and uses throughout the city. Amendments to the building standards
contained in the codes published by the model code organizations (ICC, IAPMO,
and NFPA) by state agencies, are applicable only to those occupancies or uses
which the state agency making the amendment is authorized to regulate.
   (b)   Intent: The purpose of this code adopted hereby is to provide minimum
standards to safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare through
structural strength, means of egress facilities, stability, sanitation,
adequate light and ventilation, energy conservation, accessibility,
sustainability, resiliency, and safety to life and property from fire and other
hazards attributed to the built environment and to provide safety to
firefighters and emergency responders during emergency operations.
   Certain changes and modifications have been made in the adoption of this
code because of the requirements of specific local conditions. Consistent with
this purpose, the provisions of this code are intended and always have been
intended to confer a benefit on the community as a whole and are not intended
to establish a duty of care toward any particular person.
   This code shall not be construed to hold the city or any officer, employee
or agent thereof responsible for any damage to persons or property by reason of
any inspection authorized herein or by reason of the issuance or nonissuance of
any permit authorized herein, and/or for any action or omission in connection
with the application and/or enforcement of this code. By adopting the
provisions of this code, the city does not intend to impose on itself, its
employees or agents any mandatory duties of care toward persons and property
within its jurisdiction so as to provide a basis of civil liability for
damages.
   This section is declaratory of existing law and is not to be construed as
suggesting that such was not the purpose and intent of previous code adoptions.
(§ 3, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-4.03. Applicability.
   (a)   Conflicts: Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and
a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. Where, in
any specific case, different sections of this code specify different materials,
methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall
govern. When conflicting provisions or requirements occur within this code or
between this code and other codes or laws, the most restrictive provisions
shall govern. Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and
referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this code shall apply.
   (b)   Other Laws: The provisions of this code shall not be deemed to nullify
any provisions of local, state, or federal law.
   (c)   Referenced Codes And Standards: The codes and standards referenced in
this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the
prescribed extent of each such reference.
   (d)   Partial Invalidity: In the event that any part or provision of this
code is held to be illegal or void, this shall not have the effect of making
void or illegal any of the other parts and provisions.
   (e)   Existing Structures, Systems And Equipment: The legal occupancy of any
structure existing on the date of adoption of this code shall be permitted to
continue without change, except as otherwise specifically provided in this code
or as is deemed necessary by the building official for the general safety and
welfare of the occupants and the public and provided continued use is not
dangerous to life, health and safety.
   Additions, alterations, repairs and changes of use or occupancy in all
buildings, structures, and portions of building and structures, shall comply
with the provisions for new buildings and structures except as otherwise
provided for in this code.
   Additions or alterations shall not be made to an existing building or
building service equipment which will cause the existing building or building
service equipment to be in violation of the provisions of the technical codes
nor shall such additions or alterations cause the existing building or building
service equipment to become unsafe.
   Equipment lawfully in existence at the time of the adoption of this code may
have their use, maintenance, or repair continued if their use, maintenance, or
repair is in accordance with the original design and a hazard to life, health
or property has not been created.
   Buildings, structures, and equipment, existing and new, and parts thereof
shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. Devices or safeguards
which are required by this code shall be maintained in conformance with the
technical code under which installed. The owner, owner's agent, and occupant
shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, and their
building service equipment. To determine compliance with this section, the
building official may cause a structure to be reinspected.
   A change in the use or occupancy of any existing building or structure shall
comply with the provisions of this code and the existing building code.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, use, occupy or maintain any
building or structure or portion thereof, in the city, or cause the same to be
done, contrary to, or in violation of, any of the provisions of this code.
(§ 3, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-4.04. Purpose.
   The purpose of said Code Administration is to provide minimum standards to
safeguard life or limb, property, and public health, safety, and welfare, by
regulation and control of the design, construction, addition, alteration,
conversion, erection, installation, location, relocation, demolition, repair,
maintenance, occupancy, and use of all structures and buildings located within
the City and equipment regulated therein.
(§ 3, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-4.05. City.
   The name "City of Thousand Oaks" is hereby inserted in any and all blank
spaces provided in said California Building Standards Codes for the name of the
jurisdiction adopting said Codes, and wherever the word "city" or
"jurisdiction" appears in said Codes or is otherwise used, it shall mean and
refer to the City of Thousand Oaks.
(§ 3, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-4.06. Notice of Noncompliance.
   Whenever the Building Official determines that work was performed without
the required permit, in violation of the issued permit, or has not been
conducted in accordance with the requirements of this Code, the Building
Official may record a Notice of Noncompliance with the office of the County
Recorder and shall notify the property owner of such action. The Notice of
Noncompliance shall describe the property, shall set forth the noncomplying
conditions, and shall state that the property owner has been so notified.
   The Building Official shall submit a Notice of Compliance to the County
Recorder when it is determined that noncompliant conditions have been
corrected, abated, or removed.
   A fee in accordance with the Thousand Oaks Building Code Fee Schedule shall
be charged to the property owner to process such Notices.
(§ 3, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-4.07. Power of Citation.
   The Building Official and authorized representative deputies and designees,
as hereinafter provided shall have the power to issue citations pursuant to
Chapter 5 of Title 1 of this Municipal Code whenever they have reasonable cause
to believe that the person to be arrested has committed in their presence a
misdemeanor, misdemeanor/infraction, or infraction, consisting of a violation
of the provisions of this Code or any other ordinance or statute which the
Building Official has duty to enforce.
   The persons who are authorized to make arrests as herein provided shall
consist of the Building Official and authorized representative deputies and
designees, whose duties include administration, regulation, and enforcement
activities for the City of Thousand Oaks.
(§ 3, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-4.08. Delegates.
   Wherever the term “Building Official” appears in this Building Code, it
shall mean and refer to the Building Official of the City or his/her authorized
representative deputy or designee.
(§ 3, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-4.09. Permits.
   (a)   Required: Except as specified in this code, no building, structure or
building service equipment regulated by this code shall be erected,
constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, installed, improved, removed,
converted or demolished unless a separate, appropriate application has been
made and permit for each building, structure or building service equipment has
first been obtained from the building official. No grading shall occur without
the prior procurement of a grading permit or as authorized by the building
official.
   (b)   Work Exempt From Permit: A permit shall not be required for the types
of work in each of the separate classes of permit as listed below. Exemption
from the permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant
authorization for any work to be done in violation of the provisions of the
building standards codes, zoning code, or any other laws or ordinances of this
jurisdiction.
   Building Permits. A building permit shall not be required for the following:
   (1)   One-story detached accessory structures used as a children's playhouse
or tree house, equipment shed or utility building and similar uses provided
that all of the following conditions exist:
      (i)   The building is accessory to a dwelling unit.
      (ii)   The building does not exceed one-hundred twenty (120) square feet
maximum in area or twelve (12’) feet maximum in overall height from floor to
roof.
      (iii)   The building does not contain mechanical, electrical, or plumbing
installations that require permits.
      (iv)   The building is not located in a front, side, or other yard
wherein a setback is required by City zoning regulations.
      (v)   The building is separated more than six (6’) feet minimum from any
similar accessory structure and from the dwelling.
      (vi)   The structure is not regulated by Section 710A of the California
Building Code.
   (2)   Fences six (6’) feet maximum in height or masonry block walls (3’)
feet maximum in height when measured from top of soil on the lowest grade side
of the wall.
   (3)   Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet (1219 mm) in height measured
from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, not extending a yard on
a downslope and/or with a soils retention depth of:
      (i)   Thirty-six (36") inches maximum above grade without a surcharge or
      (ii)   Eighteen (18") inches maximum above grade with a surcharge or
supporting a slope.
   (4)   Repairs to roof coverings not exceeding a total of one-hundred (100)
square feet maximum or constituting the entire portion of a particular roof
type within any 12-month period.
   (5)   Detached decks which are twenty-nine (29”) inches maximum above grade.
   (6)   Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity is not greater
than 5,000 gallons (18,925 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width is
not greater than 2:1.
   (7)   Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above
adjacent grade, and not over any basement or story below and are not part of an
accessible route.
   (8)   Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and
similar finish work.
   (9)   Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and
scenery.
   (10)   Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy that
are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep, are not greater than 5,000 gallons
(18,925 L) and are installed entirely above ground.
   (11)   Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural
purposes, not including service systems.
   (12)   Swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached one- and
two-family dwellings.
   (13)   Window awnings in Group R-3 and U occupancies, supported by an
exterior wall that do not project more than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the
exterior wall and do not require additional support.
   (14)   Nonfixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and partitions
not over 5 feet 9 inches (1753 mm) in height.
   Electrical Permits. An electrical permit shall not be required for the
following:
   (15)   Portable motors or other portable appliances energized by means of
cord or cable having an attachment plug end to be connected to an approved
receptacle when that cord or cable is permitted by the California Electrical
Code.
   (16)   Repair or replacement components of fixed motors, transformers or
fixed approved appliances of the same type and rating in the same location.
   (17)   Temporary decorative lighting.
   (18)   Repair or replacement of current-carrying parts of any switch,
contactor or control device.
   (19)   Reinstallation of attachment plug receptacles, but not the outlets
thereof.
   (20)   Repair or replacement of any overcurrent device of the required
capacity in the same location.
   (21)   Repair or replacement of electrodes or transformers of the same size
and capacity for signs or gas tube systems.
   (22)   Removal of electrical wiring.
   (23)   Temporary, as defined in Section 108 of the California Building Code,
for wiring for experimental purposes in suitable experimental laboratories.
   (24)   The wiring for temporary, as defined in Section 108 of the California
Building Code, for theater, motion picture or television stage sets.
   (25)   Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus or equipment
operating at less than twenty-five (25) volts and not capable of supplying more
than fifty (50) watts of energy.
   (26)   Low-voltage electrical power, control and signal circuits of Classes
II and III as defined in the California Electrical Code.
   Plumbing Permits. A plumbing permit shall not be required for the following:
   (27)   Water lines to residential refrigerators for ice-making machines.
   (28)   Emergency Repairs. Where equipment replacements and repairs must be
performed in an emergency situation and a permit is required, the permit
application shall be submitted to the building official within the next working
business day.
(§ 3, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-4.010. Application for Permit.
   To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefor
in writing on a form furnished by the department of building safety for that
purpose. Such application shall:
   (1)   Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which
application is made.
   (2)   Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal
description, street address or similar description that will readily identify
and definitely locate the proposed building or work.
   (3)   Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended.
   (4)   Be accompanied by construction documents and other information as
required in Section 107 of the California Building Code.
   (5)   State the valuation of the proposed work.
   (6)   Be signed by the applicant, or the applicant's authorized agent.
   (7)   Give such other data and information as required by the building
official.
   (8)   Applications for plumbing, mechanical and electrical permits,
describing the work to be done, shall be made in writing to the Building
Official by a properly licensed contractor, his/her authorized representative,
or by a person properly qualified and licensed by the Contractor's State
License Board, under the provisions of the Business and Professions Code of the
State of California, except when and as otherwise hereinafter provided in this
section. Permits may be issued to specialty-licensed contractors or licensed
general building contractors when acting within the provisions of State
Contracting License Law.
   (9)   Any permit required by this Code may be issued to any person to do any
work regulated by this Code in a single family dwelling used exclusively for
living purposes, including the usual accessory buildings and quarters in
connection with such building, in the event that any such person is the bona
fide owner of any such dwelling and accessory buildings and quarters, and that
the same are occupied by said owner, provided that such owner shall personally
purchase all material and shall personally perform all labor in connection
therewith and demonstrate the knowledge and ability to perform said
construction work in conformance with the requirements of the California
Plumbing, Mechanical or Electrical Codes. If, in the opinion of the enforcing
authority, such knowledge and ability is insufficient, a person licensed to do
such work may be required.
(§ 3, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-4.11. Time Limitation of Application.
   Every permit application for which no permit is issued within 180 days after
the date of permit application shall expire by limitation and become invalid,
unless such permit application is pursued in good faith or permit is issued,
and construction documents and other data submitted for review may thereafter
be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the Building Official. The
applicant shall submit permit application and construction documents and pay
applicable permit application and plan review fees for such construction work
after expiration of the initial permit application. The Building Official may
extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not exceeding 180 days
on written request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the
control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. No application
shall be extended more than once. No application approved under a previous code
version shall be extended more than 180 days after a new code version is
effective. Once an application has expired hereunder, no further action shall
be taken. The applicant may submit new or the same plans and pay a new plan
review fee at any time after expiration of the original application.
Application will be subject to current code requirements.
(§ 3, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-4.12. Time Limitation of Permit.
   (a)   Permit Expiration. Every permit issued by the building official under
the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null and void
unless work authorized by such permit is commenced within one year (365
calendar days) from the issuance date of such permit. If work authorized by
such permit is commenced within three hundred sixty-five (365) calendar days
from the issuance date, such permit shall expire by limitation and become null
and void one hundred eighty (180) calendar days after the date of the last
successful inspection.
      (1)   Expiration of Permit for Unlawful Construction. Notwithstanding any
provision of Section A above, or any other provision of this chapter, if a
building permit was issued in order to bring an unpermitted structure or other
unlawful, substandard, or hazardous condition into compliance with any
applicable law, or ordinance, such permit shall expire by limitation and become
null and void ninety (90) calendar days after the date on which the permit was
issued. The building official may extend the validity of the permit for a
period not exceeding ninety (90) calendar days beyond the initial ninety (90)
day limit upon written request by the applicant filed with the building
official prior to the expiration date of the original permit.
   (b)   Permit Extension. A permit can be extended provided no changes have
been made in the original plans and specifications for such work. A permit can
receive an extension while it is valid or within thirty (30) days of
expiration. The building official may extend a permit for a period not
exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of expiration. The
permittee shall submit a written request showing that circumstances beyond the
control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken and a permit
extension fee shall be paid. Permits shall not be extended more than once.
   (c)   Expired Permits. Any permit expired for more than thirty (30) days
shall require a new permit and applicable fees as determined by the building
official for the remaining scope of work shall be paid.
(§ 3, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-4.13. Demolition Permits.
   No person, firm or corporation shall raze any building or structure, or
portion thereof, in the City, or cause the same to be done, without first
obtaining a separate Demolition Permit for each building or structure from the
Building Official.
   To obtain a demolition permit of an entire structure, the applicant shall
first file a written application for demolition permit, and associated
preliminary site inspection, and pay all fees as set by resolution of the City
Council. A construction and debris recycling plan and associated fee may also
be required by the Public Works Department. A building alteration permit shall
be obtained when a building will be partially demolished.
   The applicant shall cause all utility services, including gas, electric,
water and wastewater services, to be terminated and removed by the appropriate
utility agency. A written notification of termination of service by the utility
agencies shall be obtained by the applicant and submitted to the Building
Division prior to permit issuance.
   The applicant shall schedule an inspection of abandoned sewers, septic
tanks, cesspools, and water wells immediately upon excavation and exposure and
prior to fill in or cap off. Fill materials and/or cap devices shall be located
on site at the time of inspection. Sewers, septic tanks, and cesspools shall be
filled or capped in accordance with the current edition of the California
Plumbing Code as adopted by the City of Thousand Oaks. Water wells shall be
abandoned in accordance with the City of Thousand Oaks Public Works Department
specifications.
   The applicant shall restore the site within the former building area to be
consistent with adjacent grades and remove of all resulting building debris,
trash, junk, or any other material that constitutes a threat to life, health,
or property or is inimical to the public welfare.
   A final inspection of the site shall be scheduled by the permit holder or
authorized agent immediately after the demolition of the structure or building.
(§ 3, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-4.14. Noticed Code Violations.
   Where noticed code violations exist, the building official shall issue a
notice of denial of permit to the permit applicant or to the current owner (if
not the applicant). The notice of denial of permit shall include a description
of the noticed code violations. Failure of any person to receive a properly
addressed notice of denial of permit pursuant to this section shall not
invalidate the denial of a permit.
   The building official may issue a permit or a permit with conditions to an
owner, despite the existence of one or more noticed code violations, if it is
determined that one of the following circumstances exists:
   (a)   The noticed code violations require the permit being applied for in
order to abate the violations.
   (b)   Denial of a permit would result in an immediate threat to:
      (i)   The health or safety of occupants of the real property on which
noticed code violations exist; or
      (ii)   The occupants of adjoining private property; or
      (iii)   Persons on public property.
(§ 3, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-4.15. Fees.
   (a)   Schedule of Building Permit Fees. Fees shall be established by
resolution of the City Council and assessed in accordance with this section and
the Thousand Oaks User Fee Schedule.
   (b)   Strong Motion Instrumentation Program Fund. In addition to and
considered a part of the fees collected pursuant to the City Council resolution
establishing building permit fees, a fee shall be collected from all applicants
for building permits, as required by California Public Resources Code Section
2705, for the administration of the State of California Strong Motion
Instrumentation Program. The amount of this fee will be specified in the
Thousand Oaks User Fees. All funds raised by such additional fee shall be
placed in a trust fund which shall be known as the Strong Motion
Instrumentation Program Fund and shall be remitted quarterly to the State of
California pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 8 of Division 2 of the Public
Resources Code and the rules and regulations of the Division of Mines and
Geology of the Department of Conservation.
   (c)   Other Fees. Fees as established by resolution of the City Council and
in accordance with the Thousand Oaks User Fee Schedule shall be required and
paid for Building Department services, including, but not limited to, plan
examination and construction inspection beyond normal business hours.
   Permits for which no fees are required may be issued upon prior approval by
the Building Official for qualified projects of City departments or other
governmental agencies and for minor projects not inimical to public health,
safety or welfare.
   In specific circumstances when consultant professional services may be used
by the Building and Safety Division, those costs may be directly charged to the
applicant as fees.
   (d)   Reinspection Fees. A reinspection fee shall be established by
resolution of the City Council to be assessed by the Building Official. In
instances where reinspection fees have been assessed, no additional inspection
of the work will be performed until the required reinspection fees have been
paid.
   (e)   Refunds. The Building Official may authorize fee refunds upon written
application by the original permittee, within the limitations set forth herein:
   (1)   Any fee totaling Thirty-five and no/100ths ($35.00) Dollars or less,
exclusive of issuance fee, if any, shall be nonrefundable except as specified
in subsection (2) below.
   (2)   One hundred (100%) percent of any fee erroneously paid or collected
shall be refundable.
   (3)   Ninety (90%) percent of any plan review fee shall be refundable when
the permit application is withdrawn or cancelled prior to commencement of plan
review. Plan review fees will be nonrefundable once the plan review has
commenced.
   (4)   Eighty (80%) percent of any permit fee shall be refundable when the
construction work authorized by such permit has not commenced.
   (5)   Ninety (90%) percent of any Board of Appeals filing fee shall be
refundable when such hearing is cancelled prior to the issuance of a Notice of
Hearing pertaining to the case.
   (6)   Permits not issued to, or authorized by, the property owner shall be
nonrefundable.
   (7)   Third-party fees collected by the City on behalf of other agencies or
the State, said related fees are nonrefundable once fees have been surrendered
to the third-party agencies.
   Failure of the permit holder to submit written application for a refund
within 180 days of expiration of a plan review, permit, hearing, or request for
service for which a fee has been paid, shall constitute a waiver of entitlement
to a refund. No partial refund shall be authorized, nor credit be applied
against other fees which may be payable to the City of Thousand Oaks, when a
construction project is cancelled or abandoned subsequent to partial completion
of the building or work authorized by a permit.
(§ 3, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-4.16. Reinspection.
   A reinspection fee may be assessed by the Building Official or designee to
control the practice of calling for inspections before the job is ready for
such inspection or reinspection. In instances where reinspection fees have been
assessed, no additional inspection of the work will be performed until the
required fees have been paid.
(§ 3, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-4.17. Certificate of Occupancy.
   Change of Occupancy. A building or structure shall not be used or occupied
in whole or in part, and a change of occupancy of a building or structure or
portion thereof shall not be made, until the building official has issued a
certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate
of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the
provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction.
Certificates presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of
this code or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid.
   Exception: Certificates of occupancy are not required for work exempt from
permits in accordance with Sec.
8-4.08.
   Exception: Detached single-story structures classified as U occupancies
accessory to R-3 residential occupancies.
(§ 3, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-4.18. Unsafe Conditions.
   Structures or existing equipment that are or hereafter become unsafe,
insanitary or deficient because of inadequate means of egress facilities,
inadequate light and ventilation, or that constitute a fire hazard, or are
otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, or that involve
illegal or improper occupancy or inadequate maintenance, or that are identified
as unsafe by the International Property Maintenance Code, shall be deemed an
unsafe condition. Unsafe structures shall be taken down and removed or made
safe, as the building official deems necessary and as provided for in this
section. A vacant structure that is not secured against unauthorized entry
shall be deemed unsafe.
(§ 3, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
CHAPTER 5. INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Sec. 8-5.01. Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code.
   That certain Code designated as the 2021 Edition of the International
Property Maintenance Code, including Appendix A, published by the International
Code Council, at least one copy of which is on file in the office of the
Building Official for public record and inspection, is hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this chapter as though set forth in this chapter
in full, subject however, to amendments, additions and deletions. Said Code
shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code 2021 Edition for the City.
(§ 4, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-5.02. Deletions.
   The following sections are deleted from the International Property
Maintenance Code:
   Section 102.8, 107, 302, 303, 308, 309.3, 309.4, 309.5. Refer to Section
102.3 for referenced codes.
(§ 4, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-5.03. Applicability of Other Codes.
   Section 101.2 of the 2021 International Property Maintenance Code is amended
to read as follows:
   101.2 Scope.
   The provisions of this code and Title 8, Chapter 4, the City of Thousand
Oaks Code Administration shall apply to all existing residential and
nonresidential structures and all existing premises and constitute minimum
requirements and standards for premises, structures, equipment and facilities
for light, ventilation, space, heating sanitation, protection from the
elements, a reasonable level of sanitary maintenance the responsibility of
owner, an owner’s authorized agent, operator and occupants; the occupancy of
existing structures and premises, and for administration, enforcement and
penalties.
   Section 102.3 of the 2021 International Property Maintenance Code is amended
to read as follows:
   102.3 Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a
structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the
procedures and provisions of the California Building Code, California
Residential Code, California Fire Code, California Existing Building Code,
California Energy Code, California Plumbing Code, California Electrical Code,
California Mechanical, California Green Building Code and any adopted local
amendments.
   When the International Codes are referenced with this code in the City of
Thousand Oaks shall mean the current California Codes and all local amendments.
When standards are referenced within this Code in the City of Thousand Oaks,
the reference shall mean the most current California Referenced Standards.
(§ 4, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-5.04. Amendments.
   Section 304.14 is amended to read as follows:
   304.14 Insect screens. Every door, window and other outside opening required
for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas
or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human
consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied
with approved tightly fitting screens of 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm)
minimum, and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-
closing device in good working condition.
   Section 309.2 of the 2021 International Property Maintenance Code is amended
to read in full as follows:
   309.2 Owner. The owner of any structure shall be responsible for pest
elimination within the structure.
(§ 4, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-5.05. Amendments: Heating Facilities.
   Section 602.3 is amended to delete exceptions and read as follows:
   602.3 Heating supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents,
leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either
expressed or implied, shall supply heat to maintain a minimum temperature of 68
(F) degrees (20C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.
(§ 4, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
CHAPTER 6. MECHANICAL CODE*
*   Sections 8-6.01 through 8-6.08, codified by § 3 Ordinance No. 1494-NS,
effective December 27, 2007 were repealed by Ordinance No. 1546-NS, effective
January 1, 2011. Sections 8-6.01 through 8-6.04, codified by § 3 Ordinance No.
1546-NS, effective January 1, 2011 were repealed by Ordinance No. 1591-NS,
effective January 1, 2014. Sections 8-6.01 through 8-6.04, codified by § 3
Ordinance No. 1591-NS, effective January 1, 2014 were repealed by Ordinance No.
1624-NS, effective January 1, 2017. Sections 8-6.01 through 8-6.04, codified by
§ 3 Ordinance 1624-NS, effective January 1, 2017 were repealed by Ordinance No.
1669-NS, effective January 10, 2020. Sections 8-6.01 through 8-6.04, codified
by § 4 Ordinance No. 1669-NS, effective January 1, 2020 were repealed by
Ordinance No. 1707-NS, effective January 1, 2023.
Sec. 8-6.01. Adoption of California Mechanical Code.
   That certain Code designated as the “California Mechanical Code”, 2022
Edition, including its Standards and Appendices, based upon the Uniform
Mechanical Code, 2022 Edition, published by the International Association of
Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, at least one copy of which is on file in the
office of the Building Official for public record and inspection, is hereby
adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter as though set forth in
this chapter in full, subject, however, to the amendments, additions and
deletions set forth in this chapter. Said Code shall be known as the Mechanical
Code of the City.
(§ 5, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-6.02. Amendments: California Mechanical Code.
   The City Council, after due consideration, finds and determines that, due to
the need to establish administrative procedures to enforce the California
Mechanical Code, as well as due to local climatic, geological, or topographical
conditions, including unusual soil conditions prevailing within the City, the
public health and welfare would best be served by adding to and amending the
California Mechanical Code.
(§ 5, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-6.03. Jurisdiction.
   The name “City of Thousand Oaks” is hereby inserted in any and all blank
spaces provided in said California Mechanical Code, 2022 Edition, for the name
of the jurisdiction adopting said Code, and wherever the word “city” or
“jurisdiction” appears in said Code or is otherwise used, it shall mean and
refer to the City of Thousand Oaks.
(§ 5, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-6.04. Amendments: Chapter 1, Division II, Administration.
   Section 101.2 “Scope” is amended to read as follows:
   101.2 Scope.
   The provisions of this code and Title 8, Chapter 4, the City of Thousand
Oaks Code Administration shall apply to the erection, installation, alteration,
repair, relocation, replacement, addition to, use, or maintenance of mechanical
systems within this jurisdiction.
   Sections 103,104, 106, 107 and Table 104.5 are hereby deleted.
(§ 5, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
CHAPTER 7. CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE*
* Chapter 7, as established by § 4 of Ord. 1546-NS eff. January 1, 2011, was
repealed and replaced by Ord. 1591-NS eff. January 1, 2014. Sections 8-7.01
through 8-7.08, codified by § 4 Ordinance No. 1591-NS, effective January 1,
2014 were repealed by Ordinance No. 1624-NS, effective January 1, 2017.
Sections 8-7.01 through 8-7.08, codified by § 4 Ordinance No. 1624-NS,
effective January 1, 2017 were repealed by Ordinance No. 1669-NS, effective
January 10, 2020. Sections 8-7.01 through 8-7.08, codified by § 5 Ordinance
1669-NS, effective January 10, 2020 were repealed by Ordinance No. 1707-NS,
effective January 1, 2023.
Sec. 8-7.01. Adoption of the California Residential Code.
   That certain Code designated as the “California Residential Code”, 2022
Edition, based upon the International Residential Code, 2021 Edition, as
amended herein is adopted.
(§ 6, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-7.02. Amendments: California Residential Code.
   The City Council, after due consideration, finds and determines that due to
the geographical location of the City and the unusual soil, geological and
topographical conditions prevailing within the City, the public health and
welfare would best be served by adopting and amending the 2022 California
Residential Code including Appendix AH, AJ, AQ, AT, AX, and AZ and therefore
said California Residential Code is hereby amended as follows:
   Section R101.2 “Scope” is amended to read as follows:
   101.2 Scope.
   The provisions of this code and Title 8, Chapter 4, the City of Thousand
Oaks Code Administration shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement,
enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location,
removal and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses
not more than three stories above grade plane in height with a separate means
of egress and their accessory structures not more than three stories above
grade plane in height.
   Exception: The following shall be permitted to be constructed in accordance
with this code where provided with an automatic sprinkler system complying with
Section R313:
   1.   Live/work units located in townhouses and complying with the
requirements of Section 508.5 of the California Building Code.
   2.   Owner-occupied lodging houses with five or fewer guestrooms.
   3.   A care facility with five or fewer persons receiving custodial care
within a dwelling unit.
   4.   A care facility with five or fewer persons receiving medical care
within a dwelling unit.
   5.   A care facility for five or fewer persons receiving care that are
within a single-family dwelling.
   Sections R104, R105, R106, R107, R108, R109, R110, R111, R112, R113, and
R114 of Chapter 1, Division II are hereby deleted.
(§ 6, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-7.03. Reserved.
Sec. 8-7.04. Amendments: Foundations.
   The last sentence of Section R401.1 of Chapter 4 is amended to read as
follows:
   Wood foundations in Seismic Design Category D0, D1, D2 or E shall not be
permitted.
   Section R401.1 “Application” is amended by adding the following paragraph:
   Grading related work shall comply with the requirements of this code and the
requirements of Thousand Oaks Municipal Code Title 7, Chapter 3 and Section 8-
1.24 of the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code for grading regulations, administered
by the Department of Public Works, for requirements governing excavation,
grading and earthwork construction including fills and embankments.
   Section R401.3 “Drainage” is amended by adding the following:
   Lots shall be graded to drain to the street or to a disposal area approved
by the Building Official and/or City Engineer.
2022 S-66   495
Sec. 8-7.04   Thousand Oaks Municipal Code
   The first sentence of Sec. R403.1 “General” is amended to read as follows:
   All exterior walls and load bearing interior walls shall be supported on
continuous concrete footings, or other approved structural systems which shall
be of sufficient design to accommodate all loads according to Section R301 and
to transmit the resulting loads to the soil within the limitations as
determined from the character of the soil.
   Section R403.1.1 “Minimum size” is amended to read as follows:
   All foundation and/or slab designs shall be predicated upon a soil analysis.
Said design shall not be less than those minimum requirements set forth in
Municipal Code Section 8-1.17, Table 1809.7(1) for each soil expansion range.
   Post-tensioned slab design, when recommended by the soils engineer, may be
used in lieu of the requirements when approved by the Building Official.
   In areas where the soil is found to be in an expansive range index over
twenty (20), the soil under the footings and slabs shall be pre-saturated in
accordance with Table 1809.7(1). Municipal Code Section 8-1.17 for additional
requirements.
   Section R403.1.5 “Slope” is amended by adding the following:
   For structures located in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1, D2 or E, stepped
footings shall be reinforced with four one-half (1/2”) inch diameter deformed
reinforcing bars. Two (2) bars shall be placed at the top and bottom of the
footings as shown in Figure R403.1.5.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5db25de1c73418e6f4353e3c90932c315a871cae/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6404.gif]
 
Figure R403.1.5
   Section R403.1.6 “Foundation Anchorage” is amended to replace 1/2-inch
diameter anchor bolts with 5/8-inch diameter anchor bolts.
   Section R403.1.7 “Footings on or adjacent to slopes” is amended to read as
follows:
   Footings shall comply with the requirements of this code and the
requirements of Thousand Oaks Municipal Code Section 8-1.17 section 1808.7 for
foundations on or adjacent to slopes.
   Sections R403.1.7.1, R403.1.7.2 and R403.1.7.4 are hereby deleted.
   Section R403.1.8 “Foundations on Expansive Soils” is amended to read as
follows:
   R403.1.8 Foundations on Expansive Soils. Foundation and floor slabs for
buildings located on expansive soils shall be designed in accordance with
Section 1808.6 of the California Building Code and Municipal Code Section 8-
11.17.
   Exception: Slab-on-ground and other foundation systems that have performed
adequately in soil conditions similar to those encountered at the building site
are permitted subject to the approval of the building official.
   R403.1.8.1 Expansive Soils Classifications. Soils meeting all of the
following provisions shall be considered to be expansive, except that tests to
show compliance with Items 1, 2 and 3 shall not be required if the test
prescribed in Item 4 is conducted:
   1.   Plasticity Index (PI) of 15 or greater, determined in accordance with
ASTM D4318.
   2.   More than 10 percent of the soil particles pass a No. 200 sieve (75
µm), determined in accordance with ASTM D422.
   3.   More than 10 percent of the soil particles are less than 5 micrometers
in size, determined in accordance with ASTM D422.
   4.   Expansion Index greater than 20, determined in accordance with ASTM
D4829.
   Section R404.2 “Wood foundation walls” is amended by adding the following
sentence:
   Wood foundation walls shall not be used for structures located in Seismic
Design Category D0, D1, D2, and E.
(§ 6, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-7.05. Amendments: Concrete Floors (On Ground).
   Section R506.1 “General” is amended by adding the following:
   In lieu of a more detailed design per Section 1808.6 of the 2022 California
Building Code, the following minimum requirements for concrete slab on ground
shall apply:
   Slab floors shall be reinforced as set forth in Municipal Code Section 81.17
Table 1809.7 (1).
   All slabs founded on soils found to be in an expansive index of over fifty
(50) shall be doweled into foundation walls with No. 3 minimum reinforcing
steel bars bent twelve (12") inches minimum into the wall and thirty-six (36")
inches minimum into the slab at twenty-four (24") inches maximum on center.
Interior walls with continuous footings/foundations shall have similar floor
ties.
   Exception:
   An alternate design, such as a floating slab eliminating the requirement for
doweling, may be submitted to the Building Official for approval.
   Section R506.2.1 “Fill” is amended by adding the following:
   Grading related work shall comply with the requirements of this code and the
requirements of Thousand Oaks Municipal Code Title 7, Chapter 3 and Section 8-
1.24 for grading regulations, administered by the Department of Public Works,
for requirements governing excavation, grading and earthwork construction
including fills and embankments.
(§ 6, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-7.06. Amendments: Roof Assemblies.
   Part III, Chapter 9, Section R901.1 “Scope” is amended by adding the
following paragraph:
   The roofing requirements of Chapter 15 of the 2022 California Building Code,
as modified by Municipal Code Sections 8-1.14 and 8-1.15 shall also govern the
design materials, construction and quality of roof assemblies.
   Section R902.1.2 “Roof coverings in all other areas” is amended to read as
follows:
   R902.1.2 Roof Coverings in all other areas. The entire roof covering of
every existing structure where more than fifty (50%) percent of the total roof
area is replaced within any one-year period, the entire roof covering of every
new structure, and any roof covering applied in the alteration, repair or
replacement of the roof of every existing structure shall be a fire-retardant
roof covering that is at least Class A.
   Section R902.2 “Fire retardant-treated shingles and shakes” is amended as
follows:
   R902.2 Fire-Retardant-Treated Shingles and Shakes. Fire-retardant-treated
wood shakes and shingles are wood shakes and shingles complying with UBC
Standard 15-3 or 15-4 which are impregnated by the full-cell vacuum-pressure
process with fire-retardant chemicals, and which have been qualified by UBC
Standard 15-2 for use on Class A roofs. Fire-retardant-treated wood shakes and
shingles shall comply with ICC-ES EG107 and with the weathering requirements
contained in Health and Safety Code Section 13132.7(j). Each bundle shall bear
labels from an ICBO accredited quality control agency identifying their roof-
covering classification and indicating their compliance with ICC-ES EG107 and
with the weathering requirements contained in Health and Safety Code Section
13132.7(j).
   Health and Safety Code Section 13132.7(j) No wood roof covering materials
shall be sold or applied in this state unless both of the following conditions
are met:
   1.   The materials have been approved and listed by the State Fire Marshal
as complying with the requirements of this section.
   2.   The materials have passed at least five years of the 10-year natural
weathering test. The 10-year natural weathering test required by this
subdivision shall be conducted in accordance with Standard 15-2 of the 1994
edition of the Uniform Building Code at a testing facility recognized by the
State Fire Marshal.
   Section R902.3 “Building-Integrated Photovoltaic Product” is amended to read
as follows:
   R902.3 Building-Integrated photovoltaic product. Building-integrated
photovoltaic (BIPV) products installed as the roof covering shall be tested,
listed and labeled for fire classification in accordance with UL 7103 [SFM]
Section R902.1 through R902.1.3. Class A products shall be installed where the
edge of the roof is less than 3 feet (914 mm) from a lot line.
   Section R902.4 “Rooftop-Mounted Photovoltaic (PV) panel systems” is amended
to read as follows:
   R902.4 Rooftop-mounted photovoltaic (PV) Panel Systems. Rooftop-mounted
photovoltaic (PV) panel systems installed on or above the roof covering shall
be tested, listed and identified with a fire classification in accordance with
UL 2703. Listed systems shall be installed in accordance with the
manufacturer's installation instructions and their listing. Class A
photovoltaic panel systems and modules shall be installed in jurisdictions
designated by law as requiring their use or where the edge of the roof is less
than 3 feet (914 mm) from a lot line.
(§ 6, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-7.07. Amendments: Masonry Fireplaces.
   Chapter 10, Section R1001.3.1 “Vertical Reinforcing” is amended to read as
follows:
   Vertical Reinforcing. For chimneys up to forty (40”) inches maximum wide,
four No. 4 minimum continuous vertical bars shall be placed between wythes of
solid masonry or within the cells of hollow unit masonry, extended to the
bottom one-third of the footing and turned a twenty-four (24”) inches minimum
horizontal, and grouted in accordance with Section R606. Grout shall be
prevented from bonding with the flue liner so that the flue liner is free to
move with thermal expansion. For chimneys more than forty (40”) inches minimum
wide, two additional No. 4 vertical bars shall be provided for each additional
flue incorporated into the chimney or for each additional forty (40”) inches in
width or fraction thereof.
(§ 6, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-7.08. Amendments: Patio Covers.
   Appendix AH, Section AH15.1 “Design Loads” is amended to read as follows:
   Section AH105.1 Design loads. Patio covers shall be designed and constructed
to sustain, within the stress limits of this code, all dead loads plus a
vertical live load of 20 pounds per square foot minimum except roof dead loads
3 pounds or less per square foot may be designed at 10 pounds per square foot
minimum live load. Such covers shall be designed to resist to minimum wind load
set forth in Section R301.2.1.
(§ 6, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-7.09. Amendments: Appendix AZ - Emergency Housing.
   Section AZ103.3 “Occupant Load” is amended to read as follows:
   AZ103.3 Occupant Load.
   Except as otherwise stated in this appendix, the maximum occupant load
allowed in buildings and structures used as emergency housing shall be
determined by the enforcing agency, but the interior floor area shall not be
less than 64 square feet (5.9 m2) for one occupant. Where more than one person
occupies the building/structure, the required floor area shall be increased at
the rate of 50 square feet (4.65 m2) for each occupant in excess of one.
   Exceptions:
   1.   Tents.
   2.   Recreational vehicles and park trailers designed for human habitation
that meet the requirements in the Health and Safety Code, Sections 18009.3 and
18010, as applicable.
   3.   For emergency housing, including emergency sleeping cabins, the minimum
interior floor area may be reduced to 53 square feet (4.9 m2) if the enforcing
agency determines that 53 square feet (4.9 m2) is adequate space for a single-
occupancy sleeping unit.
   Section AZ104.1 “General” is amended to read as follows:
   AZ104.1 General.
   Emergency sleeping cabins shall have an interior floor area of not less than
64 square feet (5.9 m2) for one occupant. Where more than one person occupies
the cabin, the required floor area shall be increased at the rate of 50 square
feet (4.65 m2) for each occupant in excess of one. The interior floor area
shall not exceed 400 square feet (37 m2), excluding lofts.
(§ 6, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
CHAPTER 8. PLUMBING CODE*
*   Sections 8-8.01 through 8-8.08, codified by § 4 Ordinance No. 1494-NS,
effective December 27, 2007 were repealed by Ordinance No. 1546-NS, effective
January 1, 2011. Sections 8-8.01 through 8-8.03, codified by § 5 Ordinance No.
1546-NS, effective January 1, 2011 were repealed by Ordinance No. 1591-NS,
effective January 1, 2014. Sections 8-8.01 through 8-8.03, codified by § 5
Ordinance No. 1591-NS, effective January 1, 2014 were repealed by Ordinance No.
1624-NS, effective January 1, 2017. Sections 8- 8.01 through 8-8.03, codified
by § 5, Ord. 1624- NS, effective January 1, 2017 were repealed by Ordinance No.
1669-NS, effective January 10, 2020. Sections 8-8.01 through 8-8.03, codified
by § 6 Ordinance No. 1669-NS, effective January 10, 2020 were repealed by
Ordinance No. 1707-NS, effective January 1, 2023.
Sec. 8-8.01. Adoption of the California Plumbing Code.
   That certain Code designated as the “California Plumbing Code,” 2022
Edition, as adopted by the State of California, based upon the Uniform Plumbing
Code, 2021 Edition, including all Appendices, and published by the
International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, at least one
copy of which is on file in the office of the Building Official for public
record and inspection, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
chapter as though set forth in this chapter in full, subject, however, to the
amendments, additions and deletions set forth in this chapter. Said Code shall
be known as the Plumbing Code of the City.
(§ 7, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-8.02. Amendments: California Plumbing Code.
   The City Council, after due consideration, finds and determines that, due to
the need to establish administrative procedures to enforce the California
Plumbing Code, as well as due to local climatic, geological, or topographical
conditions, including unusual soil conditions prevailing within the City, the
public health and welfare would best be served by adding to and amending the
California Plumbing Code, and, therefore, said California Plumbing Code, 2022
Edition, is hereby amended as follows:
   Section 101.2 “Scope” is amended to read as follows:
   101.2 Scope.
   The provisions of this code and Title 8, Chapter 4, the City of Thousand
Oaks Code Administration shall apply to the erection, installation, alteration,
repair, relocation, replacement, addition to, use, or maintenance of plumbing
systems within this jurisdiction.
   Section103.1 “General” is amended to read as follows:
   103.1 General.
   The Authority Having Jurisdiction shall be the Authority duly appointed to
enforce this code. For such purposes, the Authority Having Jurisdiction shall
have the powers of a law enforcement officer. The Authority Having Jurisdiction
shall have the power to render interpretations of this code and to adopt and
enforce rules and regulations supplemental to this code as deemed necessary in
order to clarify the application of the provisions of this code. Such
interpretations, rules, and regulations shall comply with the intent and
purpose of this code.
   In accordance with the prescribed procedures and with the approval of the
appointing authority, the Authority Having Jurisdiction shall be permitted to
appoint a such number of technical officers, inspectors, and other employees as
shall be authorized from time to time. The Authority Having Jurisdiction shall
be permitted to deputize such inspectors or employees as necessary to carry out
the functions of the code enforcement agency.
   The Authority Having Jurisdiction shall be permitted to request the
assistance and cooperation of other officials of this jurisdiction so far as
required in the discharge of the duties in accordance with this code or other
pertinent law or ordinance.
   Wherever the term “Authority Having Jurisdiction” is used in this Code, it
shall be construed to mean the Building Official/Building Division Manager or
his/her authorized representative deputy or designee.
   Sections 104.0 and 106.0 and 107.0 of Chapter I, Division II are hereby
deleted.
(§ 7, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-8.03. Amendments: Chapter 1, Division II, Section 103.5: Fees.
   Section 104.5 of said California Plumbing Code is amended and Table 104.5 is
deleted, and is to read as follows:
   104.5 Fees.
   Fees shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of this section and
as set forth by the User Fees adopted by this jurisdiction.
(§ 7, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-8.04. Amendments: Appendix Chapter D, Table D101.1: Maximum Rates Of
Rainfall For Various Cities.
   Table D101.1 of said California Plumbing Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
   D101.1 Maximum Rates Of Rainfall For Various Cities.
   The rainfall rates in table D101.1 shall be used for design unless higher
values are established locally.
   TABLE D-101.1 MAXIMUM RATES OF RAINFALL FOR VARIOUS CITIES
Table D-101.1
MAXIMUM RATES OF RAINFALL FOR
VARIOUS CITIES
                  Storm Drainage
States and Cities 60-Minute Duration, 100-Year Return
                  Inches Per Hour Gallon Per Minute Per Square Foot
Table D-101.1
MAXIMUM RATES OF RAINFALL FOR
VARIOUS CITIES
                  Storm Drainage
States and Cities 60-Minute Duration, 100-Year Return
                  Inches Per Hour Gallon Per Minute Per Square Foot
CALIFORNIA                        
Eureka            1.5             0.016
Lake Tahoe        1.3             0.014
Los Angeles       2.0             0.021
Lucerne Valley    2.5             0.026
Needles           1.5             0.016
Palmdale          3.0             0.031
Redding           1.5             0.016
San Diego         1.5             0.016
San Francisco     1.5             0.016
San Luis Obispo   1.5             0.016
Thousand Oaks     Minimum 3.01    Minimum 0.0311
 
Footnote 1. Value is subject to the project site and is to be determined by
ASCE hazard tool. No project shall be designed less than 3-inches per hour or
0.031 gallons per minute per square foot.
(§ 7, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
CHAPTER 9. SIGNS
Article 1. Freeway Signs
Sec. 8-9.101. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this article are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Advertising display” shall mean advertising structures and signs.
   (b)   “Advertising structure” shall mean a structure of any kind or
character erected or maintained for outdoor advertising purposes on which any
poster, bill, printing, painting, or other advertisement of any kind whatsoever
may be placed, including statuary.
   “Advertising structure” shall not include:
   (1)   Official notices issued by a court or public body or officer;
   (2)   Notices posted by any public officer in the performance of a public
duty or by any person in giving legal notice; and
   (3)   Directional, warning, or information signs or structures required or
authorized by law or by Federal, State, or municipal authority.
   (c)   “Freeway” shall mean a highway in respect to which the owners of
abutting lands have no right or easement of access to or from their abutting
lands or in respect to which such owners have only limited or restricted right
or easement of access and which is declared to be such in compliance with the
Streets and Highways Code of the State.
   (d)   “Landscaped freeway” shall mean a section of a freeway which is now
improved by the planting, at least on one side of the freeway right-of-way, of
lawns, trees, shrubs, flowers, or other ornamental vegetation which shall
require reasonable maintenance, or a section of freeway which has been
designated by the State as a landscaped freeway.
   Planting for the purpose of soil erosion control, traffic safety
requirements, reduction of fire hazards, or traffic noise abatement shall not
change the character of a freeway to a landscaped freeway.
   (e)   “Sign” shall mean any card, cloth, metal, painted, or wooden sign of
any character placed for outdoor advertising purposes on or to the ground or
any tree, wall, bush, rock, fence, building, structure, or thing, either
publicly or privately owned, other than an advertising structure.
   “Sign” shall not include:
   (1)   Official notices issued by a court or public body or officer;
   (2)   Notices posted by any public officer in the performance of a public
duty or by any person in giving legal notice; and
   (3)   Directional, warning, or information signs or structures required or
authorized by law or by Federal, State or municipal authority.
   (f)   The verb “to place” and any of its variants, as applied to advertising
displays, shall include the maintaining and erecting, constructing, posting,
painting, printing, tacking, nailing, gluing, stitching, carving, or otherwise
fastening, affixing, or making visible any advertising display on or to the
ground or any tree, bush, rock, fence, post, wall, building, structure or
thing.
(§ 1, Ord. 19, as amended by Ord. 185)
Sec. 8-9.102. Advertising displays adjacent to freeways.
   No advertising display shall be placed or maintained on property adjacent to
or within 660 feet of the right-of-way of any freeway if the advertising
display copy is visible from, or is designed to be viewed primarily by persons
traveling on, such freeway except as follows:
   A subdivision billboard which advertises a development lying within the City
and which has no other billboard advertising on the same freeway facing traffic
in the same direction within the City may be erected and maintained in the C-1,
C-2, M-1, and M-2 zones; provided, however, such subdivision billboard shall
meet all the applicable zoning requirements of the zone in which located
without the necessity of a variance or special use permit. An agreement shall
be signed and a bond posted to guarantee the removal of any such billboard
within thirty (30) days after the awarding of a contract to landscape any
section of the freeway within five hundred (500) lineal feet along the freeway
of such billboard.
   For purposes of this section, “subdivision” shall have the meaning set forth
in the Subdivision Map Act in the State Government Code.
(§ 2, Ord. 19, as amended by Ord. 186, and § 21, Ord. 1250-NS, eff. January 9,
1996)
Statutory reference:
   Subdivision defined, see California
   Government Code Sections 66410 et seq.
Sec. 8-9.103. Advertising displays adjacent to freeways: Exceptions.
   The provisions of Section 8-9.102 of this article shall not apply to any
advertising structures or signs used exclusively as follows:
   (a)   To advertise the sale or lease of the property on which the
advertising display is placed;
   (b)   To designate the name of the owner or occupant of the premises upon
which the advertising display is placed or to identify such premises; and
   (c)   To advertise the business conducted, goods manufactured or produced,
or services rendered upon the property upon which the advertising display is
placed.
(§ 3, Ord. 19)
Sec. 8-9.104. Removal of prohibited displays.
   Any advertising structure or sign which is in violation of the provisions of
Section 8-9.102 of this article shall be removed on or before May 6, 1965, or
within three (3) years from the date when the project for the landscaping of a
section of freeway shall have been completed or accepted and the character of
such section shall have been changed from a freeway to a landscaped freeway,
whichever is later.
(§ 4, Ord. 19)
Article 2. Sign Code*
*   Sections 8-9.201 through 8-9.203, codified from Section 3100, T.O.O.C., as
amended by Ordinance No. 234, repealed by Section 1, Ordinance No. 230-NS,
effective October 21, 1971. Sections 8-9.201 through 8-9.203, as added by said
Ordinance No. 230-NS, repealed by Section 1, Ordinance No. 520-NS, effective
May 15, 1975. Sections 8-9.201 through 8-9.204, as added by said Ordinance No.
520-NS, repealed by Section 1, Ordinance No. 706-NS, effective April 26, 1979.
Sections 8-9.201 through 8-9.204, as added by Ordinance No. 706-NS, as amended
by Section XXXVII, Ordinance No. 770-NS, repealed by Section 1, Ordinance No.
862-NS, effective July 24, 1984. Sections 8-9.201 through 8-9.204 as added by
Section 6, Ordinance No. 862-NS, effective July 24, 1984, repealed by Section
1, Ordinance No. 965-NS, eff. June 9, 1987. Sections 8-9.201 through 8-9.206,
as added by Section 6, Ordinance No. 965-NS, effective June 9, 1987, repealed
by Section 1, Ordinance No. 1058, effective January 9, 1990. Sections 8-9.201
through 8-9.206, as added by Section 6, Ordinance No. 1058-NS, effective
January 9, 1990, repealed by Section 1, Ordinance No. 1157-NS, effective July
28, 1992. Sections 8-9.201 through 8-9.206, as added by Section 6, Ordinance
No. 1157-NS, effective July 28, 1992, repealed by Section 1, Ordinance No.
1251-NS, effective January 23, 1996. Sections 8-9.201 through 8-9.206 as added
by Section 6, Ordinance No. 1251-NS, effective January 23, 1996, repealed by
Section 1, Ordinance No. 1336-NS, effective July 8, 1999.
Sec. 8-9.201. Adoption of Uniform Sign Code.
   That certain Code designated as the “Uniform Sign Code,” 1997 Edition,
published by the International Conference of Building Officials, at least one
copy of which is on file in the office of the City Clerk for public record and
inspection, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article as
though set forth in this article in full, subject, however, to the amendments,
additions and deletions set forth in this Article, and said Code shall be known
as the Sign Code for the City.
(§ 6, Ord. 1336-NS, eff. July 8, 1999)
Sec. 8-9.202. Purpose.
   The purpose of said Sign Code is to provide minimum standards to safeguard
life, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the
design, quality of materials, construction, location, electrification and
maintenance of all signs and sign structures not located within a building.
(§ 6, Ord. 1336-NS, eff. July 8, 1999)
Sec. 8-9.203. Amendments: Section 301: Permits.
   Section 301 of the Sign Code is amended to read as follows:
      301 Permits Required. A sign shall not hereafter be erected, re-erected,
constructed, altered or maintained, except as provided by this code and after a
permit for the same has been issued by the building official. A separate permit
shall be required for a sign or signs for each business entity, and a separate
permit shall be required for each group of signs on a single supporting
structure. In addition, electrical permits shall be obtained for electric
signs.
      For the purposes of this chapter, wherever the term “sign permit” is
used, it shall mean “building permit” for sign construction, alteration or
maintenance.
(§ 6, Ord. 1336-NS, eff. July 8, 1999)
Sec. 8-9.204. Amendments: Section 304: Fees.
   Section 304 of the Sign Code is amended to read as follows:
      304 Fees. A sign permit fee and a plan review fee shall be paid in
accordance with the fee schedule as established by resolution of City Council
for building permit fees.
(§ 6, Ord. 1336-NS, eff. July 8, 1999)
Sec. 8-9.205. Amendments: Section 401: Design.
   The Council, after due consideration, finds and determines that, due to
local conditions, including unusual soil, wind and geological conditions
prevailing within the City, the public health and welfare would best be served
by requiring that subsection 401.2 be hereby amended to read as follows:
      401 Design.
      401.2 Wind Loads. Signs and sign structures shall be designed and
constructed to resist wind forces as specified in Chapter 23 of the California
Building Code.
   EXCEPTION: The wind pressure to be used in the design and construction of
signs regulated under the Uniform Sign Code shall be not less than twenty (20)
pounds per square foot.
(§ 6, Ord. 1336-NS, eff. July 8, 1999)
Sec. 8-9.206. Violations.
   Any person, firm, company or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this article or said Sign Code shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this
Code pursuant to Section
1-2.01 of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code.
(§ 6, Ord. 1336-NS, eff. July 8, 1999)
CHAPTER 10. ELECTRICAL CODE*
*   Sections 8-10.01 through 8-10.12, codified by § 5 Ordinance No. 1494-NS,
effective December 27, 2007 were repealed by Ordinance No. 1546-NS, effective
January 1, 2011. Sections 8-10.01 through 8-10.10, codified by § 6 Ordinance
No. 1546-NS, effective January 1, 2011 were repealed by Ordinance No. 1591-NS,
effective January 1, 2014. Sections 8-10.01 through 8- 10.10, codified by § 6
Ordinance No. 1591-NS, effective January 1, 2014 were repealed by Ordinance No.
1624-NS, effective January 1, 2017. Sections 8-10.01 through 8-10.10, codified
by § 6, Ordinance No. 1624-NS, effective January 1, 2017 were repealed by
Ordinance No. 1669-NS, effective January 10, 2020. Sections 8-10.01 through 8-
10.10, codified by § 7 Ordinance No. 1669-NS, effective January 10, 2020 were
repealed by Ordinance No. 1707-NS, effective January 1, 2023.
Sec. 8-10.01. Adoption of the California Electrical Code.
   That certain Code designated as the 2022 California Electrical Code based
upon the 2020 National Electrical Code, including Annex C and D, published by
the National Fire Protection Association, at least one (1) copy of which is on
file in the Office of the Building Official for public record and inspection,
is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter as though set
forth in this chapter in full, subject, however, to the amendments, additions
and deletions set forth in this chapter, and said California Electrical Code
and provisions shall be known as the Electrical Code of the City.
(§ 8, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-10.02. Amendments: California Electrical Code.
   The City Council, after due consideration, finds and determines that, due to
the need to establish administrative procedures to enforce the California
Electrical Code, as well as due to local conditions, including its geographical
location and unusual soil, geological, and topographic conditions prevailing
within the City, the public health and welfare would best be served by adding
to and amending the California Electrical Code.
(§ 8, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-10.03. Amendments: Administration.
   Enforcing Official. Whenever the term or title “Enforcing Agency or
Official”, “Authority having jurisdiction” or “Building Official” is used
herein, it shall mean the Building Official/Building Division Manager or his/
her authorized representative deputy or designee.
   Section 89.101.3 “Scope” is amended, and subsections are adopted as
published, is to read as follows:
   89.101.3 Scope.
   The provisions of this code and Title 8, Chapter 4, the City of Thousand
Oaks Code Administration shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement,
enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location,
maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any
appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures throughout
the State of California.
   A new Article 90.10 is added to read as follows:
   90.10 Additional Provisions. Refer to Title 8 Chapter 1 of the Thousand Oaks
Municipal Code and Chapter 1, Division II, of the 2022 California Building Code
for the following topics:
   Powers and Duties of the Building Official, Right of Entry, Stop Orders,
Liability, Board of Appeals, Violations, Authority to Disconnect, Permits,
Annual Permit, Expiration of Permits, Electrical Plan Review, Fees and
Inspections, and Work Exempt from Permits.
(§ 8, Ord. 1707-NS, January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-10.04. Amendments: Article 90.4: Enforcement.
   Article 90.4 of said California Electrical Code is hereby amended by adding
sub-section (90.4.1) to read as follows:
   90.4.1 Used Electrical Equipment.
   Unless otherwise approved by the Building Official, all electrical equipment
installed in the City of Thousand Oaks shall be new and shall be listed by a
recognized testing laboratory. Used equipment may be installed when sufficient
documentation has been received and approved by the Building Official. The
documentation shall consist of tests by a recognized testing laboratory
sufficient to warrant and certify the equipment as safe for the intended use.
(§ 8, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-10.05. Amendments: Article 110.8: Wiring Methods.
   Article 110.8 of the 2022 California Electrical Code is hereby amended read
as follows:
   110.8 Wiring Methods.
   Only wiring methods recognized as suitable are included in this Code. The
recognized methods of wiring shall be permitted to be installed in any type of
building or occupancy, except as otherwise provided in this Code.
   Additions, extensions, alterations or renewal of existing wiring
installations shall be made in compliance with the provisions of this Code.
Where additions, alterations or extensions of a wiring installation are
proposed, where this Code requires a metallic conduit system, and the existing
installation was lawfully installed according to any other applicable
ordinance, code or order, and the existing wiring is not unsafe in the opinion
of the Building Official, the existing wiring need not be replaced.
(§ 8, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-10.06. Amendments: Article 240.24 (E): Location in or on premises.
   Article 240.24(E) of the 2022 California Electrical Code is hereby amended
to read as follows:
   (E)   Not Located in Bathrooms.
   In dwelling units, dormitory units, and guest rooms or guest suites,
overcurrent devices, other than supplementary overcurrent protection, shall not
be located in bathrooms. Branch circuit panel boards shall not be installed
within rooms containing a shower or in rooms within five (5’) feet of a bathtub
without a showerhead.
(§ 8, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-10.07. Reserved.
Sec. 8-10.08. Amendments: Table 310.106(A) Minimum Size of Conductors.
   Table 310.106(A) is hereby amended by revising the minimum conductor size
for Aluminum or Copper-Clad Aluminum wire to No. 6 A.W.G standard conductor for
conductor voltage rating from 0 to 8000 volts.
(§ 8, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-10.09. Reserved.
Sec. 8-10.10. Reserved.
CHAPTER 11. HOURS FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES
Sec. 8-11.01. Construction activities restricted to certain hours.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or conduct any activity in
the construction of any building or structure, the moving of earth, or the
laying of any pavement, including, but not limited to, the making of any
excavation, clearing or grading of surface land, and loading or unloading
material, equipment, or supplies, except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:
00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, unless a permit for each work at different
hours or days has first been issued by the Public Works Director. Applications
for such permits shall be made in writing to the Public Works Director and
shall state the name of the applicant, his business address, the location of
the proposed work, the reason for seeking a permit to do such work on Sunday or
between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and the estimated time of the proposed
operation. No such special permit shall be issued except where the public
peace, health, or welfare will not be adversely affected by such issuance or
will be harmed by failure to perform the work at the times indicated.
(§ 1, Ord. 154-NS, eff. June 4, 1970)
Sec. 8-11.02. Exceptions.
   The provisions of Section
8-11.01 of this chapter shall not be applicable to:
   (a)   Construction or other enumerated activity involving a total labor and
material value of One Thousand and no/100ths ($1,000.00) Dollars or less; or
   (b)   Construction or other enumerated activity taking place more than one
mile from any dwelling in which persons reside.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to prevent any work
necessary to prevent injury to persons or property at any time.
(§ 1, Ord. 154-NS, eff. June 4, 1970)
CHAPTER 12. REPORTS OF RESIDENTIAL RECORDS*
*   Chapter 12 entitled “Reports of Residential Records,” codified from
Ordinance No. 932-NS, as amended by Ordinance No. 1289-NS, repealed by Section
1, Ordinance No. 1712-NS, effective May 26, 2023.
CHAPTER 13. CONSUMER INFORMATION: NEW RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION SALES
Sec. 8-13.01. Purpose and intent.
   The provisions of this chapter are enacted in order to more fully provide
purchasers of new residential properties within the City with information
relative to such purchases, including information relating to the zoning of
surrounding properties, the City’s General Plan Land Use Element, and the
existence and condition of public schools and parks serving the subdivision, as
well as the prevention of misleading information about the quality of
construction. This chapter shall be known as the “Thousand Oaks Consumer
Information in New Housing Law.” The provisions of this chapter shall apply
only to the first sale to the proposed occupant of a residential dwelling in an
approved and recorded subdivision within the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 569-NS, eff. May 13, 1976)
Sec. 8-13.02. Model homes.
   All model homes in new subdivisions shall accurately represent the
corresponding production homes which are built or proposed to be built. No
change or alteration in the quality or quantity of construction materials or
decorator finishes shall be made or permitted in any model home which
constitutes a difference from that which is or will be provided by the
developer in any corresponding completed production home, unless such change or
alteration in the model is clearly marked and prominently indicated in the
model by a sign or other marker, at the location of the change or alteration,
containing letters and/or numbers, not less than two (2") inches in height,
accurately setting forth how or in what respect completed production homes will
or may be different. Those items installed in the model by the developer as
decorator items (not for sale) and optional accessory furnishings or materials
shall likewise be marked with signs, of not less than two (2") inch letters,
indicating such to prospective purchasers. In lieu of this requirement, a
statement of differences between the models and production homes may be
provided to prospective buyers, together with a list of the various options
available to such buyers.
(§ 1, Ord. 569-NS, eff. May 13, 1976)
Sec. 8-13.03. Furnishing of planning and zoning information, and received
notices of hearing.
   Every person entity, firm or corporation selling, or offering for sale, new
residential property within an approved subdivision tract in the City shall:
   (a)   Current zoning information. Attach, affix, or incorporate into all
printed matter relating to sales information about such residential properties,
or otherwise make available to prospective buyers or display in a conspicuous
location in the sales office, copies of the latest revised edition of the City
of Thousand Oaks General Plan of Land Use, any specific plan of which the
development is a part, the latest revised edition of the City of Thousand Oaks
Zoning District Map, and the latest revised edition of a map showing all
schools and parks, including the development status of each site, within the
City. The map shall indicate that circumstances may change affecting the
location and development of any proposed or partially developed school or park
site.
   (b)   Forwarding of notices of public hearing. Upon receipt of any mailed,
written notice of a public hearing held pursuant to Title 9 of this Code for
the consideration of a zoning matter, subdivision or other development
entitlement, forward that notice or a copy of that notice to each individual
owner or buyer under a purchase contract of any lot or dwelling unit within
that residential tract. The failure to forward such in a reasonably timely
manner shall be deemed a violation of this section and subject the violator to
the penalty provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code. However, any
failure to forward the notices, as required by this section, shall not
invalidate or affect the referenced public hearing.
(§ 1, Ord. 569-NS, eff. May 13, 1976, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1020-NS, eff.
April 11, 1989)
Sec. 8-13.04. Furnishing of information relative to schools, parks, common
areas, and street improvements.
   Every person, firm, or corporation selling, or offering for sale, new
residential property within an approved subdivision tract in the City shall
attach, affix, or otherwise incorporate into all printed matter relating to
sales information about such residential properties the following:
   (a)   Printed material which designates and indicates the location of all
elementary, intermediate, and high schools in the area which serve the
subdivision, the enrollment at each such school, the teacher-student ratio, the
type of school sessions presently operative and planned, and information
regarding the availability of bus service from the subject subdivision to the
serving school, plus any definitive plans for school construction which will
serve the subdivision shall be provided. All such printed material relative to
schools shall be based upon the most current information available from, and
certified by, the Conejo Valley Unified School District and shall be revised
semiannually until all lots within the subdivision have been sold.
   (b)   Printed material regarding the size, location, and facilities of the
existing and proposed public parks serving the subdivision shall also be
provided. All parks designated as proposed to serve a subdivision shall bear an
estimated date of the commencement and completion of park improvements. All
such printed material relative to parks shall be based upon the most current
information available from, and certified by, the Conejo Recreation and Park
District and shall be revised semiannually until all lots within the
subdivision have been sold.
   (c)   Printed material specifying proposed greenbelt improvements within
common areas, as well as plans for other recreational amenities that will be
utilized, jointly maintained, and paid for by the lot owners, shall be
provided. Such information shall be consistent with plans approved by the City
and shall also be verified by the City for accuracy and completeness. All such
information shall be revised semiannually until all lots within the subdivision
have been sold.
   (d)   Printed materials regarding the installation and estimated completion
date for street improvements not planned within the construction phase
containing the lots being sold, but eventually serving or affecting such lots,
shall be provided. Such information shall be obtained and verified by the City
and shall be consistent with the plans and phasing construction sequences
approved by the City. All such information shall be revised semiannually until
all lots within the subdivision have been sold.
(§ 1, Ord. 569-NS, eff. May 13, 1976)
Sec. 8-13.05. Administration of provisions.
   The Community Development Department of the City shall be responsible for
the initial assembly and distribution of all the printed material required by
this chapter. Such printed material shall be requested by every person, firm,
or corporation selling, or offering for sale, residential property within an
approved tract in the City sixty (60) days prior to the planned occupancy of
the model home complex or sixty (60) days prior to the anticipated sale of any
residential unit; provided, however, in the event such printed material is
unavailable from the City within such required time periods, such printed
material shall be obtained from the City within five (5) days after the date of
notice of its availability. All printed material shall be certified by the
City, based upon the latest available information supplied by the school and
park districts. A fee of Twenty-Five and no/100ths (§25.00) Dollars shall be
charged to each developer to defray the cost of supplying such material. Before
any residential property is sold to any new home buyer, the seller shall obtain
a written acknowledgement from the buyer that the information required to be
provided by this chapter has been furnished to and received by the buyer. All
initially obtained information shall be revised and updated semiannually until
all lots within the subdivision have been sold. The developer shall request any
revised information from the Community Development Department thirty (30) days
prior to the expiration of the six (6) month period. A fee of Five and no/
100ths ($5.00) Dollars shall be charged to each developer for such revised
information.
(§ 1, Ord. 569-NS, eff. May 13, 1976)
Sec. 8-13.06. No liability of public entities in furnishing information.
   No public entity, or any employee or agent thereof, shall be liable for
injuries or damages to any person for its negligence, error, or omission in
supplying, certifying, or verifying the information required to be provided by
this chapter provided such public entity, or employee or agent thereof, acts in
good faith and without malice.
(§ 1, Ord. 569-NS, eff. May 13, 1976)
Sec. 8-13.07. No conflict with State Laws intended: Severability.
   In enacting this chapter, the City recognizes that, pursuant to Sections
11000 et seq. of the Business and Professions Code of the State, the Department
of Real Estate of the State issues public reports on all subdivisions within
the State as defined therein and that such public reports may contain
information relating to subject matter required to be supplied by the
provisions of this chapter to purchases of residential lots in approved and
recorded subdivisions within the City. It is the intent of this chapter to
provide consumer information to prospective purchasers of new residential lots,
which consumer information shall be in addition to and supplemental to
information provided in the public reports issued by the Department of Real
Estate of the State. To the extent that any section, subsection, sentence,
clause, phrase, or provision of this chapter is in conflict with the provisions
of Sections 11000 et seq. of the Business and Professions Code of the State to
such a degree that said provisions shall be deemed preempted by State law, said
preempted provisions shall have no further force and effect.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the
decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The City hereby
declares that it would have adopted this chapter, and each section or
subsection thereof, notwithstanding the fact that other sections, subsections,
or portions thereof may be declared invalid, preempted, or unconstitutional.
(§ 1, Ord. 569-NS, eff. May 13, 1976)
Sec. 8-13.08. Violations: Penalties.
   (a)   Any person knowingly violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Code pursuant to Section 1-2.01
of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code.
   (b)   No sale of residential property shall be invalidated solely because of
the failure of any person to comply with any provision of this chapter, unless
such failure is an act or omission which would be a valid ground for the
rescission of such sale in the absence of the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 569-NS, eff. May 13, 1976, as amended by § XL, Ord. 770-NS, eff.
February 26, 1981)
CHAPTER 14. ENERGY CODE*
Sec. 8-14.01. Adoption of California Energy Code.
   That certain Code designated as the 2022 California Energy Code, at least
one copy of which is on file in the office of the Building Official for public
record and inspection, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
chapter as though set forth in this chapter in full, subject however, to
amendments, additions and deletions. Said Code shall be known as the Energy
Code 2022 Edition for the City.
(§ 9, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-14.02. Amendments.
   Section 100.0 “Scope” is amended to read as follows:
   100.1 Scope.
   The provisions of this code and Title 8, Chapter 4, the City of Thousand
Oaks Code Administration shall apply to the erection, installation, alteration,
repair, relocation, replacement, addition to, use, or maintenance of plumbing
systems within this jurisdiction.
   Subsections (a) through (h) are adopted as published and without amendments.
(§ 9, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
CHAPTER 15. DISABLED ACCESS APPEALS AND ADVISORY BOARD
Sec. 8-15.01. Purpose.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Part 5.5 of the State Health and Safety Code,
(Section 19955, et seq.), it is the intent of the City Council to insure that
all public accommodations or facilities constructed in the City with private
funds, shall be accessible to, and usable by, the disabled and, therefore,
there is hereby established a physically handicapped access appeals board
herein referred to as “Disabled Access Appeals and Advisory Board.” It is
further the intent of the Council that in cases of practical difficulty or
extreme differences, exceptions may be granted from the literal requirements of
the standards and specifications required by Title 24 of the California Code of
Regulations, state statutes or local law, or to authorize the use of other
methods or materials, but only when the work involves specified small jobs, or
it is clearly evident that equivalent facilitation and protection are thereby
secured.
   It is further the intent of the Council to obtain full compliance with
disabled accessibility requirements in all publicly funded buildings.
(§ 1, Ord. 1037-NS, eff. July 25, 1989, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1173-NS, eff.
March 2, 1993, and § 2, Ord. 1294-NS, eff. October 2, 1997)
Sec. 8-15.02. Disabled Access Appeals and Advisory Board.
   The Disabled Access Appeals and Advisory Board is hereby created and shall
be composed of five (5) at-large community members with appropriate
qualifications. Two (2) persons on the Board shall be disabled persons who are
movement impaired, two (2) members shall be persons experienced in construction
and one (1) member shall be a public member, all of whom shall be residents of
the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 1037-NS, eff. July 25, 1989, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1173-NS, eff.
March 2, 1993, and § 2, Ord. 1294-NS, eff. October 2, 1997, as amended by part
1, Ord. 1440-NS, eff. July 21, 2005)
Sec. 8-15.03. Appointment, terms and vacancies.
   (a)   Appointment. After compliance with the State Maddy Act, the Council
shall appoint qualified members of the Board. Each member of the Disabled
Access Appeals and Advisory Board serves at the pleasure of the Council and may
be removed by a majority vote of all members of the Council.
   (b)   Terms. At-large Board Member appointments shall be for two-year
staggered terms. Three terms shall expire at end of February of even numbered
years and two terms shall expire at end of February of odd numbered years.
   (c)   Vacancies. A vacancy on the Disabled Access Appeals and Advisory Board
shall be filled by City Council appointment of a qualified member, pursuant to
procedures adopted by Council resolution.
(§ 1, Ord. 1037-NS, eff. July 25, 1989, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1173-NS, eff.
March 2, 1993, as amended by part 1, Ord. 1440-NS, eff. July 21, 2005)
Sec. 8-15.04. Powers.
   (a)   General. The purpose of the Board is to act in an advisory capacity to
the City Council relative to measures and methods utilized to promote disabled
accessibility in the City. The duties of the Board are:
   (1)   To advise and recommend to the City Council ways and means to promote
disabled accessibility in the City. The Board may also, upon request, advise
private owners of ways to improve disabled accessibility of private property.
   (2)   To explore methods of obtaining private, local, state and federal
funds to promote disabled accessibility within the City.
   (3)   To render assistance regarding disabled accessibility in City
sponsored programs, activities and services and on access to City properties.
   (b)   Appeals. The Disabled Access Appeals and Advisory Board shall consider
at a noticed public hearing all matters referred to it by the City Council,
staff, and any written appeals filed by any aggrieved person regarding a City
departmental action taken, except as technical decision referred to in this
subsection, on a denial or issuance of building permit, paving permit or
departmental permit concerning issues of the application of state law, City
ordinances or City policies governing access for the disabled to public
accommodations in buildings and facilities constructed with private funds.
However, there is no right of appeal with regards to a departmental decision
required to meet specific numerical standards of Title 24 of the California
Code of Regulations, when no exception, exemption or other relief is authorized
by that law.
   (c)   Exceptions. The Board shall also review appeals of the Building
Official’s or the Department of Community Development’s granting or denying of
exceptions authorized under Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
Other than the small project exception under subsection (c) below, in reviewing
appeals of departmental decisions on exceptions from the literal requirements
of the standards and specifications authorized under Title 24, or City codes,
or in permitting the use of other methods and materials concerning disabled
accessibility and usability, the Board may approve such only when it finds (1)
an unreasonable hardship, if Title 24 requires such, would be created for the
permit applicant to alter the existing structure, and (2) it is clearly evident
that equivalent facilitation access and protection will be secured. “Equivalent
facilitation” means an alternative method of complying with the literal
requirements of the standards or specifications that provides access in terms
of the purpose of those standards or specific actions.
   (d)   Small project exceptions. When the total construction cost of
alterations, structural repairs or additions does not exceed the State’s 1996
valuation threshold amount of Eighty-One Thousand Eight Hundred Ninety-Six and
Forty-Six/100ths ($81,896.46) Dollars, as annually adjusted by the Construction
Cost Index, the Board, on appeal of such projects, may find that an
unreasonable
hardship exists on the permit applicant, and compliance shall be limited to the
actual work of the project. For purposes of this exception, an unreasonable
hardship exists where the cost of providing an accessible entrance, path of
travel, sanitary facilities, public phones and drinking fountains, is
disproportionate to the cost of the project; that is, where it exceeds twenty
(20%) percent of the cost of the project without these features. Where the cost
of alterations necessary to make these features fully accessible is
disproportionate, access shall be provided to the extent that it can be without
incurring disproportionate cost.
   The obligation to provide access may not be evaded by performing a series of
small alterations to the area served by a single path of travel if those
alterations could have been performed as a single undertaking. If an area has
been altered without providing an accessible path of travel to that area, and
subsequent alterations of that area or a different area on the same path of
travel are undertaken within three (3) years of the original alteration, the
total cost of alterations to the areas on that path of travel during the
preceding three (3) year period shall be considered in determining whether the
cost of making that path of travel accessible is disproportionate. Only
alterations undertaken after January 26, 1992, shall be considered in
determining if the cost of providing an accessible path of travel is
disproportionate to the overall cost of the alterations.
   (e)   Total exemptions. Where Title 24 authorizes the Building Official’s
finding of total exemption from full compliance for existing structures, the
appeals process to the Board shall be required to ratify such action as
required by Section 101.17.11, Item 4 of Title 24.
   (f)   Factors for determining unreasonable hardship. When required to find
an unreasonable hardship pursuant to granting any exceptions under state law or
City ordinance, the Board shall consider:
   (1)   Cost of providing access.
   (2)   Cost of all construction contemplated.
   (3)   Impact of proposed access improvements on financial feasibility of the
project.
   (4)   Nature of accessibility which would be gained or lost.
   (5)   Nature of the use of the facility under construction and its
availability to disabled persons.
   (g)   Recommendations. With issues sent to the Disabled Access Appeals and
Advisory Board by City staff or the City Council, the Board shall provide
recommendations to the City Council for the Council’s approval of
interpretations, policies, standards or guidelines to be used by the Building
Official, other City departments or the Board pertaining to unreasonable
hardships, other exceptions and the interpretation or application of state or
City laws, or city policies governing access for the disabled to public
accommodations or facilities constructed with private funds.
   (h)   Decision: Appeal to Council. The Board may grant, conditionally grant
or deny any appeal. The decision of an appeal shall be concurred in by at least
three (3) members of the Board. The granting or denying of any appeal by the
Board may be appealed by the applicant, any aggrieved person or any individual
Councilmember (without fee) to the City Council.
(§ 1, Ord.1037-NS, eff. July 25, 1989, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1173-NS, eff.
March 2, 1993, and § 2, Ord. 1294-NS, eff. October 2, 1997)
Sec. 8-15.05. Appeal process.
   (a)   Appeal right. Any person aggrieved by a decision or action taken by
the Building Official or the Department of Community Development on any
building permit, paving permit or development permit (including a major or
minor modification) being reviewed by that department and concerning the
application of state law, federal law, Title 24 of the California Code of
Regulations, City ordinances, or City policies, governing access of the
disabled to public accommodations and facilities in building or facilities
constructed with private funds, may file an appeal to the Board concerning that
action with the
Building Official. However, there is no right of appeal to a departmental
decision required to meet specific numerical standards of Title 24 when no
exception, exemption or other relief is authorized by that law. An “aggrieved”
person for the purpose of this chapter shall mean the applicant for the permit
subject to departmental action or any other person.
   (b)   Time of appeal. The applicant for a City development permit, filed
with the Department of Community Development, may request an early appeal of
any decision of that department concerning disabled parking or exterior access
for that project. Also, appeals may be filed under the City’s Special
Accommodations/Lack of Access procedures as contained in the ADA Self Analysis
for City of Thousand Oaks programs. All other appeals shall be filed within ten
(10) days of the issuance of the tentative building paving or development
permit. These permits shall be conditionally issued and subject to the ten (10)
day appeal period. The Department of Community Development and the Building
Official shall publicly post a list of all building permits, development
permits and exceptions subject to Title 24, such as are approved in order to
provide the public with notice of permits which an aggrieved person may wish to
appeal.
   (c)   Form: Fees. The appeal shall be on the City approved form and clearly
set forth the grounds and basis for the appeal. No appeal shall be considered
by the Disabled Access Appeal and Advisory Board except upon the grounds
stated. Except for an appeal of a special accommodation/lack of access
involving City administered programs, no appeal shall be deemed filed and
accepted unless the appeal processing fee is paid at that time by the appellant
in the amount as determined by City Council resolution to cover the cost
connected with processing that appeal.
   (d)   Hearing: Notice: Appeal to Council. The Board shall hold a noticed
public hearing and make its determination on the appeal within thirty (30) days
of its filing with the Building Official and issue its decision by resolution
containing the required findings. Notice shall be published and posted in a
conspicuous place at City Hall at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. The
notice of the time and place of the hearing shall also be mailed to the
appellant and the affected permit applicant at least ten (10) days prior to the
hearing. This hearing may be set beyond thirty (30) days, providing a written
waiver of such time limit is given by the permit applicant. If the Board fails
to act on any appeal within the time limit specified in this subdivision, then
the action of the Building Official on the matter shall be final subject to
appeal to the City Council. The appeal to the Council shall be filed within
five (5) days of the Board’s decision. The appeal to the Council shall be on
the City’s approved form, filed with the Building Official. No appeal shall be
considered unless the appropriate fee is paid upon filing. The Council shall
hear the appeal within thirty (30) days of its filing.
   (e)   Open hearings. The Board’s public hearings shall be open to the
general public with a public concerns opportunity and an agenda posted pursuant
to the requirements of state law (the Brown Act).
(§ 1, Ord. 1037-NS, eff. July 25, 1989, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1173-NS, eff.
March 2, 1993, and § 2, Ord. 1294-NS, eff. October 2, 1997)
Sec. 8-15.06. Establishment of Board rules and procedures.
   The Disabled Access Appeals and Advisory Board shall adopt such procedural
rules as it deems necessary for conducting hearings as required by this
chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1037-NS, eff. July 25, 1989; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1173-NS, eff.
March 2, 1993)
Sec. 8-15.07. Compensation of Appeals and Advisory Board.
   Each member of the Disabled Access Appeals and Advisory Board shall be paid
on a per meeting attended basis, in accordance with an approved compensation
schedule as established by City Council resolution.
(§ 1, Ord. 1037-NS, eff. July 25, 1989; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1173-NS, eff.
March 2, 1993)
CHAPTER 16. GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS*
*Chapter 16, as established by § 8 of Ord. 1546-NS eff. January 1, 2011, was
repealed and replaced by Ord. 1591-NS eff. January 1, 2014. Sections 8-16.01
and 8-16.02, codified by § 8 Ordinance No. 1591-NS, effective January 1, 2014
were repealed by Ordinance No. 1624-NS, effective January 1, 2017. Sections 8-
16.01 and 8-16.02, codified by § 8 Ordinance 1624-NS, effective January 1, 2017
were repealed by Ordinance No. 1669-NS, effective January 10, 2020. Sections 8-
16.01 and 18-16.02, codified by § 9 Ordinance No. 1669-NS, effective January
10, 2020 were repealed by Ordinance No. 1707-NS, effective January 1, 2023.
Sec. 8-16.01. Adoption of California Green Building Standards Code.
   That certain Code, designated as the 2022 California Green Building
Standards Code, at least one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the
Building Official for public record and inspection, is hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this chapter as though set forth in this chapter
in full, subject, however, to the amendments, additions and deletions set forth
in this chapter. Said California Green Building Standards Code, as amended
herein, shall be known as the Green Building Standards Code of the City.
(§ 10, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-16.02. Amendments: California Green Building Standards Code.
   The City Council, after due consideration, finds and determines that the
2022 California Green Building Standards Code is hereby amended as follows:
   Section 101.3 “Scope” is amended, subsections adopted as published, and is
to read as follows:
   101.3 Scope.
   The provisions of this code and Title 8, Chapter 4, the City of Thousand
Oaks Code Administration shall apply to the planning, design, operation,
construction, use and occupancy of every newly constructed building or
structure, unless otherwise indicated in this code, throughout the State of
California.
   It is not the intent that this code substitute or be identified as meeting
the certification requirements of any green building program.
   Section 101.12 titled: “Fee for Mandatory Measures” is added and is to read
as follows:
   101.12 Fee for Mandatory Measures. A fee established by resolution of City
Council and in accordance with the Thousand Oaks Building Code Fee Schedule for
plan examination and permit fees shall be assessed to verify compliance with
the mandatory measures of the California Green Building Standards Code.
(§ 10, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
CHAPTER 17. EXISTING BUILDING CODE
Sec. 8-17.01. Adoption of California Existing Building Code.
   That certain Code, designated as the 2022 California Existing Building Code,
at least one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the Building
Official for public record and inspection, is hereby adopted by reference and
made a part of this chapter as though set forth in this chapter in full,
subject, however, to the amendments, additions and deletions set forth in this
chapter. Said California Existing Building Code, as amended herein, shall be
known as the Existing Building Code of the City.
(§ 11, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-17.02. Amendments: California Existing Building Code.
   The City Council, after due consideration, finds and determines that the
2022 California Existing Building Code is hereby amended as follows:
   Section 101.2 “Scope” is amended, subsections adopted as published, and is
to read as follows:
   [A]101.2 Scope.
   The provisions of this code and Title 8, Chapter 4, the City of Thousand
Oaks Code Administration shall apply to the repair, alteration, change of
occupancy, addition to and relocation of existing buildings.
   Exception: Detached one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses not more
than three stories above grade plane in height with a separate means of egress,
and their accessory structures not more than three stories above grade plane in
height, shall comply with this code or the California Residential Code.
   101.2.1 Application of Fire Code.
   Where work regulated by this code is also regulated by the construction
requirements for existing buildings in Chapter 11 of the California Fire Code,
such work shall comply with applicable requirements in both codes.
   Section 103 “Department of Building and Safety” Refer to Title 8 Chapter 1
of the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code, and Chapter 1, Division II, of the 2022
California Building Code for the following topics:
   Powers and Duties of the Building Official, Right of Entry, Stop Orders,
Liability, Board of Appeals, Violations, Authority to Disconnect, Permits,
Annual Permit, Expiration of Permits, Plan Review, Inspections and Work Exempt
from Permits.
   Sections 104, 105, 106, 107 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116 and
117 of Chapter I, Division II are hereby deleted.
(§ 11, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
Sec. 8-17.03. Safety Assessment Placards.
   Section 118 “Safety Assessment Placards” is hereby added to Chapter 1
Division II-Scope and Administration of the 2022 California Existing Building
Code, to read as follows:
   Section 118 Safety Assessment Placards.
   118.1 Intent. This section establishes standard placards to be used to
indicate the condition of a structure for continued occupancy. The section
further authorizes the Building Official and his/her authorized representatives
to post the appropriate placard at each entry point to a building or structure
upon completion of a safety assessment.
   118.2 Application of Provisions.
   The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all buildings and
structures of all occupancies regulated by the City of Thousand Oaks. The City
Council may extend the provisions as necessary.
   118.3 Definitions.
   Safety assessment is a visual, non-destructive examination of a building or
structure for purpose of determining the condition for continued use or
occupancy.
   118.4 Placards.
   a.   The following are descriptions of the official placards to be used to
designate the condition for continued occupancy of buildings or structures.
   1.   INSPECTED (Green) - Lawful Occupancy Permitted is to be posted on any
building or structure wherein no apparent structural hazard has been found.
This placard is not intended to mean that there is no damage to the building or
structure.
   2.   RESTRICTED USE (Yellow) - Restricted Occupancy Permitted is to be
posted on each building or structure that has been damaged wherein the damage
has resulted in some form of restriction to the continued occupancy. The
individual who posts this placard will note in general terms the type of damage
encountered and will clearly and concisely note the restrictions on continued
occupancy.
   3.   UNSAFE (Red) - No Entry or No Occupancy Permitted is to be posted on
each building or structure that has been damaged such that continued occupancy
poses a threat to life safety. Buildings or structures posted with this placard
shall not be entered under any circumstance except as authorized in writing by
the Building Official, or his/her authorized representative. Safety assessment
teams shall be authorized to enter these buildings at any time. This placard is
not to be used or considered as a demolition order. The individual who posts
this placard will note in general terms the type of damage encountered.
   b.   This Municipal Code section, the name of the jurisdiction, its address,
and phone number shall be permanently affixed to each placard.
   c.   Once it has been attached to a building or structure, a placard is not
to be removed, altered or covered until done so by an authorized representative
of the Building Official. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to alter, remove, cover or deface a placard unless authorized
pursuant to this section.
(§ 11, Ord. 1707-NS, eff. January 1, 2023)
TITLE 9. PLANNING AND ZONING
CHAPTER 1. FLOOD CONTROL
      
9-1.01–Fees
      
9-1.02–Building permits: Applications
      
9-1.03–Building permits: Issuance: Conditions
CHAPTER 2. GENERAL PLAN AND SPECIFIC PLANS
Article 1. General Plan
      
9-2.101–Defined
      
9-2.102–Nature and purpose
      
9-2.103–Formulation
      
9-2.104–Adoption
      
9-2.105–Administration
Article 2. Procedure for Amendments to the General Plan
      
9-2.201–Amendment procedures
      
9-2.202–Initiation
      
9-2.203–Increases on residential densities or commercial acreage
      
9-2.204–Limitations on amendments relating to the “Parks, Golf Courses, Open
Space” designation.
Article 3. Petitions for Amendments to the General Plan
      
9-2.301–Filing: Form: Scope
      
9-2.302–Contents
      
9-2.303–Fees
      
9-2.304–Acceptance
      
9-3.305–Urban lot splits
Article 4. Specific Plans
      
9-2.401–Authority: Scope
      
9-2.402–Specific Plan applications and adoption
      
9-2.403–Contents of Specific Plans
      
9-2.404–Filing fees
Article 5. Urban Restriction Boundary
      
9-2.501–Purpose and findings
      
9-2.502–General Plan amendment
      
9-2.503–Exemptions for certain projects
      
9-2.504–Insertion date
      
9-2.505–Severability
      
9-2.506–Amendment or repeal
CHAPTER 3. SUBDIVISIONS
Article 1. General Provisions
      
9-3.101–Citation and authority
      
9-3.102–Applicability
      
9-3.103–Modifications of requirements
Article 2. Definitions
      
9-3.201–Incorporated and specific definitions
      
9-3.202–Advisory Agency
      
9-3.203–Appeal Board
      
9-3.204–City Engineer
      
9-3.205–County Surveyor
      
9-3.206–Flag lot
      
9-3.207–Geologically hazardous area
      
9-3.208–Hillside area
      
9-3.209–Lot
      
9-3.210–Parcel
      
9-3.211–Permanent domestic water supply
      
9-3.212–Public service easement (P.S.E.)
      
9-3.213–Stock cooperative apartment project
      
9-3.214–Subdivider
      
9-3.215–Subdivision
      
9-3.216–Subdivision Map Act
      
9-3.217–Tentative map
      
9-3.218–Vesting tentative map
Article 3. Map Requirements
      
9-3.301–Subdivisions creating five or more lots or parcels
      
9-3.302–Subdivisions creating four or less lots or parcels: Waivers
      
9-3.303–Exemptions
      
9-3.304–Condominium, community apartment, and stock cooperative apartment
projects
      
9-3.305–Urban lot splits
Article 4. Processing Fees
      
9-3.401–Fees
Article 5. Filing of Tentative Maps
      
9-3.501–Preliminary maps and data
      
9-3.502–Submission of tentative maps: Environmental documentation
      
9-3.503–Preliminary procedure
      
9-3.504–Information to be provided on tentative maps: General
      
9-3.505–Topography and lots
      
9-3.506–Design and improvements
      
9-3.507–Documents to be submitted with tentative maps
      
9-3.508–Soil and geology reports
      
9-3.509–Number of copies
      
9-3.510–Acceptance of maps
Article 6. Design and Improvements
      
9-3.601–Requirements
      
9-3.602–Lots
      
9-3.603–Size requirements
      
9-3.604–Street rights-of-way
      
9-3.605–Utility easements
      
9-3.606–Drainage easements
      
9-3.607–State highways
      
9-3.608–Public water agencies
      
9-3.609–Public wastewater agencies
      
9-3.610–Street lighting
Article 7. Hearings, Reports, and Appeals, Expirations and Extensions of
Approvals
      
9-3.701–Reports and recommendations
      
9-3.702–Hearings and appeals
      
9-3.703–Development allotment or reservation of allotment required
      
9-3.704–Expiration and extension of tentative map approvals
Article 8. Filing and Approval of Vesting Tentative Maps
      
9-3.801–Application
      
9-3.802–Filing and processing
      
9-3.803–Consistency
      
9-3.804–Expiration
      
9-3.805–Vesting on approval of vesting tentative map
      
9-3.806–Development allotment
Article 9. Final Map and Parcel Map Requirements
      
9-3.901–Final map and parcel map requirements
      
9-3.902–Preparation: Multiple final maps
      
9-3.903–Size and materials
      
9-3.904–Boundary lines
      
9-3.905–Title sheets
      
9-3.906–Key maps and location maps
      
9-3.907–Survey data
      
9-3.908–Data for lots
      
9-3.909–Easements
      
9-3.910–Easement dimensioning
      
9-3.911–Easement dedications
      
9-3.912–Monuments
      
9-3.913–Established lines
      
9-3.914–City boundaries
      
9-3.915–Watercourses
      
9-3.916–Lot numbers and parcel numbers
      
9-3.917–Title blocks
      
9-3.918–Engineers' certificates
      
9-3.919–Bearings
      
9-3.920–Orientation
      
9-3.921–Additional information
      
9-3.922–Standard practices
      
9-3.923–Limits of errors
      
9-3.924–Size of lettering
      
9-3.925–Parcel map preparation
      
9-3.926–Dedications
      
9-3.927–Submission for certification
      
9-3.928–Information to be submitted with final maps and parcel maps
      
9-3.929–Improvement plans
      
9-3.930–Improvement agreements
      
9-3.931–Tax Collector's signatures or letters
      
9-3.932–Evidence of title
      
9-3.933–Deeds
      
9-3.934–Off-site easements
      
9-3.935–Utility statements
      
9-3.936–Wastewater services
      
9-3.937–Water services
      
9-3.938–Fire Chief's certificate
      
9-3.939–Stormwater acceptance easements
      
9-3.940–Street rights-of-way
      
9-3.941–Park sites
      
9-3.942–Storm drain channels
      
9-3.943–Private street easements
      
9-3.944–Other easements
      
9-3.945–Geologic and soils reports
      
9-3.946–Filing of maps: Approval: Denial
Article 10. Dedication and Improvement Regulations
      
9-3.1001–Requirements
      
9-3.1002–Acceptance, rejection, and termination of offers of dedication
      
9-3.1003–Improvement agreements: Completion of improvements and acceptance
      
9-3.1004–Completion of improvements: Extensions
      
9-3.1005–Guarantees
      
9-3.1006–Street tree planting
      
9-3.1007–Improvement plans
      
9-3.1008–Approval of improvement plans
      
9-3.1009–Preparation of improvement plans
      
9-3.1010–Grading plans included in improvement plans
      
9-3.1011–Scale of improvement plans
      
9-3.1012–Contents of improvement plans
      
9-3.1013–Changes in improvement plans
      
9-3.1014–Cost estimates
      
9-3.1015–Commencement of improvements
      
9-3.1016–Street improvements
      
9-3.1017–Drainage improvements
      
9-3.1018–Wastewater and water supply systems
      
9-3.1019–Fire protection
      
9-3.1020–Underground utilities
      
9-3.1021–Street name and traffic signs
      
9-3.1022–Barricades
      
9-3.1023–Underground openings
      
9-3.1024–Water wells
      
9-3.1025–Fencing
      
9-3.1026–As-built plans
      
9-3.1027–Improvement standards and specifications
Article 11. Improvement Security
      
9-3.1101–Requirement of improvement security
      
9-3.1102–Amount of improvement security
      
9-3.1103–Exoneration of improvement security
Article 12. Reversions and Mergers
      
9-3.1201–Reversions to acreage
      
9-3.1202–Initiation of proceedings by owners
      
9-3.1203–Initiation of proceedings by the Council
      
9-3.1204–Data for reversions to acreage
      
9-3.1205–Fees
      
9-3.1206–Proceedings
      
9-3.1207–Filing
      
9-3.1208–Effect of filing reversion maps with the County Recorder
      
9-3.1209–Return of fees and deposits and release of securities
      
9-3.1210–Mergers of nonconforming contiguous parcels
      
9-3.1211–Effective date of mergers
      
9-3.1212–Notification of intention to merger: Hearing
      
9-3.1213–Request for hearing
      
9-3.1214–Procedure for hearing
      
9-3.1215–Procedure for determination following hearing
      
9-3.1216–Determination when no hearing is requested
      
9-3.1217–Mergers and resubdivision
      
9-3.1218–Voluntary lot mergers
Article 13. Monuments
      
9-3.1301–Final map and parcel map monuments
      
9-3.1302–Monument construction
      
9-3.1303–Monument bonds
      
9-3.1304–Notices of setting of final monuments: Payment of engineers and
surveyors
Article 14. Environmental Impact and Grading and Erosion Control
      
9-3.1401–Environmental impact
      
9-3.1402–Grading and erosion control
Article 15. Improvement Fees, Supplemental Capacity, and Reservations
      
9-3.1501–Costs of bridges and major thoroughfares
      
9-3.1502–Reservations for public uses
      
9-3.1503–Costs of drainage and wastewater facilities
      
9-3.1504–Other fees: Improvements
      
9-3.1505–Supplemental improvements
Article 16. Additional Fees and Dedications: School Facilities and Park and
Recreational Purposes
      
9-3.1601–Dedication of land and/or payments in lieu of fees for school
facilities
      
9-3.1602–Dedication of land for park and recreational purposes
      
9-3.1603–Subdividers required to provide park and facilities
      
9-3.1604–Application of article provisions
      
9-3.1605–Relation of land required to population density
      
9-3.1606–Determination of population density
      
9-3.1607–Amount of land to be dedicated
      
9-3.1608–Amount of fees in lieu of land dedication
      
9-3.1609–Credit for private open space
      
9-3.1610–Choice of dedication of land or payment of fees or both
      
9-3.1611–Designation of development time
      
9-3.1612–Limitations on use of land and fees
Article 17. Correction and Amendment of Maps
      
9-3.1701–Requirements
      
9-3.1702–Form and contents
      
9-3.1703–Submittal and approval by the City Engineer
      
9-3.1704–Filing with the County Recorder
      
9-3.1705–Fees
Article 18. Enforcement of Chapter Provisions
      
9-3.1801–Prohibitions
      
9-3.1802–Remedies
      
9-3.1803–Certificates of compliance
      
9-3.1804–Certificates of noncompliance
      
9-3.1805–Certificates of compliance and noncompliance: Appeals of
determinations of the Community Development Director
CHAPTER 4. ZONING
Article 1. Title, Purpose and Interpretation
      
9-4.101–Title
      
9-4.102–Purpose
      
9-4.103–Interpretation
      
9-4.104–Pending actions and proceedings
      
9-4.105–Continuation of existing laws
      
9-4.106–Public utilities
      
9-4.107–City project review
Article 2. Definitions
      
9-4.201–Scope
      
9-4.202–Definitions
Article 3. Establishment and Designation of Zones
      
9-4.301–Use zones
      
9-4.302–Sub-zones
      
9-4.303–Additional sub-zones
      
9-4.304–Establishment
      
9-4.305–Uncertainty of zone boundaries
      
9-4.306–Ambiguities
      
9-4.307–Height Limit Overlay Zone (H)
      
9-4.308–Historic Landmark Overlay Zone (HL)
      
9-4.309–Establishment and designation of zones
      
9-4.310–Mixed-Use Overlay Zone (MUOZ)
Article 4. Rural-Agricultural Zones (R-A)
      
9-4.401–Permitted uses (R-A)
      
9-4.402–Uses requiring special use permits (R-A)
      
9-4.403–Animals and fowl (R-A)
      
9-4.404–Previously designated Residential-Agricultural Zone properties (R-A)
      
9-4.405–Food cooperatives (R-A)
Article 5. Rural-Exclusive Zones (R-E)
      
9-4.501–Permitted uses (R-E)
      
9-4.502–Uses requiring special use permits (R-E)
      
9-4.503–Animals and fowl (R-E)
      
9-4.504–Food cooperatives (R-E)
Article 6. Single-Family Estate Zones (R-O)
      
9-4.601–Permitted uses (R-O)
      
9-4.602–Uses requiring special use permits (R-O)
      
9-4.603–Animals and fowl (R-O)
      
9-4.604–Food cooperatives (R-O)
Article 7. Single-Family Residential Zones (R-1)
      
9-4.701–Permitting uses (R-1)
      
9-4.702–Uses requiring special use permits (R-1)
      
9-4.703–Animals and fowl (R-1)
      
9-4.704–Food cooperatives (R-2)
Article 8. Two-Family Residential Zones (R-2)
      
9-4.801–Permitted uses (R-2)
      
9-4.802–Uses requiring special use permits (R-2)
      
9-4.803–Food cooperatives (R-2)
Article 9. Residential Planned Development Zones (R-P-D)
      
9-4.901–Intent and purpose (R-P-D)
      
9-4.902–Permitted uses (R-P-D)
      
9-4.903–Uses requiring special use permits (R-P-D)
      
9-4.904–Development standards (R-P-D)
      
9-4.905–Residential planned development permits (R-P-D)
      
9-4.906–Residential Planned Development–Single-Family Detached sub-zone (R-P-D-
SFD)
      
9-4.907–Density transfer considerations (R-P-D)
      
9-4.908–Residential planned development permits: Lands designated SP (R-P-D)
      
9-4.909–Development allotment or reservation of allotment required (R-P-D)
      
9-4.910–Food cooperatives (R-P-D)
      
9-4.911–Residential planned development: Single-family detached dwellings
within an R-P-D sub-zone with a density greater than 4.5 dwelling units per net
acre
Article 10. Multiple-Family Residential Zones (R-3)
      
9-4.1001–Permitted uses (R-3)
      
9-4.1002–Additional permitted uses (R-3)
      
9-4.1003–Uses requiring special use permits (R-3)
      
9-4.1004–Residential planned development permits (R-3)
      
9-4.1005–Food cooperatives (R-3)
Article 10.5 Mixed-Use (MU) and Mixed-Use Overlay (MUOZ) Zones
      
9-4.1050–Purpose (MU/MUOZ)
      
9-4.1051–Permitted uses (MU/MUOZ)
      
9-4.1052–Development standards (MU/MUOZ)
Article 11. Commercial Office Zones (C-O)
      
9-4.1101–Purpose (C-O)
      
9-4.1102–Permitted uses (C-O)
      
9-4.1103–Uses requiring special use permits (C-O)
      
9-4.1104–Planned development permits (C-O)
      
9-4.1105–Signs (C-O)
      
9-4.1106–Height regulations (C-O)
      
9-4.1107–Area regulations (C-O)
      
9-4.1108–Off-street parking (C-O)
      
9-4.1109–Landscaping, lighting, and storage (C-O)
Article 12. Neighborhood Shopping Center Zones (C-1)
      
9-4.1200–Purpose (C-1)
      
9-4.1201–Uses requiring development permits (C-1)
      
9-4.1202–Uses requiring special use permits (C-1)
      
9-4.1203–Development permits: Conditions and limitations (C-1)
      
9-4.1204–Development permits: Issuance (C-1)
      
9-4.1205–Nonresidential buildings in redevelopment areas
Article 13. Highway and Arterial Business Zones (C-2)
      
9-4.1300–Purpose (C-2)
      
9-4.1301–Uses requiring development permits (C-2)
      
9-4.1302–Uses requiring special use permits (C-2)
      
9-4.1303–Development permits: Conditions and limitations (C-2)
      
9-4.1304–Development permits: Issuance (C-2)
      
9-4.1305–Nonresidential buildings in redevelopment areas
Article 14. Community Shopping Center Zones (C-3)
      
9-4.1400–Purpose (C-3)
      
9-4.1401–Permitted uses (C-3)
      
9-4.1402–Uses requiring special use permits (C-3)
      
9-4.1403–Uses requiring development permits (C-3)
      
9-4.1404–Development permits: Conditions and limitations (C-3)
      
9-4.1405–Development permits: Issuance (C-3)
      
9-4.1406–Nonresidential buildings in redevelopment areas
Article 15. Regional Shopping Center Zones (C-4)
      
9-4.1500–Purpose (C-4)
      
9-4.1501–Permitted uses (C-4)
      
9-4.1502–Uses requiring special use permits (C-4)
      
9-4.1503–Uses requiring development permits (C-4)
      
9-4.1504–Development permits: Conditions and limitations (C-4)
      
9-4.1505–Development permits: Issuance (C-4)
Article 16. Industrial Park Zones (M-1)
      
9-4.1601–Purpose (M-1)
      
9-4.1602–Permitted uses (M-1)
      
9-4.1603–Uses requiring special use permits (M-1)
      
9-4.1604–Uses requiring development permits (M-1)
      
9-4.1605–Development permits: Conditions and limitations (M-1)
      
9-4.1606–Development permits: Issuance (M-1)
Article 17. Light Manufacturing Zones (M-2)
      
9-4.1701–Permitted uses (M-2)
      
9-4.1702–Uses requiring special use permits (M-2)
      
9-4.1703–Development permits: Issuance (M-3)
      
9-4.1704–Development permits: Conditional limitations (M-2)
Article 18.    Design Review: Requirements and Procedure
      
9-4.1800–Purpose
      
9-4.1801–Architectural design review required
      
9-4.1802–Precise plan of design required
      
9-4.1803–Single-family detached residential and individual townhouse and
condominium exceptions
      
9-4.1804–Commercial, industrial, institutional exceptions
      
9-4.1805–Precise plan of design applications
      
9-4.1806–Architectural design review guidelines
      
9-4.1807–Design review criteria
      
9-4.1808–Design review procedure
      
9-4.1809–Appeals
      
9-4.1810–Inapplicability of article to repainting of residences
      
9-4.1811–Exceptions for redevelopment projects
Article 19. Condominium Conversions, Mobile Home Park Subdivisions
and Mobile Home Park Changes of Use
      
9-4.1901–Purpose and intent
      
9-4.1902–Definitions
      
9-4.1903–Procedure
      
9-4.1904–Condominium conversions
      
9-4.1905–Mobile home park subdivisions
      
9-4.1906–Mobile home park change of use
      
9-4.1907–Denial for coercive acts
Article 20. Mobile Home Park Development Zones
      
9-4.2001–Purpose (T-P-D)
      
9-4.2002–Permitted uses (T-P-D)
      
9-4.2003–Senior mobile home park overlay zone (SMHP)
      
9-4.2004–Development permits: General conditions and limitations (T-P-D)
      
9-4.2005–Occupancy limitations & rentals
      
9-4.2006–Age verification & compliance procedures
      
9-4.2007–Duty of mobile home park residents to comply with age verification
request
      
9-4.2008–Duty of mobile home park owners/operators to comply with age reporting
requirement and certification
Article 21. Uses Allowed by Zone
      
9-4.2101–Purpose
      
9-4.2102–Permitted uses in specific plan areas
      
9-4.2103–Matric key
      
9-4.2104–Permitted use matrix - Residential zones
      
9-4.2104.5–Permitted use matrix - Mixed-use zones and mixed-use overlay zones
      
9-4.2105–Permitted use matrix - Non-residential zones
      
9-4.2106–Limitations on specific uses
      
9-4.2107–Findings for approval of entitlements for permitted uses
Article 22. Objective Design Standards for Residential Development
      
9-4.2201–Intent and purpose
      
9-4.2202–Applicability
      
9-4.2203–Definition of terms
      
9-4.2204–Relationship to other ordinances
      
9-4.2205–Objective design standards
Article 23. Sign Regulations
      
9-4.2301–Purpose and intent
      
9-4.2302–Permit required
      
9-4.2303–Definitions
      
9-4.2304–Construction, maintenance, and removal
      
9-4.2305–Residential zones
      
9-4.2306–Residential zones: New subdivisions
      
9-4.2307–Trailer Park Development Zones (T-P-D)
      
9-4.2308–Commercial and industrial zones
      
9-4.2309–Commercial and industrial zones: General requirements
      
9-4.2310–Special use permits
      
9-4.2311–Nonconforming signs
      
9-4.2312–Signs seal program: Exceptions
      
9-4.2313–Outdoor display of merchandise
Article 24. Off-Street Parking
      
9-4.2401–Intent and purposes
      
9-4.2402–Parking spaces required
      
9-4.2403–Computation of off-street parking spaces
      
9-4.2404–General installation requirements of parking areas
      
9-4.2405–General design standards of parking areas
      
9-4.2405.5–Parking structures: General design guidelines
      
9-4.2406–Applicability of Amendments
Article 25. Height, Yard, Area, and Building Conditions and Exceptions
      
9-4.2501–Building height
      
9-4.2502–Building height: Exceptions
      
9-4.2503–Yards: General
      
9-4.2504–Front yards
      
9-4.2505–Side yards
      
9-4.2506–Side yards where two-family, multiple, or row dwellings front or rear
on a side yard
      
9-4.2507–Reduced side yards
      
9-4.2508–Rear yards
      
9-4.2509–Projections into required yards
      
9-4.2509.1–Setback reductions in residential areas
      
9-4.2509.2–Electrical, barbed wire, broken glass, etc. in fencing
      
9-4.2509.5–Area requirements for accessory buildings
      
9-4.2510–Lot area
      
9-4.2511–Substandard reverse-corner and wedge-shaped lots
      
9-4.2512–Lot splits
      
9-4.2513–Building setback lines for property adjoining roads, streets, and
highways
      
9-4.2514–Structures within mapped roads, streets, and highway rights-of-way
      
9-4.2515–R Zone restrictions
      
9-4.2516–Transportable facilities for dwelling purposes
      
9-4.2517–(Repealed)
      
9-4.2518–Home occupations
      
9-4.2519–Garage sales and boutique sales
      
9-4.2520–Food cooperatives
      
9-4.2521–(Repealed)
      
9-4.2522–Fire protection
      
9-4.2523–Restaurant outdoor customer dining areas
      
9-4.2524–Residential Sports Facilities
      
9-4.2525–Emergency shelters
      
9-4.2526–Reasonable accommodations for persons with disabilities
      
9-4.2527–Transitional and supportive housing
      
9-4.2528–Self-storage facilities
      
9-4.2529–Replacement housing requirements and occupant protections
Article 26. Community Park and Recreational Facilities
      
9-4.2601–Purpose
      
9-4.2602–Residential developers to provide park and recreational facilities
      
9-4.2603–Application of article provisions
      
9-4.2604–Relation of land required to population density
      
9-4.2605–Determination of population density
      
9-4.2606–Amount of land to be dedicated
      
9-4.2607–Amount of fees in lieu of land dedication
      
9-4.2608–Credit for private open space
      
9-4.2609–Choice of dedication of land or payment of fees or both
      
9-4.2610–Designation of development time
      
9-4.2611–Limitations on use of land and fees
Article 27. Nonconforming Buildings and Uses
      
9-4.2701–Nonconforming uses of land
      
9-4.2702–Nonconforming buildings: Nonresidential
      
9-4.2702.5–Nonresidential buildings: Nonresidential buildings in redevelopment
areas
      
9-4.2703–Nonconforming buildings: Residential
      
9-4.2704–Nonconforming uses of conforming buildings
      
9-4.2705–Nonconforming uses of nonconforming buildings
      
9-4.2706–Nonconforming uses of land and buildings
      
9-4.2707–Nonconforming lots
Article 28. Variances and Permits
      
9-4.2801–Variances: Authorized
      
9-4.2802–Permits, filing applications and payment of fees
      
9-4.2802.5–Conditions on certain special use permits
      
9-4.2803–Review and action on applications
      
9-4.2804–Authority of the Community Development Director to approve permit
applications
      
9-4.2805–Administrative actions
      
9-4.2806–Hearings: Procedure
      
9-4.2807–Appeals of administrative decisions to the Planning Commission
      
9-4.2808–Appeals to Council
      
9-4.2809–Implementation
      
9-4.2810–Former procedures superseded
      
9-4.2811–Revocation
      
9-4.2812–Expiration
      
9-4.2813–Reapplications
      
9-4.2814–Granting for certain land and uses
      
9-4.2815–Oil and gas permits: Conditions
      
9-4.2816–Exempt housing projects
      
9-4.2817–Inactive planning applications
Article 29. Amendments
      
9-4.2901–Scope
      
9-4.2902–Initiation
      
9-4.2903–Applications: Form
      
9-4.2904–Applications: Filing fees
      
9-4.2905–Applications: Acceptability and effect of signatures
      
9-4.2906–Applications: Permanent records
      
9-4.2907–Additional area
      
9-4.2908–Commission hearings
      
9-4.2909–Commission hearings: Time
      
9-4.2910–Commission hearings: Notices
      
9-4.2911–Commission hearings: Investigations
      
9-4.2912–Commission hearings: Continuance
      
9-4.2913–Commission hearings: Rules of conduct
      
9-4.2914–Commission recommendations
      
9-4.2915–Commission recommendations: Majority vote required: Finality
      
9-4.2916–Council hearings
      
9-4.2917–Council hearings: Modification of Commission recommendations
      
9-4.2918–Council hearings: Decisions
      
9-4.2919–Reapplications
      
9-4.2920–Urgency interim ordinances
      
9-4.2921–Prezoning unincorporated territory
Article 30. Enforcement, Violations and Penalties
      
9-4.3001–Conflicting licenses, permits, and certificates
      
9-4.3002–Annexed property
      
9-4.3003–Nonconforming buildings and uses
      
9-4.3004–Enforcement: Appeals
      
9-4.3005–Violations
      
9-4.3006–Abatement of nuisances
      
9-4.3007–Noncompliance with permits or zone clearance: Stop orders
Article 31. Hillside Planned Development Zones (H-P-D)
      
9-4.3100–Purpose and policy (H-P-D)
      
9-4.3101–Hillside areas defined: Application of article provisions (H-P-D)
      
9-4.3102–Permitted uses (H-P-D)
      
9-4.3103–Hillside Planned Development Single-Family Detached sub-zone (H-P-D–S-
F-D)
      
9-4.3104–Uses requiring special use permits (H-P-D)
      
9-4.3105–Density (H-P-D)
      
9-4.3106–Grading Control (H-P-D)
      
9-4.3107–Open space ownership and maintenance (H-P-D)
      
9-4.3108–Development standards (H-P-D)
      
9-4.3109–Permits (H-P-D)
      
9-4.3110–Application for hillside plan development permit
      
9-4.3111–Permit hearing processing
      
9-4.3112–Development allotment or reservation of allotment required (H-P-D)
Article 32. Public, Quasi-Public, and Institutional Lands and Facilities Zone
(P-L)
      
9-4.3200–Purposes (P-L)
      
9-4.3201–Uses requiring development permits (P-L)
      
9-4.3202–Uses requiring special use permits (P-L)
      
9-4.3203–Development permits: Conditions and limitations (P-L)
      
9-4.3204–City projects reviewed by Planning Commission (P-L)
Article 33. Height Limit Overlay Zone (H)
      
9-4.3300–Purpose (H)
      
9-4.3301–Height limits (H)
      
9-4.3302–Front yards (H)
      
9-4.3303–Side yards (H)
      
9-4.3304–Rear yards (H)
      
9-4.3305–Area requirements (H)
Article 34. Historic Landmark Overlay Zone (HL)
      
9-4.3400–Purpose (HL)
      
9-4.3401–Delineation of historic landmarks or sites (HL)
      
9-4.3402–Archaeological sites: Special provisions (HL)
      
9-4.3403–Regulations (HL)
      
9-4.3404–Appeals (HL)
Article 35. Protected Ridgeline Overlay Zone Regulations (PR)
      
9-4.3500–Purpose (PR)
      
9-4.3501–Protected ridgeline zone (PR)
      
9-4.3502–Protected ridgeline development standards
      
9-4.3503–Commercial/industrial zone specific plan alternative
      
9-4.3504–Site planning/information submitted
Article 36. Open Space Zone (OS)
      
9-4.3600–Purposes (OS)
      
9-4.3601–Uses requiring development permits (OS)
      
9-4.3602–Uses requiring special use permits (OS)
Article 37. Urban Lot Splits and Two-Unit Housing Developments
      
9-4.3701–Intent and purpose
      
9-4.3702–Applicability
      
9-4.3703–Definition of terms
      
9-4.3704–Eligibility
      
9-4.3705–Urban lot split - planning permit and application requirements
      
9-4.3706–Urban lot split - standards and requirements
      
9-4.3707–Two-unit housing development - planning permit and application
requirements
      
9-4.3708–Two-unit housing development - standards and requirements
Article 38. Special Use Permit for Rental of Dwelling
      
9-4.3800–Special use permit to rent dwelling
Article 39. Highway and Arterial Business/Auto Mall Zone (C-2/AM)
      
9-4.3900–Purpose (C-2/AM)
      
9-4.3901–Permitted uses (C-2/AM)
      
9-4.3902–Uses requiring special use permits (C-2/AM)
      
9-4.3903–Development permits: Standards, conditions and limitations (C-2/AM)
Article 40. Transportation Demand Management (TDM) Standards for New
Development
      
9-4.4001–Purpose, authorization and intent
      
9-4.4002–Definitions
      
9-4.4003–Transportation demand and trip reduction standards and measures
      
9-4.4004–Applicability of TDM development standards
      
9-4.4005–Review of transit impacts
      
9-4.4006–Monitoring
Article 41. Temporary uses
      
9-4.4100–Purpose
      
9-4.4101–Uses permitted subject to a temporary use permit
      
9-4.4102–Application
Article 42. Oak Tree Preservation and Protection
      
9-4.4201–Purpose
      
9-4.4202–Definitions
      
9-4.4203–Oak tree preservation
      
9-4.4204–Permit required
      
9-4.4205–Exemptions
      
9-4.4206–Processing of permits: Standards for granting or denying permits
      
9-4.4207–Conditions on removal
      
9-4.4208–Non-liability of City
      
9-4.4209–Enforcement
Article 43. Landmark Tree Preservation and Protection
      
9-4.4301–Purpose
      
9-4.4302–Definitions
      
9-4.4303–Landmark tree preservation
      
9-4.4304–Permit required: Exemptions
      
9-4.4305–Processing of permits: Standards for granting or denying permits
      
9-4.4306–Conditions on removal
      
9-4.4307–Nonliability of City
      
9-4.4308–Penalties
      
9-4.4309–Tree valuation
      
9-4.4310–Designation of historic trees
Article 44. Wireless Communications Facilities
      
9-4.4401–Purpose
      
9-4.4402–Permits required
      
9-4.4403–Compliance with policies
Article 45. Accessory Dwelling Units
      
9-4.4501–Intent and purpose
      
9-4.4502–Authority
      
9-4.4503–Applications and approvals
      
9-4.4504–Preclusion of minimum unit development
      
9-4.4505–Location and number of ADUs
      
9-4.4506–Development standards
      
9-4.4507–Objective design standards
      
9-4.4508–Parking
      
9-4.4509–Fire sprinklers and utilities
      
9-4.4510–Occupancy and conveyance
      
9-4.4511–JADU deed restriction
      
9-4.4512–Fees
      
9-4.4513–State-mandated ADUs
CHAPTER 5. ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT AND ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY PROTECTION
Article 1. Purpose
      
9-5.101–Purpose
      
9-5.102–Specific provisions
Article 2. Continuity and Ratification
      
9-5.201–Ratification of prior City requirements
      
9-5.202–Ratification of prior reports
      
9-5.203–Continuity
Article 3. Notice Requirements
      
9-5.301–Notice of draft environmental documents
CHAPTER 6. LIABILITY FOR ANNEXATION FEES
      
9-6.01–Recitals
      
9-6.02–Inhabited annexations (twelve or more registered voters)
      
9-6.03–All annexations
CHAPTER 7. EXEMPTED CHARGES FOR LOW
INCOME SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING
       
9-7.01–Exempted charges for low income senior citizen housing
CHAPTER 8. DEDICATION OF LAND AND/OR PAYMENT
OF IN LIEU FEES FOR SCHOOL FACILITIES
      
9-8.01–Findings and purpose
      
9-8.02–Definitions
      
9-8.03–Application of chapter provisions
      
9-8.04–Findings required
      
9-8.05–Dedication of land or payment of fees required
      
9-8.06–Choice of dedication or payment of fees: Procedures
      
9-8.07–Limitations on use of land and fees
      
9-8.08–Schedules specifying use of land or fees
      
9-8.09–Reports by the school district
CHAPTER 9. TIME LIMITATIONS FOR JUDICIAL REVIEWS OF CITY DECISIONS OR ACTIONS
TAKEN
      
9-9.01–Time limitations for judicial reviews of City decisions or actions taken
CHAPTER 10. AFFORDABLE HOUSING
Article 1. General Provisions
      
9-10.101–Intent and purpose
      
9-10.102–Definitions
Article 2. Affordable Housing Trust Fund
      
9-10.201–Creation of the Affordable Housing Trust Fund
      
9-10.202–Revenue to Fund
      
9-10.203–Purpose and use of monies in the Fund
      
9-10.204–Administration of the Fund
Article 3. Inclusionary Housing Program
      
9-10.301–Purpose and intent
      
9-10.302–Applicability
      
9-10.303–Exemptions
      
9-10.304–Inclusionary Housing Plan
      
9-10.305–Standards for inclusionary units
      
9-10.306–Alternative Compliance Procedures
      
9-10.307–Inclusionary housing incentives
      
9-10.308–General requirements for inclusionary units
Article 4. Nonresidential Development Linkage Fees
      
9-10.401–Purpose
      
9-10.402–Applicability
      
9-10.403–Exemptions
      
9-10.404–Nonresidential use categories
      
9-10.405–Assignment of specific use to nonresidential use categories
      
9-10.406–Method of calculation
      
9-10.407–Determination and payment of fees
      
9-10.408–Adjustment and review of fees
      
9-10.409–Use of linkage fees
Article 5. Density Bonus Program
      
9-10.501–Purpose and intent
      
9-10.502–General density bonus program provisions
      
9-10.503–City review and approval of density bonus plan
      
9-10.504–General requirements for density bonus affordable units
Article 6. Compliance Procedures
      
9-10.601–Affordable housing agreement
      
9-10.602–Affordable unit restrictions
      
9-10.603–Implementation, monitoring and enforcement
      
9-10.604–Wavier requirements
Article 7. Incentives for Small and Underutilized Parcels
      
9-10.701–Purpose and intent
      
9-10.702–Eligibility for incentives
      
9-10.703–Incentives
Article 8. Incentives for Affordable Housing with Lot Consolidation
      
9-10.801–Purpose and intent
      
9-10.802–Eligibility for incentives
      
9-10.803–Incentives
      
9-10.804–Affordability requirements
CHAPTER 11. DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
      
9-11.01–Authority
      
9-11.02–Applications
      
9-11.03–Fees
      
9-11.04–Qualification as an applicant
      
9-11.05–Review of application
      
9-11.06–Public hearings
      
9-11.07–Notice requirements
      
9-11.08–Failure to receive notice
      
9-11.09–Determination by Planning Commission
      
9-11.10–Decision by City Council
      
9-11.11–Approval and effective date of a development agreement
      
9-11.12–Recordation
      
9-11.13–Periodic review required
      
9-11.14–Proceedings for amending, modification or termination
CHAPTER 12. PUBLIC HEARING AND ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW NOTICE REQUIREMENTS
Article 1. Purpose
      
9-12.101–Applicability: Notices of application and public hearing notices
      
9-12.102–Applicability: Environmental review notices
      
9-12.103–Intent
Article 2. Notices of Applications and Public Hearing Notices
      
9-12.201–Contents of notice
      
9-12.202–Notice requirements
      
9-12.203–Notice by mailing or delivery: Category 1 applications
      
9-12.204–Notice by mailing or delivery: Five-hundred-foot radius
      
9-12.205–Notice to local agencies
      
9-12.206–Notice to homeowners and property owners associations
      
9-12.207–Notice by posting with a small sign
      
9-12.208–Notice by posting with a large sign
      
9-12.209–Notice by publication (legal advertising section)
      
9-12.210–(Repealed)
Article 3. Environmental Review Notices
      
9-12.301–Contents of notice
      
9-12.302–Notice requirements
CHAPTER 13. DISPOSITION OR LEASE OF PROPERTY
HELD BY THE CITY FOR OPEN SPACE PURPOSES
Article 1. General
      
9-13.101–Purpose
      
9-13.102–Definitions
      
9-13.103–City Council authority
Article 2. Disposition of Open Space Property
      
9-13.201–Public hearing required
      
9-13.202–Notice requirements
      
9-13.203–Consolidation of hearings
Article 3. Exceptions
      
9-13.301–Transfer to other agencies for open space purposes
      
9-13.302–Minor open space adjustments
ZONING MAPS
APPENDIX A. SPECIFIC PLAN NO. 15
CHAPTER 1. FLOOD CONTROL
Sec. 9-1.01. Fees.
   The City hereby consents to the imposition and collection of flood control
fees as a condition of development of land within the corporate boundaries of
the City within Zone Three of the Ventura County Flood Control District
pursuant to the provisions of Ventura County Flood Control District Ordinance
No. FC-14, as amended by Ordinance No. FC-16, and Section 7.1 of the Ventura
County Flood Control Act.
(§ 1, Ord. 164)
Sec. 9-1.02. Building permits: Applications.
   When land is to be developed (as such term is defined in Ventura County
Flood Control District Ordinance No. FC-14) on less than the whole of a lot or
parcel of record containing in excess of one acre, the building permit
applicant shall furnish, and the building permit application shall contain, a
legal description of the part of the lot or parcel of land of record which is
to be developed and to which fees are to be applied. The provisions of this
section shall not apply to the construction of a single-family building,
structure, or improvement on a single lot or parcel of record.
(§ 3, Ord. 164)
Sec. 9-1.03. Building permits: Issuance: Conditions.
   No building permit shall be issued until all applicable fees for flood
control facilities prescribed by the Ventura County Flood Control District have
been paid.
(§ 2, Ord. 164)
CHAPTER 2. GENERAL PLAN AND SPECIFIC PLANS*
*   Chapter 2 entitled “Master Plan,” consisting of Section 9-2.01, codified
from Ordinance No. 7, repealed by Ordinance No. 190-NS, effective January 28,
1971. Chapter 2 entitled “General Plan,” consisting of Sections 9-2.01 through
9-2.05, added by Ordinance No. 190-NS, effective January 28, 1971 repealed by
Ordinance No. 436-NS, effective April 25, 1974.
Article 1. General Plan
Sec. 9-2.101. Defined.
   The Community Development Department shall prepare, the Planning Commission
shall approve, and the Council shall adopt a comprehensive, long-term General
Plan for the physical development of the City and of any land outside the
boundaries of the City which, in the judgment of the Planning Commission, bears
relation to the future growth and development of the City and its planning. The
General Plan thus adopted shall comply with the requirements of Articles 5 and
6 of Chapter 3 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the State as to form and
the manner of adoption. Such plan as adopted shall be a policy guide to the
Planning Commission and Council in implementing future development and long-
term planning. Such plan may be amended as set forth in this chapter and shall
not be considered a zoning law or specific zoning. The preparation of specific
plants, the granting of zoning, and the authorization of zone changes after the
adoption of such plan shall take into consideration the analysis, projections,
and studies adopted as part of such General Plan. Zoning shall be consistent
with the General Plan, as required by the provisions of Sections 65860 of said
Government Code.
(§ 1, Ord. 436-NS, eff. April 25, 1974)
Sec. 9-2.102. Nature and Purpose.
   The General Plan shall consist of a statement of development policies and
shall include a diagram or diagrams and a text setting forth objectives,
principles, standards, and plan proposals and shall include a land use element,
a circulation element, a housing element, an open space element, a conservation
element, a seismic safety element, a safety element, a scenic highways element,
a noise element, and such other elements as may be required in the future by
State legislation as contained in the Government Code of the State. In
addition, such plan shall include as many of the permitted elements under
Section 65303 of said Government Code as may seem to the Council, upon the
recommendation of the Planning Commission, to be reasonably required.
(§ 1, Ord. 436-NS, eff. April 25, 1974)
Sec. 9-2.103. Formulation.
   During the formulation of a General Plan, the Planning Commission shall
consult with public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic,
educational, professional, and other organizations, and citizens generally to
the end that the maximum coordination of plans may be secured, and properly
located sites for all public purposes may be indicated on the General Plan.
(§ 1, Ord. 436-NS, eff. April 25, 1974)
Sec. 9-2.104. Adoption.
   The General Plan, or any part or element thereof, and any amendment to such
plan or any part or element thereof, shall be adopted by resolution in the
manner provided by Article 6 of Chapter 3 of the State Planning and Zoning Law
(commencing at Government Code section 65350).
   “Notice of all public hearings with respect to the adoption of the General
Plan or any part or element thereof, shall be given in the manner prescribed by
the California Government Code and as may be augmented by the provisions of
Chapter 12 of this title.”
(§ 1, Ord. 436-NS, eff. April 25, 1974, as amended by §4, Ord. 1178-NS, eff.
April 27, 1993)
Sec. 9-2.105. Administration.
   The General Plan, or any part or element thereof, and any amendment to such
plan, or any part or element thereof, shall be administered in accordance with
the provisions of Article 7 of Chapter 3 of Division 1 of Title 7 of the State
Government Code.
(§ 1, Ord. 436-NS, eff. April 25, 1974, as amended by §22, Ord. 1250-NS, eff.
January 9, 1996)
Article 2. Procedure for Amendments to the General Plan
Sec. 9-2.201. Amendment procedures.
   All amendments to the General Plan, or any part or element thereof, shall be
considered in accordance with the provisions of Article 6 of Chapter 3 of the
State Planning and Zoning Law (commencing at Government Code Section 65350). No
mandatory element of the General Plan may be amended more frequently than as
specified in Government Code Section 65358.
   Notice of all public hearings with respect to the amendment of the General
Plan, or any part or element thereof, shall be given in the manner prescribed
by the California Government Code and as may be augmented by the provisions of
Chapter 12 of this title.
(§ 1, Ord. 436-NS, eff. April 25, 1974, as amended by §5, Ord. 1178-NS, eff.
April 27, 1993)
Sec. 9-2.202. Initiation.
   A proposed amendment to an element of the General Plan may be initiated in
the following manner only:
   (a)   By the adoption of a resolution of the Planning Commission setting the
matter for study and hearing; or
   (b)   By the adoption of a resolution of the Council requesting the Planning
Commission to set the matter for hearing, report, and recommendation:
   (1)   Upon its own motion; or
   (2)   Upon the acceptance of a petition filed pursuant to the provisions of
Article 3 of this chapter.
   In all cases where an amendment to the General Plan is initiated, the
Council or Planning Commission shall designate the area and/or subjects to be
studied.
(§ 1, Ord. 436-NS, eff. April 25, 1974)
Sec. 9-2.203. Increases on residential densities or commercial acreage.
   (a)   Purpose. The City’s General Plan is a long term guide for orderly
development of this community, which plan should not be subject to unreasonable
and increased development pressures. Based on the City’s present build out
under that General Plan, the City Council finds the City of Thousand Oaks is at
a point where the ultimate and foreseeable residential and commercial
development in the City’s Planning Area can be accurately predicted. The City’s
infrastructure and public facilities were or have been designed based on the
development projections in the City’s General Plan, as in effect on November 5,
1996. These public facilities can accommodate that planned and foreseeable
development. However, any increase in the residential density ranges or in
commercial acreage over those presently shown in the Land Use Element of the
General Plan will alter the character of the City and place an unacceptable
burden on the City’s topography and infrastructure. The City desires to promote
an improved local jobs/housing balance, and since land use changes to
environmentally sensitive industrial uses do not place as great a demand on
public services, roads, freeways and infrastructure, as do residential and
commercial uses, such changes are not a new policy direction requiring a vote
of the community.
   Any amendment either to the General Plan's designated acreage for
“commercial” land uses or in the residential land use density ranges, which
produces a net increase in excess of the land areas so designated, or in excess
of the dwelling unit per net acre density ranges shown on the Land Use Element
of the City’s General Plan as of November 5,1996, is a policy decision that the
voters of the City of Thousand Oaks should make.
   (b)    Voter approval of certain general plan amendments. No proposed
amendment to the Land Use Element of the City’s General Plan of the following
types shall be effective until it has been considered and approved for the
ballot by the City Council, and then submitted to and approved by a majority of
the City’s voters voting at a general or special election:
   (1)   Any amendment which reclassifies land from the “parks, golf course,
and open space” designation to any other designation; or
   (2)   Any amendment which cumulatively provides a net increase in the
maximum number of residential dwelling units which could be permitted under the
proposed land use designation; or
   (3)   Any amendment which cumulatively provides a net increase in the land
designated “commercial.”
   The proposed amendment to the Land Use Element must first have been
initiated pursuant to Section
9-2.202, have completed any environmental analysis required by law and have
been reviewed by the Planning Commission. A proposed ballot measure under this
section may contain or affect more than one site, designation or parcel.
   (c)   Periodic Review. As required by law, the City Council shall
periodically review the land uses and density ranges in the Land Use Element of
the General Plan, as well as the overall General Plan’s internal consistency,
and may request the approval of proposed Land Use Element changes by the voters
pursuant to this section, if the Council finds new circumstances,
justification, or state/federal mandates require such an amendment.
   (d)   Exemptions. This requirement of a voter approval shall not be required
or apply for the following amendments or situations:
   (1)   Where the amendment is necessary to avoid, or the application of the
voter approval requirement of this section would be deemed, an unconstitutional
taking of property under the United States or California Constitutions, be
contrary to federal laws, or the laws of this state:
   (2)   Where the amendment is necessary in order to comply with, or is
directed under a court order, judgment, writ or mandate.
   (3)   Where the amendment is necessary for a viable use of publicly owned
land which has been determined by the owner to be, and is, declared surplus as
no longer needed for a public purpose, such as unneeded school sites or the
approximate thirty-five (35) acres at 401 Hillcrest Drive.
   (e)   City Council sponsored initiative; effective period. This section was
enacted as a City Council sponsored initiative, approved by the voters at a
city-wide general election on November 5, 1996. Except for evaluation,
processing and procedural matters, this section cannot be amended or repealed
by the City Council without such amendment or repeal being approved by the
voters of Thousand Oaks. This section shall be effective and apply to any Land
Use Element amendments up to November 5, 2026, at which time this section shall
terminate.
(§ 2, Ord. 1280-NS, eff. Dec. 13, 1996)
Sec. 9-2.204. Limitations on amendments relating to the “Parks, Golf Courses,
Open Space” designation.
   (a)   Until December 31, 2050, the provisions and designations governing the
intent for lands designated “Parks, Golf Courses, Open Space” on the Land Use
Element, Open Space Element and Recreational Element, as amended through March
1, 1996, shall not be amended except to add lands to the “Parks, Golf Courses,
Open Space” designation; unless such amendment is approved by the vote of the
people.
   (b)   All those lands designated as “Parks, Golf Courses, Open Space” in the
adopted City of Thousand Oaks General Plan “Land Use Map,” as amended through
March 1, 1996, and lands which are subsequently added to the “Parks, Golf
Courses, Open Space” designation, shall remain so designated until December 31,
2050, unless redesignated to another General Plan land use category by vote of
the people, or redesignated by the City Council pursuant to the procedures set
forth in subsection (c), below.
   (c)   Land use designated as “Parks, Golf Courses, Open Space” on the Land
Use Map may be redesignated to another land use category by the City Council if
each of the following conditions are satisfied:
   (1)   The City Council makes a finding that the application of the
provisions of Section 2(a) of Ordinance 1265-NS would constitute
unconstitutional taking of the private landowner’s property; and
   (2)   In permitting the redesignation, the City Council allows additional
land uses only to the extent necessary to avoid said unconstitutional taking of
the landowner’s property.
   (d)   Approval by a vote of the people is accomplished when a General Plan
amendment is placed on the ballot through any procedure provided for in the
Elections Code, and a majority of the voters vote in favor of it. Whenever the
City Council adopts an amendment requiring approval by a vote of the people,
pursuant to the provisions of this subsection, the City Council’s action shall
have no effect until after such a vote is held and a majority of the voters
vote in favor of it. The City Council shall follow the provisions of the
Elections Code in all matters pertaining to such an election.
   This section is consistent with the initiative petition and accompanying
ordinance presented to Thousand Oaks City Council, and then adopted by the City
Council on June 18, 1996 and re-adopted on December 13, 2016. Until December
31, 2050, this section may only be amended or repealed by the voters of the
City at a general election.
(§ 1, Ord. 1339-NS eff. July 8, 1999; Ord. 1628-NS eff. December 23, 2016)
Article 3. Petitions for Amendments to the General Plan
Sec. 9-2.301. Filing: Form: Scope.
   Any interested party may file a petition with the Community Development
Director requesting the initiation of an amendment to the General Plan, except
that no person shall file, and the Community Development Director shall not
accept, a petition which is substantially the same as a petition upon which
final action has been taken within one year prior thereto. No petition shall be
accepted for filing or shall be processed unless it complies with the
requirements set forth in this article.
   The Community Development Director shall prescribe the form and scope of
petitions for amendments to the General Plan, which form shall include the type
of information, data, and papers to be filed and the number of copies thereof.
(§ 1, Ord. 436-NS, eff. April 25, 1974)
Sec. 9-2.302. Contents.
   A petition requesting the initiation of an amendment to the General Plan
shall contain at least the following information:
   (a)   The name and address of the petitioner;
   (b)   The general location and description of the area proposed for review,
including a statement of the total area involved, or, where applicable, a
statement of the specific goal(s), policy(ies), or objective(s) of the General
Plan proposed for review;
   (c)   The proposed amendment suggested, including the circumstances,
conditions, and other justifications which would warrant such action; and
   (d)   A statement of the environmental, social, physical, economic, and
other factors affecting the area or policy suggested for review which support
and/or justify the consideration of the proposed amendment.
   The Community Development Director may require the filing of additional
information, dependent upon the nature and complexity of the General Plan
element and the proposed amendment.
(§ 1, Ord. 436-NS, eff. April 25, 1974)
Sec. 9-2.303. Fees.
   For the purpose of defraying the expense involved in connection with
processing a petition for an amendment to the General Plan as provided in this
article, a fee prescribed by Council resolution shall accompany each such
petition.
(§ 1, Ord. 436-NS, eff. April 25, 1974, as amended by § IV, Ord. 581-NS, eff.
August 12, 1976, and § IV, Ord. 776-NS, eff. April 16, 1981)
Sec. 9-2.304. Acceptance.
   Upon the receipt of a verified petition, the Community Development Director
shall prepare a recommendation relative to the initiation of the proposed
amendment and shall transmit such petition and recommendation to the City
Clerk, who shall schedule the matter for Council consideration.
   A petition requesting the consideration of an amendment to the General Plan
shall be construed as a suggestion only. The Council shall not be required to
initiate such action where the Council deems no legitimate basis has been
presented making it in the public interests to do so. The Council shall
announce its decision on a petition to initiate an amendment to the General
Plan by resolution. The petitioner shall be notified of the action of the
Council by the City Clerk.
(§ 1, Ord. 436-NS, eff. April 25, 1974)
Article 4. Specific Plans
Sec. 9-2.401. Authority: Scope.
   Specific Plans are authorized by the provisions of Article 8 of Chapter 3 of
Division 1 of Title 7 of the State Government Code. All Specific Plans prepared
pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be consistent with the
authority and scope set forth in Article 8.
(§ 1, Ord. 436-NS, eff. April 25, 1974, as amended by § 23, Ord. 1250-NS, eff.
January 9, 1996)
Sec. 9-2.402. Specific Plan applications and adoption.
   (a)   The Community Development Director shall provide forms for Specific
Plans and amendments thereto, and shall prescribe the information necessary to
be submitted and other filing requirements for such applications. Applications
for the approval or amendment of a Specific Plan shall be considered in
accordance with the procedure set forth in Article 8 of Chapter 3 of the State
Planning and Zoning Law (commencing at Government Code Section 65350).
   (b)   Notice of all public hearings with respect to the adoption of or
amendment(s) to a Specific Plan, shall be given in the manner prescribed by the
Government Code and as may be augmented by the provisions of Chapter 12 of this
title.
(§ 1, Ord. 436-NS, eff. April 25, 1974, as amended by § 6, Ord. 1178-NS, eff.
April 27, 1993)
Sec. 9-2.403. Contents of Specific Plans.
   (a)   A Specific Plan shall include a text and diagram or diagrams which
specify the components required by Section 65451 of the California Government
Code and such other subjects as may be determined appropriate by the City.
   (b)   In approving a Specific Plan or amendment thereto, the Council may
impose conditions on development to assure compliance with all the elements and
aspects of the Specific Plan.
(§ 1, Ord. 436-NS, eff. April 25, 1974, as amended by § 6, Ord. 1178-NS, eff.
April 27, 1993)
Sec. 9-2.404. Filing fees.
   A filing fee prescribed by Council resolution shall be submitted with all
applications for Specific Plan approval and for all applications for amendments
to Specific Plans. Such fees shall be in addition to any fees or deposits
required by any other section of this Code.
(§ 1, Ord. 436-NS, eff. April 25, 1974, as amended by § V, Ord. 581-NS, eff.
August 12, 1976, and § V, Ord. 776-NS, eff. April 16, 1981)
Article 5. Urban Restriction Boundary
Sec. 9-2.501. Purpose and findings.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this initiative is to re-adopt for the City of
Thousand Oaks its Urban Restriction Boundary and the protections of lands
designated as Existing Parks, Golf Courses, Open Space, as set forth in the
Parks Initiative. The Thousand Oaks City Urban Restriction Boundary (Thousand
Oaks CURB) line has the following objectives:
   (1)   To encourage efficient growth patterns and protect the City of
Thousand Oaks' quality of life by concentrating future development largely
within existing developed areas, or, in some cases, directly adjacent to them,
consistent with the availability of infrastructure and services;
   (2)   To promote on lands outside the Thousand Oaks CURB line ongoing
agricultural and other natural resource and open space uses as defined in
Government Code Section 65560(b), such as preservation of natural resources and
natural habitat, public and private outdoor recreation, uses that foster public
health and safety, and productive investment for farming enterprises;
   (3)   To manage the City's growth in a manner that fosters and protects the
character of Thousand Oaks while encouraging appropriate economic development
in accordance with the City's unique local conditions;
   (4)   To allow the City to continue to meet its reasonable housing needs for
all economic segments of the population, especially low and moderate income
households, by directing the development of housing into areas where services
and infrastructure are more efficiently available; and
   (5)   To promote stability in long term planning for the City by
establishing a cornerstone policy within the General Plan designating the
geographic limits of long term urban development and allowing sufficient
flexibility within those limits to respond to the City's changing needs over
time.
   The Parks Initiative has similar purposes, and works symbiotically with the
SOAR measure, with its intent focused on protecting the unique position held by
lands designated Existing Parks, Golf Courses, Open Space within the City's
planning area.
   (b)   Findings.
   (1)   The protection of existing agricultural, open space and watershed
lands surrounding the City of Thousand Oaks is of critical importance to
present and future residents of the City of Thousand Oaks. Agriculture has been
and remains a major contributor to the economy of the City and County of
Ventura, directly and indirectly creating employment for many people and
generating substantial tax revenues for the City.
   (2)   In particular, the City of Thousand Oaks and surrounding area, with
its unique topography, viewsheds, watershed lands and proximity to unique
soils, micro-climate and hydrology, is a gate-keeper to one of the finest
growing regions in the world. Ranch land, vegetable and fruit production from
the County of Ventura and in particular the importance of the Calleguas
watershed, Hidden Valley, Tierra Rejada Valley and alluvial plains adjacent to
the City have achieved international acclaim, enhancing the City's economy and
reputation. As importantly, the ring of open space around the City provides a
unique open space buffer of immense importance to the protection of the
wildlife indigenous to the area.
   (3)   Continued urban encroachment into agricultural, open space or
watershed areas will impair agriculture and threaten the public health, safety
and welfare by causing increased traffic congestion, associated air pollution,
not only for the City but for its jurisdictional neighbors. Such urban
encroachment would eventually result in both the unnecessary, expensive
extension of public services and facilities and inevitable conflicts between
urban, agricultural and open space uses.
   (4)   The unique character of the City of Thousand Oaks and quality of life
of City residents depend on the protection of a substantial amount of open
space, rural and agricultural lands both within and without its City limits.
Part of that unique character requiring protection is the land use designations
of Existing Parks, Golf Courses, Open Space within the City’s planning area.
   The protection of such lands not only ensures the continued viability of
agriculture, but also protects the available water supply to surrounding
communities and contributes to flood control and the protection of wildlife,
environmentally sensitive areas, and irreplaceable natural resources. As
importantly, continuing the existence of the City Urban Restriction Boundary
around the City of Thousand Oaks would promote the formation and continuation
of a cohesive community by defining the boundaries and by helping to prevent
urban sprawl. Such a City Urban Restriction Boundary has and will continue to
promote the efficient municipal services and facilities by confining urban
development to defined development areas.
   (5)   This initiative ensures that the important Goals and Policies of the
general plan are inviolable against transitory short-term political decisions
and that agricultural, watershed and open space lands are not prematurely or
unnecessarily converted to other non-agricultural or non-open space uses
without public debate and a vote of the people.
   Accordingly, the initiative requires that until December 31, 2050, the City
of Thousand Oaks shall restrict the provision of urban services, or creation of
urban uses, other than in certain circumstances and according to specific
procedures set forth in this initiative measure, within the Urban Restriction
Boundary created in 1998 by initiative, and extended by this initiative measure
using the location of the Sphere of Influence Line established by the Local
Agency Formation Commission as of January 1, 1998. Although the Sphere of
Influence has since been expanded to include the Broome Ranch, the CURB line
shall continue to be in its current location, coterminous with the Sphere of
Influence line applicable to the City of Thousand Oaks in existence on January
1,1998, approved by the Local Agency Formation Commission.
   (6)   Although established in the same location as the Sphere of Influence
line as it existed as of January 1, 1998, the CURB is not intended to and shall
in no way inhibit, and has not inhibited, the Local Agency Formation Commission
from changing or altering the Sphere of Influence line in accordance with state
law. The two lines although coincidentally coterminous as of one point in time
are independent one from the other in legal significance and purpose. While the
Sphere of Influence line may be altered by the Local Agency Formation
Commission in accordance with the provisions of state law, the Urban
Restriction Boundary is a local land use policy of the City and shall not be
changed except as herein provided.
   (7)   The Parks Initiative calls out the protection of lands designated by
the City of Thousand Oaks as Existing Parks, Golf Courses, Open Space in the
general plan. Said lands shall remain as so designated, absent a vote of the
public until December 31, 2050.
(§ 1, Ord. 1328-NS, eff. December 4, 1998; as amended by § 2, Ord. 1628-NS,
eff. December 23, 2016)
Sec. 9-2.502. General Plan amendment.
   1.   PURPOSE
   The City of Thousand Oaks and surrounding area, with its unique viewsheds,
watershed lands and proximity to unique soils, micro-climate and hydrology, is
a gate-keeper to one of the finest growing regions in the world. Ranch land,
vegetable and fruit production from the County of Ventura and in particular
Hidden Valley, the Tierra Rejada Valley and alluvial plains adjacent to the
City have achieved international acclaim, enhancing the City's economy and
reputation.
   The purpose of this initiative is to ensure that the preservation of
agricultural production, open space, and protection of environmentally
sensitive habitat both inside the City through the Parks Initiative readoption
and outside of the City through the SOAR initiative readoption are inviolable
against transitory short-term political decisions and that agricultural,
viewshed, watershed and open space lands are not prematurely or unnecessarily
converted to other non-agricultural or non-open space uses without public
debate and a vote of the people. As importantly, limiting urban sprawl through
the use of an Urban Restriction Boundary and protection of the land use
designations Existing Parks, Golf Courses, Open Space, enhances the sense of
community, allows for development unique to the City of Thousand Oaks and
promotes the efficient use of the City's infrastructure.
   2.   PRINCIPLES
   Continued urban encroachment into open space, viewshed and watershed areas
negatively impacts sensitive environmental areas, intrudes on open space
irrevocably changing its utility, diminishes the quality of life and threatens
the public health, safety and welfare by causing increased traffic congestion,
associated air pollution, alteration of sensitive lands in flood plains and
causing potentially serious water problems, such as pollution, depletion, and
sedimentation of available water resources not only for the City of Thousand
Oaks but for its jurisdictional neighbors. Such urban encroachment would
eventually result in both the unnecessary, expensive extension of public
services and facilities and inevitable conflicts between urban and open space/
agricultural uses.
   The unique character of the City of Thousand Oaks and quality of life of
City residents depend on the protection of a substantial amount of open space,
viewshed, and watershed. The protection of such lands through the
implementation of this Initiative by readoption of the Parks Initiative and the
SOAR initiatives through December 31, 2050, not only ensures the continued
viability of agriculture, but also protects the available water supply and
contributes to flood control and the protection of wildlife, environmentally
sensitive areas, and irreplaceable natural resources.
   3.   IMPLEMENTATION
   (a)   The City of Thousand Oaks hereby readopts the land use designations
set forth for protection in the Parks Initiative, in particular Existing Parks,
Golf Courses, Open Space, and readopts the established Thousand Oaks City Urban
Restriction Boundary (Thousand Oaks CURB), both as set forth in Ord. 1628-NS on
Exhibit "A." The Thousand Oaks CURB continues to run coterminously with the
Sphere of Influence line established by the Local Agency Formation Commission
for the City of Thousand Oaks, as it existed as of January 1,1998.
   (b)   Until December 31, 2050, the City of Thousand Oaks shall retain the
designations and land uses allowed on all lands designated in the General Plan
and on the Jurisdictional Boundaries Map [Attached to Ord. 1628-NS as Exhibit
"A " and incorporated herein by reference] as Existing Parks, Golf Courses,
Open Space, and shall restrict urban services (except temporary mutual
assistance with other jurisdictions) and urbanized uses of land to within the
Thousand Oaks City Urban Restriction Boundary, except as provided herein and
except for the purpose of completing roadways designated in the Circulation
Element of the Thousand Oaks General Plan as of January 1,1998, construction of
public potable water facilities, and public parks. In each reference to the
year 2030 found within the Parks Initiative, attached to Ord. 1628-NS (this
measure) as Exhibit "B", that reference is hereby amended to reference the year
2050. Other than for the exceptions provided herein, upon the effective date of
this Thousand Oaks SOAR and Parks Initiative General Plan amendment voter
approval extensions, the City and its departments, boards, commissions,
officers and employees shall continue to refuse to grant, or by inaction allow
to be approved by operation of law, any General Plan amendment, rezoning,
specific plan, subdivision map, conditional use permit, building permit or any
other ministerial or discretionary entitlement, which is inconsistent with the
purposes of this General Plan amendment extension, unless in accordance with
the Amendment Procedures of Section 4 of this General Plan Amendment extension.
   (c)   "Urbanized uses of land" as it pertains to the CURB shall mean any
development which would require the establishment of new community sewer
systems or the significant expansion of existing community sewer systems; or,
would result in the creation of residential densities greater than one primary
residential unit per 10 acres in area; or, would result in the establishment of
commercial or industrial uses which are neither agriculturally- related nor
related to the production of mineral resources.
   (d)   The Land Use Element Map, attached to Ord. 1628-NS as Exhibit "A " is
restated, and readopted to reflect the continued existence of the Thousand Oaks
Urban Restriction Boundary and the Existing Parks, Golf Courses, Open Space
land use designations through the year 2050.
   (e)   The City Urban Restriction Boundary, nor the Existing Parks, Golf
Courses, Open Space land use designations, as identified herein, may not be
amended, altered, revoked or otherwise changed prior to December 31, 2050,
except by vote of the people or by the City Council pursuant to the procedures
set forth in Section 4 of this General Plan amendment.
   4.   CHANGES TO BOUNDARY and LAND USE DESIGNATIONS; PROCEDURES
   Until December 31, 2050, the foregoing Purposes, Principles and
Implementation provisions of this initiative, extending and restating the
requirement for voter participation for changes to Existing Parks, Golf
Courses, Open Space and the CURB may be amended only by a vote of the people
commenced pursuant to the initiative process by the public, or pursuant to the
procedures set forth below.
   (a)   The City Council may amend the City Urban Restriction Boundary
described herein if it deems it to be in the public interest, provided that the
amended boundary is within the limits of said Urban Restriction Boundary
established by this General Plan Amendment. Any such contraction of the CURB
line may not thereafter be re-extended without following the procedures set
forth herein.
   (b)   The City Council, following at least one public hearing for
presentations by an applicant and the public, and after compliance with the
California Environmental Quality Act, may amend the Urban Restriction Boundary
described herein to comply with state law regarding the provision of housing
for all economic segments of the community, the City Council may amend the City
Urban Restriction Boundary as described herein in order to accommodate lands to
be designated for residential uses, provided that no more than 10 acres of land
may be brought within the Urban Restriction Boundary for this purpose in any
calendar year. Such amendment may be adopted only if the City Council makes
each of the following findings:
   (1)   The land is immediately adjacent to existing compatibly developed
areas and the applicant for the inclusion of land within the City of Thousand
Oaks Urban Restriction Boundary has provided to the City evidence that the Fire
Department, Police Department, Public Works Department, the Community
Development Department, applicable water and sewer districts, and the School
District with jurisdiction over such land have adequate capacity to accommodate
the proposed development and provide it with adequate public services; and
   (2)   That the proposed development will address the highest priority need
identified in the analysis by which the City has determined it is not in
compliance with State Law, i.e., low and very low income housing; and
   (3)   That there is no existing residentially designated land available
within the City Urban Restriction Boundary to accommodate the proposed
development; and
   (4)   That it is not reasonably feasible to accommodate the proposed
development by redesignating lands within the City Urban Restriction Boundary;
and
   (5)   Notice of such Proposed Modification is given according to the City's
standard notice requirements to neighboring properties; and as well, not less
than 30 days prior to the proposed modification appearing on the City Council
agenda, to LAFCo, and to all individuals or organizations who or which have
indicated a desire for such Notice by requesting the same by placing his/her/
its name and contact information with the City Clerk.
   (c)   The City Council following at least one public hearing for
presentations by an applicant and the public, and after compliance with the
California Environmental Quality Act, may amend the City Urban Restriction
Boundary described herein, or may redesignate lands designated on the General
Plan as Existing Parks, Golf Courses, Open Space, based on substantial evidence
in the record, if the City Council makes each of the following findings:
   (1)   Application of the provisions of subsections (a) or (b) of these
amendment procedures are unworkable and failure to make the suggested
amendments would constitute an unconstitutional taking of a landowner's
property for which compensation would be required or would deprive the
landowner of a vested right; and
   (2)   The amendment and associated land use designations will allow
additional land uses only to the minimum extent necessary to avoid said
unconstitutional taking of the landowner's property or to give effect to the
vested right.
   (d)   The City Council following at least one public hearing for
presentations by an applicant and the public, and after compliance with the
California Environmental Quality Act, may place any amendment to the Urban
Restriction Boundary or the provisions of the Existing Parks, Golf Courses,
Open Space land use designations, each as readopted by this initiative, on the
ballot pursuant to the mechanisms provided by State Law.
   (e)   The General Plan may be reorganized and individual provisions,
including the provisions of this initiative, may be renumbered or reordered in
the course of ongoing updates of the General Plan in accordance with the
requirements of state law.
(§ 1, Ord. 1328-NS, eff. December 4, 1998; as amended by § 3, Ord. 1628-NS,
eff. December 23, 2016)
Sec. 9-2.503. Exemptions for certain projects.
   The provisions of this initiative do not apply to any roadways designated in
the circulation element of the Thousand Oaks General Plan, construction of
public potable water facilities, or the creation of public parks, nor to any
development project that has obtained as of the effective date of the
initiative a vested right pursuant to state or local law.
(§ 1, Ord. 1328-NS, eff. December 4, 1998; as amended by § 4, Ord. 1628-NS,
eff. December 23, 2016)
Sec. 9-2.504. Insertion date.
   (a)   Upon the effective date of this initiative, the General Plan is
effectively amended to incorporate the terms of this initiative measure;
except, that if the four amendments of the mandatory elements of the general
plan permitted by state law for any given calendar year have already been
utilized in 2015, prior to the effective date of this initiative, this General
Plan amendment shall be deemed inserted in the City's General Plan on January
1, 2017.
   (b)   The City of Thousand Oaks General Plan in effect at the time the
Notice of Intention to circulate this initiative measure was submitted to the
City Clerk of Thousand Oaks, and that General Plan as amended by this
initiative measure, comprise an integrated, internally consistent and
compatible statement of policies for the City. In order to ensure that the City
of Thousand Oaks General Plan remains an integrated, internally consistent and
compatible statement of policies for the City as required by state law and to
ensure that the actions of the voters in enacting this initiative are given
effect, any provision of the General Plan that is adopted between the submittal
date and the date that this initiative measure is deemed inserted into the
General Plan, shall, to the extent that such interim-enacted provision is
inconsistent with the General Plan provisions adopted by section 3 of this
initiative measure, that interim-enacted provision shall be amended as soon as
possible and in the manner and time required by state law to ensure consistency
between the provisions adopted by this initiative and other elements of the
City's General Plan. In the alternative, such interim-enacted inconsistent
provision shall be disregarded and of no validity or effect.
(§ 1, Ord. 1328-NS, eff. December 4, 1998; as amended by § 5, Ord. 1628-NS,
eff. December 23, 2016)
Sec. 9-2.505. Severability.
   This measure shall be interpreted so as to be consistent with all federal
and state laws, rules, and regulations. If any section, sub-section, sentence,
clause, phrase, part, or portion of this measure is held to be invalid or
unconstitutional by a final judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
measure. The voters hereby declare that this measure, and each section, sub-
section, sentence, clause, phrase, part, or portion thereof would have been
adopted or passed even if one or more sections, sub-sections, sentences,
clauses, phrases, parts, or portions are declared invalid or unconstitutional.
If any provision of this initiative is declared invalid as applied to any
person or circumstance, such invalidity shall not affect any application of
this measure that can be given effect without the invalid application. This
initiative shall be broadly construed in order to achieve the purposes stated
in this initiative. It is the intent of the voters that the provisions of this
measure shall be interpreted by the City and others in a manner that
facilitates the protection of lands designated as Existing Parks, Golf Courses,
Open Space within the City and the confinement of urban uses within a City
Urban Restriction Boundary thereby protecting agricultural, open space and
rural lands, and preventing urban sprawl.
(§ 1, Ord. 1328-NS, eff. December 4, 1998; as amended by § 6, Ord. 1628-NS,
eff. December 23, 2016)
Sec. 9-2.506. Amendment or repeal.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, this initiative may be amended or
repealed only by the voters of the City of Thousand Oaks at an election held in
accordance with state law.
(§ 1, Ord. 1328-NS, eff. December 4, 1998; as amended by § 7, Ord. 1628-NS,
eff. December 23, 2016)
CHAPTER 3. SUBDIVISIONS*
*   Article 1 entitled “General Provisions,” consisting of Sections 9-3.101
through 9-3.116, codified from Ordinance Nos. 63 and 180 and recodified from
Sections 8200 through 8204, 8210, 8211, 8217, 8218, 8260, 8261, and 8293,
T.O.O.C., as amended by Ordinance Nos. 88, 149, 162-NS, effective August 27,
1980, and 581-NS, effective August 12, 1976, Article 2, entitled “Tentative
Maps,” consisting of Sections 9-3.201 through 9-3.223, recodified from Sections
8201, 8220 through 8232, and 8235 through 8245, T.O.O.C., as amended by
Ordinance Nos. 88, 149, 2156, 170, 181, 138-NS, effective February 3, 1980, and
said Ordinance Nos. 162-NS and 581-NS, Article 3 entitled “Final Maps,”
consisting of Sections 9-3.301 through 9-3.350, recodified from Sections 8255
through 8259 and 8262 through 8264, T.O.O.C., as amended by Ordinance Nos. 88,
170, 245-NS, effective December 23, 1971, and 275-NS, effective June 8, 1972,
Article 4 entitled “Improvements,” consisting of Section 9-3.401 through 9-
3.428, recodified from Sections 8265 through 8291, T.O.O.C., as amended by
Ordinance Nos. 88, 228, 221-NS, effective September 2, 1971, said Ordinance
Nos. 245-NS and 275-NS, and Ordinance No. 549-NS, effective November 13, 1975,
Article 5 entitled “Land Divisions,” consisting of Sections 9-3.501 through 9-
3.505, recodified from Sections 8212 through 8216, T.O.O.C., as amended by
Ordinance No. 88, and Article 6 entitled “Dedication of Land for Park and
Recreational Purposes,” consisting of Sections 9-3.501 through 9-3.611, as
added by Ordinance No. 238-NS, effective November 4, 1971, as amended by
Ordinance Nos. 376-NS, effective May 31, 1973, 403-NS, effective August 14,
1973, and 405-NS, effective September 13, 1973, repealed in their entirety by
Ordinance No. 744-NS, effective April 17, 1980.
Article 1. General Provisions
Sec. 9-3.101. Citation and authority.
   This chapter is adopted to implement and supplement the Subdivision Map Act
of the State as it presently exists and as it may be amended from time to time,
and this chapter may be cited as the “City of Thousand Oaks Subdivision Law.”
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.102. Applicability.
   Except as specifically excluded by the Subdivision Map Act of the State or
this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to any division of
real property wholly or partially within the incorporated area of the City and
shall govern the filing, processing, approval, conditional approval, or
disapproval of tentative, final, and parcel maps and any modifications thereof.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and in the Subdivision Map Act of
the State, all subdivisions shall be subject to the same substantive and
procedural requirements. Subdivisions of unincorporated territory adjacent to
the City, in the County, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter to
the extent permitted and as provided by Section 66454 of the Government Code of
the State.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.103. Modifications of requirements.
   Whenever, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, the Community
Development Director, or the Council, the land involved in any subdivision is
of such size or shape, or is subject to such title limitations of record, or is
affected by such topographical location or conditions, or is to be devoted to
such use that it is inadvisable or impracticable in the particular case to
conform fully to the regulations contained in this chapter, the Community
Development Director, the Planning Commission, or the Council may make such
modifications thereof as in its opinion are reasonably necessary or expedient
and in conformity with the Subdivision Map Act of the State.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Article 2. Definitions
Sec. 9-3.201. Incorporated and specific definitions.
   Whenever any words or phrases used in this chapter are not defined in this
chapter but are defined in the Subdivision Map Act of the State or elsewhere in
this title, such definitions shall be deemed incorporated in this chapter and
shall apply as though set forth in full in this chapter. The words and phrases
set forth in this article shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.202. Advisory Agency.
   (a)   The Planning Commission shall constitute the “Advisory Agency” for
divisions of real property which require the preparation of a tentative map and
a final map pursuant to this chapter and the State Subdivision Map Act, where
such map proposes the division of real property into five (5) or more lots or
parcels, tentative and parcel maps required by Government Code sections 66426
(b) through (d) and for major modifications to such maps, as provided in
Section
9-3.702(d) herein. In such capacity the Planning Commission is hereby empowered
to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove, a proposed subdivision.
   (b)   The Community Development Director shall constitute the “Advisory
Agency” for the following:
   (1)   Divisions of real property which require the preparation of a
tentative map and a parcel map pursuant to this chapter and the State
Subdivision Map Act, where such map proposes the division of real property into
four (4) or fewer lots or parcels and when required by Government Code Section
66426(a), and modifications there to, including time extensions for the
recordation of the approved map;
   (2)   Lot line adjustments;
   (3)   Actions taken relative to waivers of parcel maps;
   (4)   Certificates of compliance;
   (5)   Cancellations of merger;
   (6)   Minor modifications to approved tentative maps, including time
extensions for the recordation of an approved tentative map, as provided in
Section
9-3.702(d) herein.
   In such capacity the Community Development Director is hereby empowered to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove a proposed subdivision.
   (c)   The Director may designate an administrative hearing officer to
consider applications described herein and, if such officer is designated, he
or she shall have all the powers and duties granted to the Director herein.
   Wherever the title “Community Development Director” is used in this chapter,
it includes an administrative hearing officer designated by the Director.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980, as amended by § 2, Ord. 899-NS, eff. October
22, 1985, and § 7, Ord. 1178-NS eff. April 27, 1993)
Sec. 9-3.203. Appeal Board.
   (a)   “Appeal Board” shall have the meaning ascribed to that term in the
State Subdivision Map Act.
   (b)   The Planning Commission shall constitute the Appeal Board for all
decisions rendered by the Community Development Director pursuant to the
Director's authority as the Advisory Agency set forth in Section
9-3.202 herein.
   (c)   The Council shall constitute the Appeal Board for all decisions
rendered by the Planning Commission pursuant to its authority as the Advisory
Agency set forth in Section
9-3.202 herein, and pursuant to its authority as the Appeal Board for decisions
rendered by the Community Development Director.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980, as amended by § 7, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April
27, 1993)
Sec. 9-3.204. City Engineer.
   “City Engineer” shall mean the Public Works Director and duly authorized
representatives.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.205. County Surveyor.
   “County Surveyor” shall mean the Director of the County Public Works Agency
and his duly authorized representatives.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.206. Flag lot.
   “Flag lot” shall mean a lot which has at least six (6) courses or sides, at
least three (3) of which form a staff which abuts a public or private access
way and provides access to the rest of the lot. The staff shall be a minimum of
fifty (50') feet in length, measured from the side abutting the public or
private access way to the point at which the staff expands into the bulk or
flag portion of the lot. The staff shall have a width not less than twenty
(20’) feet nor greater than forty (40’) feet at its widest portion. A flag lot
shall have two (2) separate front yards with two (2) front property line
designations. One front yard shall be located in the staff portion adjacent to
the street with a front property line separating the staff from a street. A
second front yard shall be located in the bulk or flag portion of the flag lot
with a front property line which closely parallels the street. A front yard in
the flag portion of the lot may have a front property line designation that is
closely perpendicular to a street where the perpendicular lot line is narrower
than the lot line that closely parallels the street provided that the side
yards of the flag lot are adjacent to side yards of adjoining lots. In the case
of flag lots with zero lot line dwelling units, setbacks shall be in accordance
with Section
9-4.904(d)(2)(ii)(ad).
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980, as amended by §1, Ord. 1214-NS, eff. June
20, 1994, and § 1, Ord. 1414-NS, eff. October 2, 2003)
Sec. 9-3.207. Geologically hazardous area.
   “Geologically hazardous area” shall mean an area which may be affected by
one or more of the geologic hazards discussed in the Seismic Safety Element of
the General Plan of the City.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.208. Hillside area.
   “Hillside area” shall have the same meaning as set forth in subsection (n)
of Section
7-3.06 of Chapter 3 of Title 7 of this Code.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.209. Lot.
   “Lot” shall have the same meaning as the word “parcel,” and the two (2)
words shall be synonymous.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.210. Parcel.
   “Parcel” shall have the same meaning as the word “lot,” and the two (2)
words shall be synonymous.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.211. Permanent domestic water supply.
   “Permanent domestic water supply” shall mean potable water in a quantity
sufficient to adequately and continuously supply the total domestic
requirements of all customers, including requirements for fire protection under
maximum demand conditions, to be provided by a system approved by a public
health agency of the State or the Environmental Health Division of the
Environmental Resource Agency of the County. The potability shall be determined
in accordance with standards established by the State and the Federal
government.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.212. Public service easement (P.S.E.).
   “Public service easement” shall mean a non-fee City ownership of the right
to install and maintain, among other things, street lights, street trees,
sidewalks, street directional, advisory, and regulatory signs, underground
vault vents, and water main blow-off and air vent valves. In addition, such
term shall include a reservation of a public utility easement, the use thereof
secured individually by each qualified public utility requiring use therein,
and an easement for cable television purposes.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.213. Stock cooperative apartment project.
   “Stock cooperative apartment project” shall mean a stock cooperative as
defined by Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code of the State
where the “improved real property” referred to in said section is residential
real property, including, but not limited to, multi-family residential
property, and where “exclusive occupancy in a portion of the real property”
includes, but is not limited to, occupancy in a dwelling unit on the property.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.214. Subdivider.
   “Subdivider” shall mean a person, firm, corporation, partnership, or
association which proposes to divide, divides, or causes to be divided real
property into a subdivision for himself or itself or for others.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.215. Subdivision.
   “Subdivision” shall have the meaning set forth in the Subdivision Map Act in
the Government Code of the State.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980, as amended by § 24, Ord. 1250-NS, eff.
January 9, 1996)
Sec. 9-3.216. Subdivision Map Act.
   “Subdivision Map Act” shall mean the provisions of Sections 66410, et seq.
of Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the State and such
amendments and additions thereto as may be made from time to time by the
Legislature of the State.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.217. Tentative Map.
   “Tentative map” shall mean a nonrecordable map, made for the purpose of
showing lots, subdivision design, improvements, existing conditions in and
around the site, and such other information as required by Article 5 of this
chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 935-NS, eff. October 7, 1986)
Sec. 9-3.218. Vesting tentative map.
   “Vesting tentative map” shall mean a tentative map for a residential
subdivision that shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words
“Vesting Tentative Map” at the time it is filed in accordance with Article 8 of
this chapter, and is thereafter processed in accordance with the provisions of
that article.
(§ 1, Ord. 935-NS, eff. October 7, 1986)
Article 3. Map Requirements
Sec. 9-3.301. Subdivisions creating five or more lots or parcels.
   A tentative map and a final map shall be required for all subdivisions
creating five (5) or more lots or parcels, five (5) or more condominiums
(townhouses), stock cooperative apartment units, or a community apartment
project containing five (5) or more parcels, except where:
   (a)   The land, before division, contains less than five (5) net acres, and
each parcel created by the division abuts upon a maintained public street or
highway, and no dedications or improvements are required; or
   (b)   Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of twenty (20)
acres, and each parcel created by the division has a City approved access to a
maintained public street or highway; or
   (c)   The land comprises part of a tract of land zoned for industrial or
commercial development, and each parcel created by the division has a City
approved access to a public street or highway, and the proposed division has
the approval of the Council as to street alignments and widths; or
   (d)   Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of not less than
forty (40) acres or is not less than a quarter of a quarter section; provided,
however, a tentative and final map shall be required for a subdivision in which
one or more of the resultant parcels is between forty (40) acres or sixty (60)
acres in size.
   A City approved tentative map and a recorded parcel map shall be required
for those subdivisions described in subsections (a), (b), (c), and (d) of this
section.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.302. Subdivisions creating four or less lots or parcels: Waivers.
   A City approved tentative map and a final parcel map shall be required for
all subdivisions creating four (4) or less lots or parcels, or four (4) or less
condominiums (townhouses) or stock cooperative apartment units, and for
community apartment projects containing four (4) or less parcels, except when
the subdivision:
   (a)   Contains only parcels of not less than forty (40) acres or which are
not less than a quarter of a quarter section; or
   (b)   Is for land conveyed to or from a governmental agency, public entity
or public utility, or to a subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to
such public utility for rights-of-way, unless it is determined, upon
substantial evidence, that public policy necessitates a tentative map and
parcel map.
   A parcel map required by this chapter may be waived, pursuant to the
procedures set forth in subsection (b) of Section
9-3.702 of Article 7 of this chapter, by the Community Development Director
upon a finding that the proposed division complies with all requirements as to
area, improvements and design, floodwater drainage control, appropriate
improved public roads, wastewater facilities, water supply availability,
environmental protection, and other requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and
this Code. The Community Development Director, in his discretion, may require
the filing of a tentative map as a condition of waiver under this section.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.303. Exemptions.
   This chapter shall not be applicable to:
   (a)    The financing or leasing of apartments, offices, stores, or similar
spaces within apartment buildings, industrial buildings, commercial buildings,
mobile home parks, or trailer parks;
   (b)   Mineral, oil, or gas leases;
   (c)   Leases of land for agricultural purposes (cultivation of food or fiber
or the grazing or pasturing of livestock);
   (d)   Land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the provisions of the
Health and Safety Code of the State;
   (e)   Short-term leases (terminable by either party on not more than thirty
(30) days’ written notice) of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a
railroad corporation, as defined by Section 230 of the Public Utilities Code,
unless a showing is made in individual cases, under substantial evidence, that
public policy necessitates a map. In such a case, a parcel map shall be
required pursuant to the requirements of this Code;
   (f)   Lot line adjustments between two (2) or more adjacent parcels where no
additional parcels or building sites are created, the potential density of
development is not increased on any of the new parcels, no potential to further
divide any of the new parcels is created, the ingress and egress to the new
parcels does not create circulation problems on the parcels or to the
surrounding areas, and no violation of any provision of this Code will result;
provided, however, any such lot line adjustment shall be approved or
conditionally approved by the issuance of a certificate which shall be recorded
pursuant to the procedures set forth in subsection (b) of Section
9-3.702 of Article 7 of this chapter; and
   (g)   Any other exemption provided by the Subdivision Map Act.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.304. Condominium, community apartment, and stock cooperative apartment
projects.
   A map of a condominium project, community apartment project, or stock
cooperative apartment project need not show the buildings or the manner in
which the buildings or the airspace above the property shown on the map are to
be divided, nor shall the City have the right to refuse the approval of a
parcel, tentative, or final map of such a project on account of design or
location of buildings on the property or of the manner in which airspace is to
be divided; provided, however, the provisions of Article 19 of Chapter 4 of
this title relative to condominium conversions shall be applicable to such
projects, and the limitations set forth in this section in no way shall limit
the authority of the City under the provisions of said Article 19.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.305. Urban lot splits.
   The City shall ministerially process an application for an Urban Lot Split
pursuant to Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 37 - Urban Lot Splits and Two-Unit
Housing Developments.
(§ 1, Ord. 1704-NS, eff. November 25, 2022)
Article 4. Processing Fees
Sec. 9-3.401. Fees.
   Fees for processing subdivision matters pursuant to this chapter shall be
paid in the amount prescribed by resolution of the Council. Except as otherwise
specified in such resolution or in this Code, such fees shall not be
refundable.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Article 5. Filing of Tentative Maps
Sec. 9-3.501. Preliminary maps and data.
   In order to establish a working relationship between the City staff and
prospective subdividers prior to the submission of a formal tentative map, the
subdivider, in his discretion, may submit plans and data related to the design
and improvements of the proposed subdivision to the Community Development
Department for review for conformance with this chapter, this Code and other
applicable laws, regulations, and standards. The form and substance of the
information submitted and the procedure followed shall be determined by the
Community Development Director and may be patterned after Section
9-4.905 of Article 9 of Chapter 4 of this title. Upon the completion of such
process, the prospective subdivider may file a tentative map as provided by
this chapter.
   The time consumed by such procedure shall not be counted in determining
compliance with the requirements of Chapter 4.5 of Division 1 of Title 7 of the
Government Code of the State, the Environmental Quality Act of the State
(Public Resources Code Sections 21000, et seq.), Section
9-3.1401 of Article 14 of this chapter, subsection (b) of Section 66452.1 of
the Government Code of the State, or Section
9-3.702 of Article 7 of this chapter.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.502. Submission of tentative maps: Environmental documentation.
   (a)    Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, each proposed subdivision
shall first be submitted to the Community Development Department in the form of
a tentative map. Tentative maps shall be prepared and submitted in compliance
with all applicable State and City laws. Tentative maps shall be filed in the
office of the Community Development Department.
   (b)   Unless otherwise authorized in advance by the City Council, no
application for a tentative map shall be deemed filed and accepted for filing
unless the subdivision and use of land requested in said application is
permitted by the regulations of the underlying zone, Specific Plan (if
applicable), and General Plan designation in which the property is located.
When the Council deems it to be in the public's interest or appropriate for
proper planning for the subject property, the Council may allow a tentative map
application to be filed and processed concurrently with a proposed change of
the zone classification, Specific Plan, and/or General Plan or amendment
thereto, where such change is necessary to accommodate the proposed subdivision
or use. Where concurrent processing is permitted, the required public hearings
for the entitlements and associated zoning, Specific Plan or General Plan
legislative actions shall be combined, and only the Council shall make the
final decision on the subdivision entitlement application(s).
   (c)    Tentative maps shall not be deemed filed until any environmental
documentation required under the California Environmental Quality Act has been
completed.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1331-NS, eff. March
10, 1999)
Sec. 9-3.503. Preliminary procedure.
   Subdividers desiring to file a tentative subdivision map shall first obtain
a tract number from the County Surveyor upon the payment of the fee prescribed
therefor by resolution of the Board of Supervisors of the County. Tract numbers
may be obtained only after the subdivider has provided the County Surveyor with
a description and plan showing the boundaries of the proposed subdivision, the
area around it, and its relation to nearby public roads at a scale of one (1")
inch equals five hundred (500’) feet. If a tentative map has not been submitted
for approval within one year after the date of the issuance of a tract number,
the number shall no longer be valid and shall be cancelled by the County
Surveyor. No number which has been used previously on a map which has expired
or was denied shall be used again. No tract number shall be issued whenever
another valid tract number exists for all or part of the land lying within the
proposed subdivision, unless the application is for a “dash number” of an
approved tentative tract. Such dash numbers shall be issued only for tentative
tracts which have an approved phasing plan.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.504. Information to be provided on tentative maps: General.
   Each tentative map submitted to the Community Development Department shall
consist of one or more sheets of equal size. The scale of the map shall be one
(1") inch equals one hundred (100’) feet, if the sheets of the map do not
exceed forty-two (42") inches along any side; otherwise the scale shall be one
(1") inch equals two hundred (200’) feet. The Community Development Director
may approve the use of any scale not specified in this section. The map shall
contain the following information in addition to any requirements of the City
departments which review the map:
   (a)   A vicinity or area map at a scale of one inch equals five hundred
(500’) feet showing the major existing circulation pattern, all proposed major
streets, existing major watercourses, existing County Flood Control District
channels, and school, park, and open space areas existing or proposed within
one-half (1/2) mile or any other appropriate greater distance when necessary to
depict such features which relate significantly to the subdivision;
   (b)   In or near the lower right-hand corner of the first sheet;
   (1)   The tract number or land division number;
   (2)   The name and address of the subdivider;
   (3)   The name and address of the owners;
   (4)   The north point and scale of the map;
   (5)   The name and address of the person preparing the map;
   (6)   The date the map was prepared;
   (7)   The total number of lots;
   (8)   The area of the subdivision, both as to the total area and the area
excluding all property to be dedicated for exclusive public uses;
   (9)   The minimum, maximum, and average lot size; and
   (10)    The average natural slopes, if greater than ten (10%) percent;
   (c)   All boundary lines of the subdivision with approximate bearings and
distances; and
   (d)   The location and dimensions (including the area of lots or parcels
larger than one acre) of each lot or parcel and its relation to surrounding
surveys. The location of any remainder of the original parcel shall be shown by
reference to the existing record boundaries of such remainder.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.505. Topography lots.
   In addition to the information required by Section
9-3.504 of this article, the tentative map shall also contain the following
information:
   (a)   Any significant adjacent topographic features which may materially
affect the design of the subdivision. If features are not shown, contour
intervals shall be as follows:
   (1)   One (1’) foot when the slope of ground is less than five (5%) percent;
   (2)   Two (2’) feet when the slope of ground is between five (5%) and ten
(10%) percent;
   (3)   Five (5’) feet when the slope of ground is between ten (10%) and
twenty-five (25%) percent;
   (4)   Ten (10’) feet when the slope of ground is greater than twenty-five
(25%) percent. At least every fifth contour shall be clearly labeled and
indicated so as to be distinctive;
   (5)   The delineation of natural slope categories as follows:
   (i)   0 – 10%;
   (ii)   10.1 – 15%;
   (iii)    15.1 – 24.9%; and
   (iv)   25% or greater;
   (6)   The top and toe of all proposed slopes or embankments shown as dotted
lines and the slopes or embankments shaded lightly so as not to obscure other
data. All contemplated grading shall be so indicated;
   (7)   The daylight line between cut and fill slopes and between those and
natural slopes;
   (b)   The individual lot lines and approximate dimensions and the number of
each lot. All lots, and the dimensions thereof, shall be shown on one sheet of
the map;
   (c)   The existing zoning and proposed uses of all lots; e.g., single-
family, multiple-family, commercial, industrial, school, park, open space, or
other;
   (d)   All structures, fences, tree rows, wells, utility poles, prominent
features, and land uses within the subdivision, whether or not they are to
remain, including those within three hundred (300’) feet of the proposed
subdivision on immediately adjoining land;
   (e)   All known archeological sites and the limits thereof within or
adjacent to the subdivision;
   (f)   The approximate location and direction of flow of all watercourses and
natural drainage channels;
   (g)   The street right-of-way width and improvements on all roads and
streets (public and private) within, adjacent to, or affected by the
subdivision; and
   (h)   The location of all oak trees and other significant trees, vegetation,
and natural features.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.506. Design and improvements.
   In addition to the information required by Sections
9-3.504 and
9-3.505 of this article, the tentative map shall also contain the following
information:
   (a)   The Road Standard Plates, including right-of-way widths, centerline
radii, and the approximate grades of all roads or streets; the street drainage
system within the proposed subdivision; the approximate finished grades at
street intersections and turnarounds and the widths and approximate locations
of all existing or proposed public or private easements for roads, street
drainage, and utilities; cut and fill slopes over five (5’) feet in vertical
height and off-site grading; and the disposition of all earth material removed
from the site and the source of all imported earth material to be used on the
property;
   (b)   Private street improvements for parcel maps shall conform to Fire
Department requirements relative to access and Public Works Department
requirements for parcel maps;
   (c)   The proposed improvements on all existing roads or streets adjacent to
or affected by the subdivision, including the necessary off-site access
improvements;
   (d)   The street names on all existing streets within, adjacent to, or to be
extended into the proposed subdivision. Proposed public or private streets, not
officially named, should be shown as A Street, B Court, or C Road, unless a
current listing of desired names has been approved for the tentative tract;
   (e)   The names and addresses of all operators of proposed subdivision
utility systems (water, wastewater, electrical, gas, telephone, and cable
television);
   (f)   The existing and proposed water and wastewater facilities;
   (g)   A tentative grading plan which shall clearly denote areas of, and in
excess of twenty-five (25%) percent slope and all cuts and fill slopes greater
than twenty-five (25’) feet in height;
   (h)   The location of all existing utility facilities and proposed
facilities, both on and off site, including electric lines, communication
lines, cable television lines, street lighting power supply lines, and
appurtenances thereto shall be shown. It shall be indicated whether the
proposed facilities are to be installed underground or not;
   (i)   A depiction of all cut and fill slopes that are over five (5’) feet in
vertical height showing elevation for the base and top of slopes as well as all
proposed key-ways to stabilize slopes;
   (j)   Delineation of off-site grading and written authorization from the
affected owners, granting a grading easement, as well as other necessary
easements to record the final map;
   (k)   A grading plan which accurately delineates the manufactured slope
areas that encroach into twenty-five (25%) percent or higher terrain;
   (l)   Identification on the map, showing the quantity of cut and fill
material;
   (m)    The plotting of all dwelling units and accessory buildings on every
pad, with all setback dimensions and yard-useable open space clearly delineated
on the site plan;
   (n)   Identification of all one-, two- and three-story units and the percent
mixture within the project boundaries;
   (o)   Written verification from all service utility companies that there is
adequate capacity to allow connections during the life of the tentative map;
   (p)   Complete elevation plans for all houses, as well as floor plans for
dwelling units and related accessory structures; and
   (q)   The identification of all recreation vehicle storage areas on the
plan, set aside as a common facility or as private storage space on individual
lots.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1047-NS, eff.
November 14, 1989)
Sec. 9-3.507. Documents to be submitted with tentative maps.
   Each tentative map submitted to the Community Development Department shall
be accompanied by documents containing the following:
   (a)   A signed statement by all the parties listed as owners of the real
property on the latest equalized County assessment roll, or by their authorized
agents, consenting to the filing of the tentative map;
   (b)   A description of the land within the proposed subdivision;
   (c)   The disposition to be made of all existing structures, trees and other
significant vegetation and natural features, wells, tanks, irrigation
facilities, and public utility facilities and the submittal of an Oak Tree
Report, prepared pursuant to this Code, if required by the Community
Development Director;
   (d)   A report describing the proposed method and plan of stormwater
disposal (the plan, including the locations of storm drain lines, inlets, and
ultimate outlets may be shown on the tentative map) prepared by a civil
engineer registered in the State. The stormwater report shall include a
hydrologic and hydraulic study, indicating the following conditions before and
after development: drainage areas, major watercourses, quantity of stormwater
and patterns, and diversion and collection systems. Flood hazard areas, based
on 100-year storm frequency, shall be delineated on the tentative map, based on
approved County Flood Control District methodology and, if applicable, included
in an inundation easement and offered for dedication to the City or the
District, as required. Buildable sites, as designated in the soils report (see
Section
9-3.508 of this article), shall be located outside of flood hazard areas. The
drainage requirements of the County Road Standards shall also apply;
   (e)   A certification by the applicant, supported by a preliminary title
report, that the design of the subdivision and the type of improvements will
not conflict with easements acquired by the public at large for access through,
or the use of, property within the proposed subdivision;
   (f)    A statement of all proposed deviations to the City standards for map,
street, and storm drainage design, together with justifications for each;
   (g)   The submittal of a traffic report, containing information as required
by the City Transportation Planner and Traffic Engineer;
   (h)   The preparation of a certified archaeological survey of the entire
area or fuel modification zone within the boundaries of the subject property,
and all other areas that may be affected by development of the site;
   (i)   Preparation of a comprehensive floral report, identifying all
vegetation on the property, and associated impacts. The brush clearance area
shall be included on the map, and information shall be submitted providing a
plant replacement program for those affected areas;
   (j)   Identification of a maintenance program along with appropriate
vehicular and pedestrian access for maintenance crews for all common areas
including fuel modification zones; and
   (k)   The submittal of a phasing plan, which shall include the following:
   1.     Recording of the final map,
   2.    Grading of lots and infrastructure,
   3.    Construction of dwelling units, including accessory common facilities.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1047-NS, eff.
November 14, 1989)
Sec. 9-3.508. Soil and geology reports.
   A preliminary soils report, prepared by a civil engineer registered in the
State and based upon adequate test borings, shall be submitted to the Community
Development Director for use in evaluating and reporting the environmental
impact the subdivision may have on the City.
   (a)   The preliminary soils report shall describe the nature of the
subsurface soils and any soil conditions which would affect the geometrics of
the proposed development. The soils report shall state whether the proposed
plan is feasible and provide general solutions for all known hazardous
conditions or problems. The reports shall include the locations and logs of any
test borings, and percolation test results and a hydrological evaluation if on-
site sewage disposal is proposed.
   (b)   If the City Engineer and Building Official have knowledge of, or the
preliminary soils report indicates, the presence of critically expansive soils
or other soils problems which, if not corrected, could possibly lead to
structural defects or hazardous conditions, a soils investigation of each lot
in the subdivision may be required. Such soils investigation shall be performed
by a civil engineer registered in the State who shall recommend the corrective
action which is likely to prevent structural damage and eliminate any hazards
to each structure proposed to be constructed in the area where such soils
problems exist.
   (c)   For hillside or other geologically hazardous areas an engineering
geology evaluation defining the geologic conditions of the site shall be
submitted. The geologic evaluation shall state whether the proposed plan is
feasible and provide general solutions for all known hazardous conditions or
problems. The evaluation shall include the location and lots of any test
borings and shall evaluate the effect of the geology on the proposed
development and on adjacent properties. The evaluation report shall point out
specific areas where development may create hazardous conditions.
   (d)   The soils and geologic reports shall designate a suitable building
site for each lot which site is safe from settlement, landsliding, mudsliding,
and flood hazards and which has reasonable access thereto.
   The Planning Commission may approve the subdivision, or portion thereof,
where soils problems or geological hazards exist if the Planning Commission
determines that the actions recommended in the soils and/or geology reports are
likely to prevent public health or safety problems, prevent structural damage,
and eliminate any hazards to each structure to be constructed, and a condition
to the issuance of any building permit shall require that the approved
recommended action be incorporated in the construction of each structure.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.509. Number of copies.
   The number of copies of tentative maps to be submitted shall be as specified
by the Community Development Department.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.510. Acceptance of maps.
   When the required number of copies of a tentative map and accompanying
reports have been received by the Community Development Department, the
tentative map shall be examined by the Community Development Department staff
in light of the requirements of the City of Thousand Oaks Improvement Standards
and Specifications and of this Code to determine whether or not the tentative
map contains all of the required information and is acceptable for filing. The
date upon which it is found to be acceptable shall be placed on the tentative
map and considered to be the filing date. Whenever a tentative map is found not
to be acceptable for filing, the person submitting the map shall be notified of
the reasons therefor. When the required number of copies of the tentative map
have been accepted for filing by the Community Development Department, copies
shall be forwarded for review by other agencies pursuant to the provisions of
Sections 66453, et seq, of the Subdivision Map Act. Nothing set forth in this
section shall be construed to contradict or constrict the provisions of Section
9-3.501 of this article concerning preliminary maps.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Article 6. Design and Improvements
Sec. 9-3.601. Requirements.
   All subdivisions and the tentative maps thereof shall conform to the General
Plan of the City and all applicable planning, zoning, design and improvement,
and environmental requirements. Unless otherwise specified, design requirements
and improvement requirements may be modified or waived only by the Planning
Commission or Council.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.602. Lots.
   Each sideline of a lot in any proposed subdivision shall be as close as is
practicable to perpendicular to the center line of the street at the point at
which the lot side line terminates. All lot lines shall comply with Section
9-3.908 of Article 9 of this chapter at the time of the recordation of the
proposed subdivision. All lots in a proposed subdivision shall conform to the
minimum lot area and width requirements of the zone in which the proposed
subdivision is located. No lot shall have less than forty (40’) feet of
frontage, and no staff of a flag lot shall be less than twenty (20’) feet wide.
All residential, commercial, and industrial lots shall have direct access to
public streets, except where private street, common driveway, or other
reciprocal easement rights are specifically approved by the City and made a
matter of record in the office of the County Recorder. In determining the
permissible minimum lot area of lots less than ten thousand (10,000) square
feet in size, all public utility line easements shall be excluded even though
such easements are included in the lot design.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.603. Size requirements.
   (a)   All proposed lots or parcels shall have not less than the minimum
width and length required by the zoning regulations as specified in Chapter 4
of this title. All proposed lots or parcels of less than ten (10) acres gross
shall also have not less than the minimum net area required by said zoning
regulations. Each lot or parcel shall have a conforming width at the front yard
setback or building line required by the applicable zone classification. The
average lot depth shall not be greater than three (3) times the lot width at
the setback or building line, unless the Planning Commission determines that
topographic features in the area justify a greater average depth.
   (b)   Whenever a division of land results in a lot or parcel for which the
only means of access is by way of an easement or the staff on a flag lot, the
easement or staff shall be considered as a public road or street for the
purposes of determining the size of the lot.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.604. Street rights-of-way.
   The street layout of a proposed subdivision shall be consistent with all
street right-of-way designations shown on the Circulation Element of the
General Plan of the City or applicable Specific Plans at the time the tentative
map is approved. The street layout and widths of rights-of-way shall also
comply with the requirements of the City of Thousand Oaks Improvement Standards
and Specifications. The requirements of this section affecting road alignments
may be waived or modified if the Planning Commission finds, after making an
appropriate study and investigation of the physical features of the area and
the general alignment of the existing roadway, and considering such other
engineering information as may be available, that the street rights-of-way
shown on the Circulation Element or applicable Specific Plans for the area of
the subdivision would not follow the existing right-of-way center line and
would follow an alignment other than the existing alignment.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.605. Utility easements.
   To the extent practicable, underground utility easements, whenever necessary
shall be abutting and parallel to lot lines.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.606. Drainage easements.
   The design of a proposed subdivision shall be such as to provide for the
proper drainage of the proposed subdivision and all lots and improvements
therein, based on the runoff which can be anticipated from the ultimate
development of the watershed area in which the subdivision is located. The
design shall be such that there are no undrained depressions. Easements shall
be provided within the proposed subdivision as may be necessary to provide for
the proper drainage of the proposed subdivision and which are included in the
Master Drainage Plan for the Conejo Valley approved by the City or the
Comprehensive Plan of Flood Control Channels approved by the Board of
Supervisors of the Ventura County Flood Control District. Access to open
channels included in the Master Drainage or Comprehensive Plan shall be
provided along the entire length of the channel. Access to underground drainage
conduits shall be provided by an easement not less than ten (10’) feet in width
directly above the entire length of the conduit, which shall not permit any
structures, including masonry walls to be installed or maintained. The design
of the proposed subdivision shall be such as to protect the subdivision and the
lots and improvements therein from off-tract drainage or flood damages. The
design shall also ensure that all public facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems, are located, elevated, and constructed so as to
minimize or eliminate flood damage. Further, the design shall provide that any
concentrations or increases or surface water resulting from the development of
the proposed subdivision are conveyed by means of adequate facilities to
suitable natural watercourse or drainage facility in the area. Off-tract
easements as may be necessary for such facilities shall be provided by the
subdivider. All easements required to be provided pursuant to this section
shall be offered for dedication at the time the final map or parcel map is
filed for approval.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.607. State highways.
   If an existing or proposed State highway abuts a proposed subdivision, the
subdivider shall secure all pertinent road data and specifications and shall
provide that the design of the proposed subdivision is compatible with the use
of such State highway.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.608. Public water agencies.
   Whenever a proposed subdivision requiring a final map is located within the
boundaries of a public water agency or a private service company willing and
able to provide water service to the lots, the agency or company shall be
chosen as the water purveyor for the proposed subdivision.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.609. Public wastewater agencies.
   Whenever a proposed subdivision requiring a final map is located within the
boundaries of a public wastewater agency willing and able to provide sewer
service to the lots, the agency shall be chosen to provide sewer service for
the proposed subdivision.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.610. Street lighting.
   Prior to the recordation of the subdivision map, if so directed or required,
the subdivider shall cause the area within the subdivision to be included in
the City of Thousand Oaks Municipal Lighting District or appropriate
maintenance assessment district and any applicable subzone thereof providing
street lighting. The Planning Commission may waive such requirement for parcel
maps if the Planning Commission finds that inclusion within such a service area
is unnecessary because of the size or location of the proposed parcels or that
inclusion could be more appropriately a condition of approval of a future
development plan.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Article 7. Hearings, Reports and Appeals, Expirations and Extensions of
Approvals
Sec. 9-3.701. Reports and recommendations.
   Any staff report or recommendations on a tentative map to the Planning
Commission shall be in writing, and a copy thereof shall be delivered to the
subdivider at least three (3) days prior to any hearing or action on such map
by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.702. Hearings and appeals.
   (a)   For subdivisions which require the preparation of a tentative map and
a final map, the Advisory Agency shall, within fifty (50) days after the filing
of the map, or within such longer period of time as may be agreed to by the
subdivider, hold a public hearing on the map, make all findings required by
this Code and the Subdivision Map Act, conditionally approve, recommend
conditional approval by the City Council, recommend denial by the City Council,
or disapprove the tentative map and report its action to the subdivider, as
follows:
   (1)   Where the Commission is considering a regular or vesting tentative map
application for which the Council has permitted concurrent processing of the
application with a change of zone classification or other legislative action
(Specific Plan amendment or General Plan amendment) pursuant to Section
9-3.502, the City Council shall make the final decision on approving the
tentative map application and the Commission shall only make a recommendation
to the Council of conditional approval or denial of the tentative map. Where
the Commission has recommended denial, the Commission may forward to the
Council proposed conditions of approval for the Council's consideration if the
Council determines to approve the tentative map application. Upon receiving a
recommendation from the Commission, the Council shall conduct its own public
hearing on the tentative map application(s) and associated legislative land use
actions, providing notice thereof in the same manner as was required for the
Commission hearing, and shall render a final decision.
   (2)   In all other cases, the Commission shall render a decision to
conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative map application.
   (3)   Where, due to the absence of a Commissioner(s), a tie vote is cast on
a motion to approve, conditionally approve, or deny an appeal, a permit or
entitlement, or on the recommendation to the City Council for the approval or
denial on a permit or entitlement (in the case of applications being processed
concurrently with legislative actions), and the Commission is unable to break
the tie vote situation through further deliberation and votes during that
meeting and immediately following the tie vote, then the Commission shall
reopen the hearing and continue the matter on an open hearing basis until the
next Commission meeting at which the tie might be broken through the
participation of the Commissioner(s) absent at the original hearing.
   If the Commission determines that the tie cannot be broken within the next
twenty-one (21) days due to the announced conflict and abstention of a
Commissioner in the matter, a vacancy, or a long term absence, then no
entitlement shall be granted and the matter shall be automatically referred to
the City Council for a decision with no recommendation implied or made by the
Commission.
   A tentative map shall not be deemed to have been filed until the preliminary
map procedure, governed by Section
9-3.501 of Article 5 of this chapter, has been completed, rejected or
abandoned.
   In accordance with the provisions and time limitations set forth in Section
66452.5 and 66474.7 of the Subdivision Map Act, any interested party adversely
affected by a decision to conditionally approve, or disapprove a tentative map
may appeal the decision of the Planning Commission to the Council, which shall
hold a public hearing and make a decision thereon. In addition, the City
Council may, on its own motion within ten (10) days after the final decision by
the Planning Commission, elect to review and consider any decision of the
Planning Commission. No application for an appeal need be filed by the City
Council, or any member representative thereof, when the City Council elects, by
majority vote of its own motion, to review and consider a decision of the
Planning Commission.
   (b)   For lot line adjustment and waivers or parcel maps which do not
require the preparation of a tentative map or a parcel map pursuant to Sections
9-3.302 and
9-3.303 of Article 3 of this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act, the Community
Development Director shall constitute the Advisory Agency, and shall conduct a
public hearing prior to rendering a decision. Within fifty (50) days after the
filing of the application, the contents of which shall be specified by the
Community Development Director, or within such longer period of time as may be
agreed to by the applicant, the Community Development Director shall make all
findings required by this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act, shall approve,
conditionally approve, or disapprove the application, and shall report his or
her action to the applicant. In accordance with the provisions and time
limitations set forth in Sections 66452.5 and 66474.7 of the Subdivision Map
Act, any interested person adversely affected by a decision may appeal any
decision of the Community Development Director (Advisory Agency) to the
Planning Commission (Appeal Board), which shall hold a public hearing thereon,
and may appeal any decision of the Planning Commission (Appeal Board) to the
Council, which shall hold a public hearing thereon. In addition, the City
Council may, on its own motion within ten (10) days after the final decision by
the Planning Commission, elect to review and consider any decision of the
Planning Commission. No application for an appeal need be filed by the City
Council, or any member representative thereof, when the City Council elects, by
majority vote on its own motion, to review and consider a decision of the
Planning Commission.
   (c)   Whenever a public hearing is to be held, notice shall be given in the
manner required by Chapter 12 of this title.
   (d)   Following the approval of a tentative map for a subdivision requiring
the preparation of a final map, the Community Development Department, upon the
payment of the fee specified therefor, may grant requests for minor
modifications of the tentative map which do not affect the quantity or quality
of required dedications, which do not increase the total number or
significantly alter the configuration of the proposed lots in the subdivision,
which do not affect the grading of the subdivision, which do not affect the
design integrity of the subdivision, or which do not alter the intent or
purpose of the imposed conditions of approval. Before granting any minor
modification request, the Community Development Department shall make a written
finding, with a statement of reasons in support thereof, that the proposed
modification could not reasonably be expected to change any of the findings
previously adopted at the time of the approval of the tentative map. Minor
modification decisions which are objected to in writing by any interested
person aggrieved by the decision within ten (10) days after rendition shall be
deemed to be recommendations only, and the modification request shall
thereafter be processed in the manner provided in this chapter, and for the fee
required, for the initial processing of tentative maps for subdivisions
requiring the preparation of final maps.
   (e)   Requests for major modifications of approved tentative maps of
subdivisions requiring the preparation of final maps shall be processed in the
manner provided in this chapter, and for the fee required, for the initial
processing of tentative maps for such subdivisions.
   (f)   Upon the payment of the fee specified therefor by Council resolution,
requested minor or major modifications of approved tentative maps of
subdivisions requiring the preparation of parcel maps shall be processed in the
same manner as provided for subdivision or tract maps.
   (g)   Any interested person may file with the Community Development
Department a written request for notification of any proposed modification of a
particular approved tentative map. At least five (5) days prior to the granting
of any request to modify any approved tentative map, copies of the proposed
modification shall be provided to all persons who have filed notification
requests pursuant to this section.
   (h)   In approving or conditionally approving tentative subdivision maps,
the Planning Commission, or the Council on appeal, shall find that the proposed
subdivision, together with its provisions for its design and improvement, is
consistent with applicable General and Specific Plans and laws and standards
adopted by the City. The Planning Commission, or the Council on appeals, may
deny the approval of the tentative map on any of the grounds provided by City
laws or standards or the Subdivision Map Act. The Commission or Council shall
deny approval if it makes any of the following findings:
   (1)   That the proposed map is not consistent with the applicable General
and Specific Plans;
   (2)   That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not
consistent with the applicable General and Specific Plans;
   (3)   That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development;
   (4)   That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of
development;
   (5)   That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are
likely to cause substantial environmental damages or substantially and
avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat;
   (6)   That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is
likely to cause serious public health problems; and
   (7)   That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will
conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or
the use of property within the proposed subdivision or with public access to
public resources as defined and regulated by Sections 66478.1, et seq. of the
Subdivision Map Act. In this connection, the governing body may approve a map
if it finds that alternate easements, for access or for use, will be provided
and that they will be substantially equivalent to easements previously acquired
by the public. This subsection shall apply only to easements of record or to
easements established by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, and no
authority shall be granted to a legislative body to determine that the public
at large has acquired easements for access through, or the use of, property
within the proposed subdivision.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980, as amended by § 8, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April
27, 1993, and § 2, Ord. 1331-NS, eff. March 10, 1999, Parts 3 and 4, Ord. 1446-
NS, eff. October 25, 2005)
Sec. 9-3.703. Development allotment or reservation of allotment required.
(§ IV, Ord. 757-NS, eff. September 4, 1980, as amended by § 1, Ord. 867-NS,
eff. September 4, 1984 and repealed by § 32, Ord. 1555-NS, eff. May 13, 2011)
Sec. 9-3.704. Expiration and extension of tentative map approvals.
   (a)   Expiration. The approval or conditional approval of a tentative map
shall expire thirty-six (36) months from the following date: in the event no
appeal was taken, or if the subdivider appealed, from the date of Planning
Commission approval; in the case of appeals by other persons, from the date of
the decision on appeal. Failure to submit to the City all items needed to file
a final map or parcel map with the County Recorder within such period shall
terminate all proceedings, and any subdivision of the same land shall require
the filing and processing of a new map using a new tentative tract number
issued in accordance with the provisions of Section
9-3.503 of Article 5 of this chapter. The subdivider shall be responsible for
keeping a record as to when a map will expire.
   (b)   Extensions. The City or the applicant filing the tentative map may
request an extension of the tentative map approval or conditional approval by
filing a minor modification application prior to the expiration date with the
Community Development Director. The applicant shall state the reasons for
requesting the extension. A maximum of two (2) discretionary time extensions,
not to exceed a cumulative length of forty-eight (48) months, except where
otherwise required by the Subdivision Map Act, may be approved by the Community
Development Director. The applicant or any aggrieved party may appeal the
decision of the Director to the Planning Commission within fifteen (15) days
after the decision of the Director.
   (c)   Time limits for extensions. Any extension of a tentative map approval
or conditional approval shall not exceed the time limits provided in the
Subdivision Map Act (Section 66452.6 of the Government Code of the State).
   (d)   Effect of map modifications on extensions. The modification of a
tentative map after approval or conditional approval shall not extend the time
limits imposed by this section, unless expressly indicated in the modification.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980, as amended by § I, Ord. 804-NS, eff.
February 18, 1982, and § 3, Ord. 899-NS, eff. October 22, 1985, § 2, Ord. 935-
NS, eff. October 7, 1986, and §§ 4, 5, Ord. 1122-NS, eff. October 1, 1991, as
updated by Ord. 1386-NS, eff. October 18, 2001)
Article 8. Filing and Approval of Vesting Tentative Maps
Sec. 9-3.801. Application.
   A vesting tentative map may be filed for residential, commercial, and
industrial developments. Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act, as
implemented and supplemented by this chapter, requires the filing of a
tentative map or tentative parcel map, a vesting tentative map may instead be
filed in accordance with the provisions of this article. If a subdivider does
not seek the rights conferred by the vesting tentative map statute, the filing
of a vesting tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval for any
proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to
construction.
(§ 3, Ord. 935-NS, eff. October 7, 1986, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1047-NS, eff.
November 14, 1989)
Sec. 9-3.802. Filing and processing.
   A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the same
contents, accompanying data and reports and shall be subject to the same fees
and processed in the same manner as set forth in this chapter for a tentative
map except that it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words
“vesting tentative map.”
(§ 3, Ord. 935-NS, eff. October 7, 1986)
Sec. 9-3.803. Consistency.
   A vesting tentative map may not be filed and no land shall be subdivided and
developed pursuant to a vesting tentative map for any purpose or use which will
be inconsistent with the City’s General Plan, any applicable Specific Plan or
not permitted pursuant to the zoning or other applicable provisions of this
code. Instead, any necessary General Plan Amendment or zone change must be
obtained before any such proposed map may be properly filed.
(§ 3, Ord. 935-NS, eff. October 7, 1986)
Sec. 9-3.804. Expiration.
   The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire
at the end of thirty-six (36) months from the date of approval of the tentative
map by the Planning Commission or City Council on appeal. Extensions
established by this chapter with respect to tentative maps and tentative parcel
maps shall apply to vesting tentative maps.
(§ 3, Ord. 935-NS, eff. October 7, 1986, as amended by § 5, Ord. 1122-NS, eff.
October 1, 1991)
Sec. 9-3.805. Vesting on approval of vesting tentative map.
   (a)   The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall
confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance
with the ordinances, policies, and standards in effect on the date the
application is determined to be complete except for previously initiated
proceedings to amend or enact ordinances, policies or standards.
   (b)   Notwithstanding subdivision (a), above, a permit, approval, or
entitlement may be made conditioned or denied if any of the following are
determined:
   (1)   A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the
immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or
safety, or both.
   (2)   A condition or denial is required, in order to comply with state and
federal law.
   (c)   The rights referred to herein shall expire if a final map is not
approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided in
Section
9-3.804. If the final map is approved, these rights shall last for the
following periods of time:
   (1)   An initial time period of twelve (12) months from the date the final
map is recorded. Where several final maps are recorded on varied phases of a
project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this initial time period
shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded.
   (2)   The initial time period set forth in (c)(1), above, shall be
automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application
for a grading permit or for design or architectural review, if such processing
exceeds thirty (30) days from the date a complete application is filed. Time
consumed by the subdivider in correcting plans or other related delays shall
not be counted when calculating the thirty (30) day period.
   (3)   A subdivider may apply for a one year extension at any time before the
initial time period set forth in (c)(1) expires. If an extension is denied, the
subdivider may appeal that denial to the City Council within fifteen (15) days.
   (4)   If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit
during the periods of time specified in subdivisions (c)(1) through (c)(3), the
rights referred to herein shall continue until the expiration of that permit or
any extension of that permit.
(§ 3, Ord. 935-NS, eff. October 7, 1986)
Sec. 9-3.806. Development allotment.
(§ 3, Ord. 935-NS, eff. October 7, 1986 and repealed by § 33, Ord. 1555-NS,
eff. May 13, 2011)
Article 9. Final Map and Parcel Map Requirements
Sec. 9-3.901. Final map and parcel map requirements.
   Final maps and parcel maps shall be prepared in accordance with the
requirements set forth in the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.902. Preparation: Multiple final maps.
   After the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map and prior to
the expiration thereof, the subdivider may prepare a final map or parcel map of
the proposed subdivision, or any portion thereof. A final map or parcel map
shall be prepared by a civil engineer registered by the State or a land
surveyor licensed by the State and shall be in substantial compliance with the
approved tentative map and in full compliance with the Subdivision Map Act and
this Code. If the final map does not include the entire area of the approved
tentative map, the subdivider shall obtain from the County Surveyor a suffix
number to the tract number or parcel map number appearing on the tentative map.
   Multiple final maps relating to an approved or conditionally approved
tentative map may be filed prior to the expiration of the tentative map;
provided, however, the subdivider, at the time the tentative map is filed,
shall inform the City of the subdivider’s intention to file multiple final maps
on such tentative map. In providing such notice, the subdivider shall be
required to define the number and configuration of the proposed multiple final
maps which number and configuration shall be subject to the approval of the
City. The filing of a final map on a portion of an approved or conditionally
approved tentative map shall not invalidate any part of such tentative map. The
right of the subdivider to file multiple final maps shall not detract from the
authority of the City to impose reasonable conditions relating to the filing of
multiple final maps.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.903. Size and materials.
   Final maps and parcel maps shall be clearly and legibly drawn, printed or
reproduced by a process ensuring a permanent record in black on tracing cloth
or polyester base film. All signatures shall be made in waterproof opaque ink.
If ink is used on polyester base film, the ink surface shall be coated with a
suitable substance to ensure permanent legibility. The size of each sheet shall
be eighteen (18") inches by twenty-six (26") inches. A marginal line shall be
drawn completely around each sheet leaving an entirely blank margin of one
inch. The scale of the map shall be one inch equals forty (40’) feet or one
inch equals fifty (50’) feet, and enough sheets shall be used to accomplish
this end. With the approval of the City Engineer, the scale used may be
modified, particularly where large lots (e.g., twenty thousand (20,000) square
feet or greater) are involved, and the clarity of the map is not inferior. A
graphical scale not less than three (3") inches in length shall be shown in
addition to the numerical scale.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.904. Boundary lines.
   The exterior boundary line of a subdivision shall be shown on final maps and
parcel maps as a black ink line that is at least three (3) times the width of
any other line on the maps, excluding the one-inch border lines.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.905. Title sheets.
   The title sheet of a final map shall consist of a title block, as set forth
in Section
9-3.917 of this article, and all certificates required by the Subdivision Map
Act.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.906. Key maps and location maps.
   When the final map or parcel map consists of more than two (2) sheets,
exclusive of the title sheet, a key map with lot lines at a scale of one inch
equals five hundred (500’) feet, showing the relation of the sheets, shall be
placed on the first map sheet. Every sheet comprising the map shall bear a
sheet number and shall indicate the total number of sheets comprising the map.
A location map at a scale of one inch equals one thousand (1,000’) feet,
indicating the geographical location of the proposed subdivision and the tract
access roads, shall be placed on the first map sheet. With the approval of the
City Engineer, the scale of the key map may be modified.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.907. Survey data.
   Final maps and parcel maps shall show the bearings and distances of the
center line of all streets and the arc length, tangent, radius, and central
angle of all curves; the bearings of radial lines to each lot corner on a
curve; the total width of each street, the width of the portion offered for
dedication, the width of the existing right-of-way, and the width each side of
the center line; and flood control or drainage channels and any other easements
appearing on the map.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.908. Data for lots.
   Sufficient data shall be shown to determine readily the bearing and length
of each lot line of the final map or parcel map. Each lot or parcel shall be
shown entirely on one sheet. Distances and bearings on the side lines of the
lot which are cut by an easement shall be so shown to indicate clearly the
actual length of the lot or parcel lines. No ditto marks shall be used. No lot
in a subdivision shall be divided by the boundary line of a City, County, or
special district.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.909. Easements.
   The location on the final map or parcel map of all existing and proposed
easements (including, but not limited to, easements for public utilities and
television cables) which are to remain after recordation and which are not
within streets in the subdivision shall be shown by means of broken lines,
together with the name of the vestee, the use of the easement, and the record
reference. Easements not disclosed by the records in the office of the County
Recorder and found by the surveyor or engineer to be existing shall be
specifically designated on the map, identifying the apparent dominant
tenements.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.910. Easement dimensioning.
   On lots or parcels of one acre or less, the widths of easements, the lengths
and bearings of the lines thereof, and sufficient ties to locate the easements
shall be clearly labeled and identified on the final map or parcel map. On lots
or parcels greater than one acre in size, only easement widths need be shown.
Regardless of lot size, if of record, a statement as to the easements shall
appear on the title sheet.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.911. Easement dedications.
   The owner’s certificate on the final map or parcel map or a separate
instrument for parcel maps, as set forth in Section
9-3.926 of this article, shall indicate the easements being offered for
dedication to public agencies.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.912. Monuments.
   All monuments required by the Subdivision Map Act and this Code shall be
fully and clearly shown and identified as such on the final map or parcel map,
together with sufficient information so that an engineer or surveyor could
locate each monument and readily retrace the survey.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.913. Established lines.
   Whenever the City Engineer or Council has established a center line of a
road, street, or other public right-of-way, the data shall be considered in
making the surveys and in preparing the final map or parcel map. All monuments
found shall be indicated and proper references made to field or maps of public
record relating to the monuments. If the points were by ties, that fact shall
be stated.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.914. City boundaries.
   City boundaries adjoining the subdivision shall be properly designated upon
the final map or parcel map.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.915. Watercourses.
   Any unimproved natural watercourses wholly or partially within the proposed
subdivision shall be indicated on the final map or parcel map. The final map or
parcel map shall also show areas within the subdivision which are subject to
inundation or flood hazard upon the ultimate development of a watershed.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.916. Lot numbers and parcel numbers.
   The lots on the final map shall be numbered consecutively commencing with
the number “one,” with no omissions or duplications; provided, however, where
the subdivision is a continuation of or an addition to an existing subdivision,
the lot numbers shall commence with the number immediately following the last
or highest lot number of such existing subdivision and in all other respects
shall conform with the preceding requirements. The last lot number shall be
circled. No gap in lot numbers may be reserved for a future subdivision map.
All other areas, other than streets, which are to be offered in whole for
dedication on the map or subsequent to the recordation of the map and which do
not meet zoning requirements as to size and shape shall be designated as
“Parcels” and consecutively numbered or lettered. The parcels on the parcel map
shall be designated with consecutive numbers or letters.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.917. Title blocks.
   The title, showing the tract number or parcel map number, the designation of
the latest legal subdivision of which it is a part, together with a reference
to the legal record of such subdivision, shall appear on each sheet of the
final map or parcel map.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.918. Engineers’ certificates.
   The certificate of the engineer or surveyor responsible for the survey and
final map or parcel map, containing the information required by Section 66441
or subsection (a) of Section 66449 of the Subdivision Map Act, shall appear on
the title sheet of the final map or parcel map.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.919. Bearings.
   The basis of bearings referred to on the final map or parcel map shall be
approved by the City Engineer and shall be clearly delineated or identified on
the map.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.920. Orientation.
   Each sheet of the final map or parcel map and the lettering thereon shall be
so oriented that the north point shall be directed toward the top (maximum left
to right dimension of material is up) of the street or toward the left of the
sheet. The direction of the top of the sheet shall be determined by the
orientation of the title block information required pursuant to Section
9-3.917 of this article.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.921. Additional information.
   The final map or parcel map shall also contain the following information:
   (a)   The date of preparation, north point, and scale;
   (b)   The locations and names, without abbreviations, of all existing and
proposed streets and alleys and adjoining streets;
   (c)   The dimensions in feet and hundredths of a foot or in equivalent
metric system;
   (d)   The dimensions of all lots or parcels;
   (e)   The center line data, including the bearings and distances;
   (f)   The radius, tangent, arc, length, and central angle of all curves;
   (g)   The precise location of all permanent monuments;
   (h)   The ties to and names of all adjacent subdivisions;
   (i)   The ties to any City or County boundary lines involved;
   (j)   All required certifications;
   (k)   The area of all lots or parcels, exclusive of areas dedicated to
public use, shall be shown to the nearest one-hundredth of an acre;
   (l)   References to maps previously recorded relative to the property;
   (m)    Monuments, shown and identified sufficiently to readily retrace the
survey; and
   (n)   The bearings and lengths of each lot line or parcel line, block line,
and boundary line; provided, however, if several of such lines are equal,
duplication of figures may be eliminated if no ambiguity will result.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.922. Standard practices.
   All surveys and all drafting in connection with the preparation of tentative
maps, final maps. parcel maps, and improvement plans to be submitted pursuant
to this chapter shall be done in accordance with the standard practices and
principles of drafting and land surveying.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.923. Limits of errors.
   A survey and traverse of the boundaries of the subdivision and all lots and
blocks shall close within a limit of error of one (1’) foot in ten thousand
(10,000’) feet of perimeter or within an error of closure of two one-hundredths
(0.02) foot, whichever is larger.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.924. Size of lettering.
   No map lettering shall be smaller than No. 80CL Leroy or ten-hundredths
(0.10) of an inch (0.25 cm) in height, except as specifically approved by the
City Engineer.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.925. Parcel map preparation.
   A parcel map may be compiled from data shown on final maps, records of
surveys, and parcel maps only if such filed or recorded maps were based upon
field surveys and were recorded within the last fifteen (15) years. Data from a
field survey made within the last fifteen (15) years and filed with the County
Surveyor may also be used. The fifteen (15) year time limit may be waived by
the City Engineer if it is shown that record monumentation exists and that
existing angles and distances on the ground measure within the required limits
of record angles and distances. Parcel maps compiled from filed or recorded
data shall conform to the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this
Code. All other parcel maps shall be based on a field survey made in conformity
with the Land Surveyor’s Act and shall conform to the requirements of the
Subdivisions Map Act and this Code.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.926. Dedications.
   All dedications or offers of dedication to the City or a governmental agency
shall be made by certificate on the final map or parcel map; provided, however,
for parcel maps, dedications or offers thereof may be made by separate document
recorded prior to or concurrent with the recording of the parcel map.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.927. Submission for certification.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980, as repealed by § 2, Ord. 1537-NS, eff. June
25, 2010)
Sec. 9-3.928. Information to be submitted with final maps and parcel maps.
   When a final map or parcel map is submitted to the City Engineer in
accordance with Section 9-3.946 of this article, the final map or parcel map
shall be accompanied by the documents specified in Sections
9-3.929 through
9-3.939 of this article.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980; § 3, Ord. 1637-NS, eff. January 12, 2018)
Sec. 9-3.929. Improvement plans.
   The improvement plans required by this chapter, together with such
calculations and additional information as will assist the City Engineer to
properly check the improvement plans and specifications, shall be submitted
with the final map or parcel map. The number of sets of such improvement plans
submitted shall be as specified by the City Engineer. In addition, the
improvement plans shall also be submitted to the Community Development Director
for his review.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.930. Improvement agreements.
   All agreements and improvement securities required by the Subdivision Map
Act or this Code shall be submitted to the City Engineer with the final map or
parcel map.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.931. Tax Collector’s signatures or letters.
   The County Tax Collector’s certificate on the title sheets of the final map
shall be signed and dated with a current date or a current letter signed by the
County Tax Collector certifying that there are no liens against the
subdivision, or any part thereof, for unpaid State, County, municipal, or local
taxes or special assessments collected as taxes, except taxes or special
assessments not yet payable, and certifying the amount of taxes and assessments
which are a lien but which are not yet payable, which certification shall be on
the map or submitted with the final map. A date or letter shall be deemed
current if the time is no more than ninety (90) days preceding the time the map
is submitted for City Engineer approval.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.932. Evidence of title.
   A title report containing the legal description of the lands being
subdivided, issued by a title company authorized by the laws of the State to
write the same, and a preliminary subdivision guarantee shall be submitted with
any final map or parcel map presented to the City Engineer for approval
pursuant to Section
9-3.946 of this article. A subdivision guarantee, issued by a title company
acceptable to the City and authorized by the laws of the State to write the
same, showing the names of all persons having any record title interest in the
land to be subdivided, together with the nature of their respective interests
therein, shall be submitted with the final map or parcel map at the time of the
recordation of the map. Such subdivision guarantee shall be for the benefit and
protection of the City in a guaranteed amount approved by the City Engineer
covering all lands to be dedicated for public use.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980; § 4, Ord. 1637-NS, eff. January 12, 2018)
Sec. 9-3.933. Deeds.
   Land, easements, or rights-of-way to be dedicated for public use, or the
access of land, easements, or rights-of-way to be granted to public agencies,
if not granted by the owner’s certificate on the final map or parcel map, shall
be granted by separate instrument submitted to the City Engineer prior to the
approval of the final or parcel map.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.934. Off-site easements.
   Written evidence of rights-of-entry or permanent casements on or across
private property not within the proposed subdivision as may be necessary to
allow the performance of the work necessary to improve the subdivision, to
allow for the maintenance of the subdivision improvements once completed, to
allow for permanent public access to the proposed subdivision, and to allow for
and to grant necessary slope rights shall be submitted to the City Engineer
with the final map or parcel map.
(Ord. 744-NS, off. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.935. Utility statements.
   A statement from each operator of the proposed subdivision utility systems
and cable television company stating that the easements shown on the final map
or parcel map are satisfactory for use by such utility or company for service
to the proposed subdivision and that arrangements have been made to convey such
easements to the utilities or company which is to use them shall be submitted
with the final map or parcel map.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.936. Wastewater services.
   A statement from the entity in whose service area the proposed subdivision
is located that wastewater service will be provided to the subdivision, and the
conditions, if any, under which it will be provided, and that the portion of
the improvement plans containing the design and specifications for wastewater
facilities is satisfactory to it shall be submitted with the final map or
parcel map.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.937. Water services.
   A statement from the entity in whose service area the proposed subdivision
is located that water service will be provided to the subdivision, and the
conditions, if any, under which it will be provided, and that the portion of
the improvement plans containing the design and specifications for water
facilities is satisfactory to it shall be submitted with the final map or
parcel map.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.938. Fire Chief's certificate.
   The certification of the County Fire Chief and the appropriate water entity
that adequate fire protection facilities have been planned for the proposed
subdivision and for use by the County Fire Protection District shall be
submitted with the final map or parcel map.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.939. Stormwater acceptance easements.
   Written evidence of such deeds, easements, or rights-of-way not within the
proposed subdivision as may be necessary to provide for the acceptance of
stormwaters generated by the proposed subdivision shall be submitted with the
final map or parcel map.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.940. Street rights-of-way.
   Except as otherwise provided in this section, all rights-of-way for public
streets, pedestrian and bicycle paths and walks shown on the final map or
parcel map, and all rights of access to and from residential lots of the
proposed subdivision abutting on controlled access roads shall be offered free
and clear of any prior easement or right-of-way for dedication. The rights of
direct access to and from lots or parcels abutting on controlled access roads
and streets or public rights-of-way shall be waived or dedicated. The City
Engineer may approve an offer for dedication wherein certain easements remain
prior, in whole or part, to the rights-of-way being offered to the City.
However, such approval shall be given only when unusual circumstances warrant,
and the easements which remain prior do not substantially interfere with the
proper use of the rights-of-way being offered to the City.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.941. Park sites.
   All park sites to be dedicated in accordance with this Code shall be offered
for conveyance to the appropriate public agency not later than the time the
final map or parcel map is filed for approval.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.942. Storm drain channels.
   All rights-of-way for drainage or flood control purposes required to be
provided pursuant to Section
9-3.507 of Article 5 of this chapter shall be offered for dedication to either
the City or the County Flood Control District as may be appropriate. All
rights-of-way required to be provided by said Section
9-3.507 for flood control channels or conduits or laterals thereto which are
included in the Comprehensive Plan of Flood Control Channels, approved by the
Board of Supervisors of the County Flood Control District, or the City of
Thousand Oaks Master Plan of Storm Drainage shall be of fee simple title;
provided, however, an offer of dedication of such rights-of-way may be of
easement interest in lieu of fee simple title when unusual circumstances
warrant and the Board of Supervisors of the County or the City determines that
the offer of dedication of easement interest in lieu of fee simple title will
be of greater public benefit to the County Flood Control District or City. All
other rights-of-way for drainage of flood control purposes required to be
provided by said Section
9-3.507 shall be of easement interest. All rights of way offered pursuant to
this section shall be free of all liens, encumbrances, assessments, easements,
and leases, except for public utility easements. All rights-of-way of fee
simple title shall be shown as Parcel X on the final map or parcel map.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.943. Private street easements.
   Easements allowing all governmental agencies providing for the public
safety, health, and welfare access on all private streets or lanes serving as
access for more than two (2) lots shall be offered for dedication to the City
not later than the time the final map or parcel map is filed for approval.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.944. Other easements.
   All other easements for public use required as a condition for the approval
of the tentative map for the proposed subdivision shall be offered for
dedication to the City or other appropriate agency not later than the time the
final map or parcel map is filed for approval.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.945. Geologic and soils reports.
   The final map or parcel map shall contain a certificate signed by the
engineer making the soils report and by the engineering geologist making the
geologic report. The certificate shall indicate the dates of all geologic
reports known by the geologist to be prepared specifically for the subdivision
and shall indicate that the reports are on file in the Public Works Department.
The reports containing recommendations approved by the Building Official shall
be noted in the certificate.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.946. Filing of maps: Approval: Denial.
   (a)   Final maps and parcel maps shall be filed with the City Engineer for
approval or disapproval. The City Engineer shall notify the Council at its next
regular meeting after the City Engineer has determined that the map has been
completely and timely filed that the City Engineer is reviewing the map for
final approval or disapproval. The City Clerk shall provide notice of any
pending approval or disapproval by the City Engineer, which notice shall be
attached and posted with the Council’s regular agenda and shall be mailed to
interested parties who request notice. The City Engineer, after consultation
with the Community Development Director or designee as to the compliance of the
final map with the approved tentative map and any conditions attached thereto,
shall then approve or disapprove the final map within ten (10) days following
the meeting of the Council at which notice of the pending decision was provided
by the City Clerk. If the final map is approved, the City Engineer shall
execute any improvement agreement and accept any improvement security on behalf
of the City only after the exhaustion of any appeal period in subsection (e)
below.
   (b)   The City Engineer shall deny the approval of the final map upon making
a finding that it does not fully comply with Article 9 of this chapter or does
not substantially comply with the approved tentative map or the requirements or
conditions which were applicable to the subdivision at the time of the approval
of the tentative map; provided, however, disapproval for failure to conform to
a tentative map shall be accompanied by written findings identifying the
requirements or conditions which have not been met or performed. In the event
of a denial, the City Engineer may instruct the subdivider to make the
recommended corrections and revise the final map. The City Engineer may approve
the resubmitted map if it complies with the requirements of this subsection.
   (c)   Where it appears that the failure of any map to meet any requirement
or condition is the result of a technical and inadvertent error which, in the
determination of the City Engineer, does not materially affect the validity of
the map, the map may be approved.
   (d)   Final maps or parcel maps for condominiums, community apartment
projects, and stock cooperative apartment projects shall not be approved unless
the City Engineer finds that the notices to the tenants of such proposed
projects required by Section 66427.1 of the Subdivision Map Act have been
given.
   (e)   The City Engineer’s action under this section may be appealed to the
Council within ten (10) calendar days of the date of the action in the same
manner that decisions of the Planning Commission are appealed to the Council
pursuant to Section
9-3.702(a)(3) of this Code.
   (f)   The Council shall periodically review the delegation of authority to
the City Engineer provided by this section.
   (g)   Upon the approval of the final map, and the receipt of the improvement
security by the City, the City Clerk shall execute the appropriate certificate
on the certificate sheet and forward the map or have an authorized agent
forward the map, in the case of a final map, to the Clerk of the Board of
Supervisors of the County for transmittal to the County Recorder and, in the
case of a parcel map, directly to the County Recorder.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1537-NS, eff. June
25, 2010)
Article 10. Dedication and Improvement Regulations
Sec. 9-3.1001. Requirements.
   As a condition of the approval of a map, the subdivider shall dedicate or
make an irrevocable offer of dedication of all parcels of land within the
subdivision which are needed for streets or alleys (including the dedication or
waiver of access rights and abutters' rights), bicycle paths, local transit
facilities as provided by Section 66475.2 of the Subdivision Map Act, drainage,
water, wastewater, common areas, open space areas, public service and utility
easements, and other public easements. In addition, the subdivider shall
improve or agree to improve all streets, drainage, common area landscape,
water, wastewater, public service and utility easements and other public
easements and facilities.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1002. Acceptance, rejection, and termination of offers of dedication.
   At the time of the approval of the final map, the City Engineer may accept,
subject to the improvement, or reject any dedications or offers of dedication
that are made by statement on the map. The City Clerk shall certify on the map
the action of the City Engineer. Offers of dedication shall be rejected and
terminated as provided by Sections 66477.1 and 66477.2 of the Subdivision Map
Act.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980, as amended by § 4, Ord. 1537-NS, eff. June
25, 2010)
Sec. 9-3.1003. Improvement agreements: Completion of improvements and
acceptance.
   (a)   Prior to submitting a final map or parcel map of a proposed
subdivision for approval pursuant to Section
9-3.946 of Article 9 of this chapter, the subdivider and all owners of land in
the subdivision substantially interested in the subdivision shall execute an
improvement agreement, in a form approved by the City Attorney, and as
prescribed by the City Engineer, whereby the subdivider is bound to construct
the improvements which have not been completed and accepted by the City prior
to the approval of the final map or parcel map required for the subdivision
pursuant to this Code.
   (b)   The improvement agreement shall, at a minimum, contain the following
standards and conditions:
   (1)   The furnishing of good and sufficient improvement security as provided
for in Article 11 of this chapter.
   (2)   A requirement to maintain the improvements until accepted by the City.
   (3)   A one year guarantee of the improvements after acceptance by the City.
   (4)   Any other conditions required by the Subdivision Map Act or Chapter 3
of Title 9 of this Code.
   (c)   Nothwithstanding the above, construction requirements of parcel maps
and on parcels designated as remainders when a subdivision is of a portion of
any unit of improved or unimproved land shall not be required until such time
as a permit or other grant of approval for development of the parcel is issued
by the City, unless construction is required pursuant to an agreement between
the City and the subdivider, or unless the City Engineer requires construction
within a reasonable time following the approval of the parcel map and prior to
the issuance of a permit or grant of approval for development upon a finding
that construction is necessary for reasons of public health and safety or the
orderly development of the surrounding area. The time of the completion of the
construction requirements for subdivisions which have multiple final maps may
be specified by the City Engineer, including the authority to require the
completion of improvements on any of the multiple final maps, regardless of the
sequence of the construction of the final maps by the subdivider, where the
improvements are desirable to serve the residents of the subdivision being
constructed or to accommodate the public generally who will be impacted by the
subdivision.
   (d)   The agreement, executed by the subdivider, shall be submitted to the
City Engineer, who shall execute the agreement on behalf of the City only after
approval of the final map and the exhaustion of any appeal to the City Council
provided under Section
9-3.946(e) of this chapter.
   (e)   The City Engineer’s action under this section may be appealed to the
Council within ten (10) calendar days of the date of the action in the same
manner that decisions of the Planning Commission are appealed to the Council
pursuant to Section
9-4.702(a)(3) of this Code. The scope of such appeal shall be limited to
conformance with Chapter 3 of the Subdivision Map Act and Chapter 3 of Title 9
of this Code.
   (f)   The City Engineer may execute amendments to an improvement agreement,
approved as to form by the City Attorney, that are consistent with this
section. In consideration for an amendment, the City Engineer may require,
inter alia, the following:
   (1)   Revisions of improvement plans to provide for current design and
construction standards when required by the City Engineer or Community
Development Director;
   (2)   Revised improvement construction estimates to reflect current
improvement costs, as approved by the City Engineer;
   (3)   Increase in the amount of improvement securities in accordance with
revised construction estimates; and
   (4)   Increase of inspection and plan-check fees to reflect current
construction costs or changes in the method of calculation, or both.
   (g)   Upon satisfactory completion of the improvements under the improvement
agreement, the City Engineer may accept the improvements on behalf of the City,
and in accordance with Streets and Highways Code § 1806(c), may accept streets
and roads or portions thereof, into the City street system.
   (h)   Should the subdivider fail to complete the improvements in accordance
with the terms and conditions of the improvement agreement, the City Engineer
may cause any or all uncompleted improvements to the completed and the
subdivider and sureties shall be firmly bound for the payment of all necessary
costs incurred by the City.
   (i)   The Council shall periodically review the delegation of authority to
the City Engineer provided by this section.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980, as amended by § 4, Ord. 1537-NS, eff. June
25, 2010)
Sec. 9-3.1004. Completion of improvements: Extensions.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980, repealed by § 5, Ord. 1537-NS, eff. June 25,
2010)
Sec. 9-3.1005. Guarantees.
   All improvements for subdivisions shall be guaranteed by the subdivider
following the final acceptance of all improvements of the subdivision. The
guarantee shall extend to such replacements and/or repairs as may be required
during the guarantee period in excess of routine maintenance for ordinary wear
and tear. When final acceptance is made, the guaranteed period shall be in
effect for one year thereafter. A guarantee security in an amount of at least
ten (10%) percent of the estimated cost of the improvements of the subdivision
shall be posted guaranteeing the replacement and/or repair of improvements. The
amount of the guaranteed security in no way shall limit the subdivider’s
guarantee as required by this section. No improvement security may be
exonerated for a subdivision specified by this section until a maintenance
guarantee security is posted. The replacements and/or repairs shall be
completed within the time specified after notification by the City Engineer of
the need for such work or after the approval of any plans and specifications
required therefor. An extension for the completion of the work may be granted
upon the payment of the required fee prescribed by Council resolution.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1006. Street tree planting.
   The improvement agreement executed pursuant to Section
9-3.1003 of this article shall include provisions for the planting within
parkways or public service easements along sidewalks within the subdivision of
at least one tree for each lot and two (2) trees for each corner lot in the
subdivision. The trees and shrubs proposed to be planted shall be of a type
selected from the planting pallets contained in the Forestry Master Plan and
approved by the Public Works Director and the Community Development Director or
their respective designees. A schematic plan for the proposed tree planting,
showing the type and location of the trees, shall be prepared by a California
registered landscape architect and shall be submitted to the Public Works
Director and the Community Development Director for approval prior to the
installation of such trees. The installation of such trees shall be made prior
to the occupancy of any development requiring street trees. All or any part of
this requirement may be waived if it is determined that the requirement would
be unnecessary or unreasonable under the circumstances in any particular case.
Such waiver shall be requested at the time of the review of the tentative map.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980, as amended by § 13, Ord. 1217-NS, eff.
September 27, 1994)
Sec. 9-3.1007. Improvement plans.
   The subdivider shall prepare plans and specifications for the improvements
required for the proposed subdivision pursuant to this Code, the Subdivision
Map Act, and any other entity having jurisdiction over the improvements
described therein.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1008. Approval of improvement plans.
   The City Engineer, or the engineer for any other entity having jurisdiction
over the improvements shown in the improvement plans, and the Community
Development Director shall review the plans and, only if they fully comply with
the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, this Code, and the other entity
and substantially comply with the tentative map, shall they sign the
certificate provided for in Section
9-3.946 of Article 9 of this chapter.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980; § 5, Ord. 1637-NS, eff. January 12, 2018)
Sec. 9-3.1009. Preparation of improvement plans.
   The improvement plans shall be printed or drawn clearly and legibly or be
reproduced by process which results in a permanent record which will permit
direct reproductions. Each sheet shall be twenty-four (24") inches vertically
by thirty-six (36") inches horizontally, with a marginal line drawn completely
around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of two (2") inches on the
left side and one-half (1/2") inch on the other three (3) sides. If the
improvement plans include five (5) or more sheets, a key map showing the sheets
and the area covered by each sheet of the plan shall be included on the first
sheet of the plans. Preprinted standard title cover sheets for the improvement
plans obtained from the City Engineer at cost may be used.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980, as amended by § 25, Ord. 1250-NS, eff.
January 9, 1996)
Sec. 9-3.1010. Grading plans included in improvement plans.
   The improvement plans shall also include complete grading plans. The grading
plans shall contain a title block and shall have a graphical scale in addition
to a numerical scale. The grading plans may be submitted initially on sheets
larger than twenty-four (24") inches by thirty-six (36") inches. However, if
the initial plans are submitted on such larger sheets, after the proposed
subdivision has been graded, the grading plans shall be resubmitted on sheets
conforming in size and margin requirements to the remainder of the improvement
plans. The grading plans resubmitted at the proper size may be a series of
twenty-four (24") inches by thirty-six (36") inches photographically reproduced
onto a permanent polyester base film, and made with proper overlap and title
block from the initially submitted grading plans.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980, as amended by § 26, Ord. 1250-NS, eff.
January 9, 1996)
Sec. 9-3.1011. Scale of improvement plans.
   The grading plan portion of the improvement plans shall be legible and drawn
to a scale wherein one (1") inch equals forty (40’) feet. A different scale may
be used with the approval of the City Engineer. The remaining portions of the
improvement plans shall be drawn to such scales as will permit the City
Engineer, using good engineering practices to efficiently review the plans and
supervise the construction of the improvements and properly inspect the
improvements once constructed.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1012. Contents of improvement plans.
   The improvement plans shall be prepared according to good engineering
practices and the standards of the City, or other entity having jurisdiction,
under the direction of, and shall be signed by, a registered civil engineer
licensed by the State. The improvement plans shall show the complete plans,
profiles, and details for all the improvements to be placed in a proposed
subdivision, including, but not limited to, all street work, drainage channels
and structures, all underground utilities to be installed by the subdivider,
including all appurtenances thereto located within the right-of-way, retaining
walls or other improvements to support cut slopes and embankments, bridges if
constructed in conjunction with subdivision improvements, the location of
underground utilities not within the right-of-way which may control the
location and elevation of storm drains and culverts, the location of fire
hydrants, curbs, gutters and sidewalks, fences that may be required, gates,
structures, and drainage facilities necessary to control slides, and other
improvements which may be required to complete the work.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1013. Changes in improvement plans.
   Subsequent to the signed approval of the subdivision improvement plans by
the City Engineer or engineer of any other entity having jurisdiction over any
improvements shown in the plan, no change shall be made to such plans without
the prior approval of the engineer. All changes approved by the engineer shall
comply with the requirements of this Code or the standards of the other entity.
Each request for the approval of a change in the improvement plans shall be
accompanied by the required fee prescribed by Council resolution.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1014. Cost estimates.
   An estimate of the costs of the improvements for the proposed subdivision
shall be prepared by the subdivider and shall accompany the improvement plans
at the time they are submitted. The cost estimates shall include a separate
item for contingencies in the amount of ten (10%) percent of the estimated
actual costs. Upon the consideration of the estimate submitted by the
subdivider, the City Engineer shall determine the estimated costs for the
improvements of the proposed subdivision.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1015. Commencement of improvements.
   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the grading of the proposed
subdivision and the construction of any improvements thereon shall not begin
until the City Engineer has approved the improvement plans or the proposed
construction. The City Engineer may approve the initiation of “stage grading”
in accordance with the provisions of Section
7-3.06 of Chapter 3 of Title 7 of this Code (Grading) if, in his judgment, the
improvement plans and final map are nearly ready for approval.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1016. Street improvements.
   All streets, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, structures, signs, fences, and
barricades within the subdivision shall be installed or improved to the
standards specified in the City of Thousand Oaks Road Standards and
construction specifications in effect at the time of construction.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1017. Drainage improvements.
   Subject to the provisions of Section
9-3.1503 of Article 15 of this chapter, all facilities for drainage required
for the proposed subdivision, regardless of location, shall be constructed by
the subdivider in accordance with the requirements specified in the City
Standards and Specifications in effect at the time of construction.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1018. Wastewater and water supply systems.
   Except as otherwise provided in this Code, and subject to the provisions of
Section
9-3.1503 of Article 15 of this chapter, the wastewater and water supply systems
shall be installed by the subdivider in each proposed subdivision and
connections thereto made from each lot within the subdivision. The requirement
that all lots be connected to sewers or the water supply system may be modified
by the Council, upon a request by the subdivider at the time of the approval of
the final map, if unusual circumstances warrant. The wastewater system and
domestic water supply system shall be constructed in accordance with the
requirements specified in the City Design and Construction Standards or the
standards of the appropriate wastewater or water service entity in effect at
the time of construction.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1019. Fire protection.
   As a part of the water supply installed in the proposed subdivision, the
subdivider shall install water mains, fire hydrants, gated equipment
connections, and other fire protection facilities deemed necessary by the
County Fire Protection District and the Public Works Director to provide
adequate fire protection to the proposed subdivision. The installation shall be
in accordance with the requirements specified by the Public Works Director, the
County Fire Department regulations, and the City in effect at the time of
construction. All fire protection facilities shall be dedicated to the proposed
water purveyor upon completion.
   (a)   Water wells shall not be used to satisfy the Fire Department
requirements for fire flow for new construction. Fire flow requirements shall
only be provided by connection to an existing public water system.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1133-NS, eff.
February 4, 1992)
Sec. 9-3.1020. Underground utilities.
   Except as otherwise provided in this Code, all existing and proposed utility
facilities, including, but not limited to, electric lines, communication lines,
cable television lines, street lighting power supply lines, and appurtenances
thereto, shall be placed underground, and all utility facilities, including
service laterals, shall be installed in the ground and appropriately pressure
tested prior to the paving of streets. The City Engineer may authorize the
installation of utility facilities after the street improvements are installed
if the installation will not require the reconstruction or repair of the street
improvements or if unusual circumstances warrant. All necessary arrangements
for the installation of utilities shall be made with the operator of each
proposed subdivision utility system pursuant to this section.
   Certain utility appurtenances, including, but not limited to, transformers,
pedestal-mounted terminal boxes, meter cabinets, and concealed ducts used in
connection with underground facilities which cannot be reasonably placed
underground may be placed on the surface of the ground. The request shall be
made at the time of the approval of the tentative map. The Planning Commission
or Council may grant the request for all or part of a subdivision where, due to
physical conditions, it would cause unreasonable hardship.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1021. Street name and traffic signs.
   Street name signs shall be installed by the subdivider at all intersections
within the subdivision prior to the occupancy of homes. Traffic control devices
and signs shall be installed by the subdivider at all locations within the
subdivision specified by the City Engineer. All traffic control devices and
signs shall conform to all applicable local laws and regulations.
Alternatively, the developer may request the Public Works Director to install
the devices and signs and pay the City for the costs thereof.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1022. Barricades.
   Barricades conforming to City standards shall be constructed by the
subdivider at the ends of all streets abutting undeveloped property adjacent to
the proposed subdivision.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1023. Underground openings.
   All underground pipes and openings encountered during the construction of
any improvements in the subdivision shall be removed by the subdivider or
sealed by him after consultation with, and in a manner satisfactory to, the
City Engineer.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1024. Water wells.
   All water wells within the proposed subdivision shall be abandoned by
sealing in a manner satisfactory to the Public Works Director and in compliance
with applicable City laws or shall be protected from surface and underground
pollution in accordance with requirements determined by the Public Works
Director pursuant to Chapter 4 of Title 6 of this Code. All water wells not
abandoned shall be delineated on the parcel map or final map, and measures
satisfactory to the Public Works Director shall be taken to prevent injuries to
persons or property by use of appropriate physical barricades and deed
restrictions.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1025. Fencing.
   (a)   Where determined by the Community Development Director and the City
Engineer to be necessary for the public welfare and safety, the subdivider
shall construct masonry walls six (6’) feet high, the design of which shall be
approved by the Community Development Director.
   (1)   On all lot lines of the subdivision which adjoin drainage channels;
   (2)   Adjacent to all major highway rights-of way, as shown on the
Circulation Element or applicable specific plans, which abut or pass through
the subdivision;
   (3)   Adjacent to all publicly-owned property; and
   (4)   As required as a condition of approval of the map.
   (b)   If a final map which does not include the entire tentative map area is
submitted for approval, all flood control and drainage channels within the
tentative map area shall be fenced in accordance with the requirements of
subsection (a) of this section with permanent or temporary fencing as approved
by the City Engineer. If a temporary fence is constructed, it shall be replaced
with the required permanent fence or wall when the land adjacent to the channel
is included within the final map.
   (c)   Ornamental wrought iron, heavy landscaping, or other appropriate
fencing, or combinations thereof, as approved by the Community Development
Department and Public Works Department may be substituted for the masonry walls
otherwise required by subsections (1) and (2) of subsection (a) of this
section.
   (d)   All walls and fences required pursuant to this section shall be
completed prior to the occupancy of buildings within any portion of the
development in close proximity of areas requiring such walls and fences.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1026. As-built plans.
   At the time of the completion of the improvements required pursuant to this
Code, and as a condition precedent to the exoneration of the improvement
security, the subdivider shall submit two (2) sets of prints and the original
tracings of the improvement plans which have been modified to reflect the
improvements as built to the City Engineer and shall certify that all
improvement work has been constructed in accordance with the requirements of
this Code. Any grading plans not originally approved on standard size drawing
materials shall be reduced as set forth in Section
9-3.1010 of this article.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1027. Improvement standards and specifications.
   As authorized by Section 66462 of the Subdivision Map Act, the City of
Thousand Oaks Standards for Roads, Wastewater and Water Facilities, the County
Standard Designs for public improvements, the latest revision of the Standard
Specifications for Public Works Construction ("Greenbook"), and the American
Water Works Association Standards, the Caltrans Standard Specifications, and
the CAMUTCD, copies of which are on file with the City Engineer, are hereby
adopted by reference, and all subdivision improvements shall be in accordance
with the standards and specifications contained therein and such amendments and
additions thereto as may be made from time to time by the Council and the City
Engineer.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1408-NS, eff. July
3, 2003, § 1, Ord. 1521-NS, eff. August 13, 2009, and § 1, Ord. 1647-NS, eff.
August 10, 2018)
Article 11. Improvement Security
Sec. 9-3.1101. Requirement of improvement security.
   Any improvement agreement, contract, or act required or authorized by the
Subdivision Map Act, for which security is required by the Subdivision Map Act
or this Code, shall be secured in the manner and amounts provided in Sections
66499, et seq, of the Subdivision Map Act and in this Code. Such improvement
agreements may be secured by any form of security, including security interests
in real property, which security is accepted and approved by the City Attorney.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1102. Amount of improvement security.
   Improvement security posted for the improvements required for the proposed
subdivision shall be for the full amount of the estimated costs of the
improvements as determined by the City Engineer pursuant to Section
9-3.1014 of Article 10 of this chapter. In addition, security shall be posted
to secure payment by the subdivider to the contractor, his subcontractors, and
to persons renting equipment or furnishing labor or materials to them for the
improvement of the proposed subdivision in the full amount of the estimated
costs of such materials and services as determined by the City Engineer. Five
Hundred and no/100ths ($500.00) Dollars of the required improvement security
shall be in the form of a cash deposit with the City. No interest shall be
earned on the deposit. Such cash deposit may be used by the City in correcting
unsafe or emergency road conditions occasioned by or arising out of the
performance of any work in constructing the subdivision improvements, in weed
abatement within the subdivision, in periodic street cleaning, or in the
removal of trash from within the subdivision. The City may use the cash deposit
only if the City is unable, after reasonable attempts, to contact the developer
(or his contractor) to perform the required emergency work, weed abatement, or
trash removal or if the developer or his contractor refuses to forthwith
perform the required work after being informed of its necessity by the City. If
any part of the Five Hundred and no/100ths ($500.00) Dollar cash deposit is
used by the City, the developer shall be charged for the cost of the required
work and shall remit to City, within (10) days after written notice of such
expenditures, sufficient cash to bring the deposit to Five Hundred and no/
100ths ($500.00) Dollars once more. Any portion of the cash deposit which has
not been used by the City at the time the street improvements are accepted into
the City roads system shall be returned to the developer. Any improvement
security required in addition to the Five Hundred and no/100ths ($500.00)
Dollars may be of any type specified in Section 66499 of the Subdivision Map
Act.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1103. Exoneration of improvement security.
   After the full and faithful performance of the improvement agreement by the
subdivider, acceptance of the public improvements by the City Engineer, and the
posting of the guarantee security pursuant to Section
9-3.1005 of Article 10 of this chapter, the City Engineer shall exonerate all
improvement security posted to secure the execution of the agreement. The City
Engineer may accept a cash deposit or a certificate of deposit necessary to
accomplish the required performance in lieu of all or part of such performance
when he finds it is reasonable and necessary under all of the circumstances.
Upon a request of the subdivider, the City Engineer, in his discretion, may
reduce the amount of the improvement security by partial exoneration in an
amount not exceeding ninety (90%) percent of the total estimated costs of the
improvements of the subdivision when a corresponding percentage amount of
improvements has been fully completed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.
However, under no circumstances shall such partial exoneration constitute
acceptance of the improvements upon which such partial exoneration is granted.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980, as amended by § 6, Ord. 1537-NS, eff. June
25, 2010)
Article 12. Reversions and Mergers
Sec. 9-3.1201. Reversions to acreage.
   Property previously subdivided by final map may be reverted to acreage by
final map, and property previously subdivided and consisting of four (4) or
less contiguous parcels under the same ownership may be reverted to acreage by
parcel map, pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and of this
article. The parcel map procedures, including the waiver of parcel map
procedures as set forth in Section
9-3.302 of Article 3 of this chapter, shall also be used to eliminate lot lines
in situations where adjoining lots have merged by virtue of Section
9-3.1210 of this article.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1202. Initiation of proceedings by owners.
   Proceedings to revert subdivider property to acreage may be initiated by a
petition of all of the owners of record of the real property within the
subdivision. The petition shall be in a form prescribed by the Community
Development Department and shall contain the following information:
   (a)   Adequate evidence of title to the real property within the
subdivision;
   (b)   Sufficient data to make all of the determinations and findings
required by this article;
   (c)   A final map or parcel map which delineates dedications which will not
be vacated and dedications which are a condition to reversion; and
   (d)   Such other pertinent information as may be required by the Community
Development Department.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1203. Initiation of proceedings by the Council.
   The Council on its own motion, by resolution, may initiate proceedings to
revert subdivision property acreage. The resolution shall direct the Community
Development Department to obtain all the information necessary to accomplish
the proposed reversion.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1204. Data for reversions to acreage.
   Petitioners for reversions to acreage shall file the following:
   (a)   Evidence of title to the real property; and
   (b)   Evidence of the consent of all of the owners of any interest in the
property; or
   (c)   Evidence that none of the improvements required to be made have been
made within two (2) years after the date the final map or parcel map was filed
for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for the completion of the
improvements, whichever is later; or
   (d)   Evidence that no lots shown on the final map or parcel map have been
sold within five (5) years after the date such final map was filed for record;
and
   (e)   A tentative map in a form prescribed by the Council; or
   (f)   A final map or parcel map in a form prescribed by the Council which
map delineates dedications which will not be vacated and dedications which will
be required as a condition or reversion.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1205. Fees.
   Petitions to revert property to acreage shall be accompanied by the required
fees prescribed by Council resolution. If the proceedings are initiated
pursuant to Section
9-3.1203 of this article, the persons who request the Council to initiate the
proceedings shall pay the required fees.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1206. Proceedings.
   (a)   For reversions to acreage required to be processed by a final map, a
public hearing shall be held by the City Council. Notice of the public hearing
shall be given in the manner required by Chapter 12 of this title.
   (1)   The Council may approved a reversion to acreage only if the Council
finds that:
   (i)   Dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the
reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or prospective public
purposes; and
   (ii)   Either:
   (aa)    All owners of an interest in the real property within the
subdivision have consented to the reversion; or
   (ab)    None of the improvements required to be made have been made within
two (2) years after the date the final map or parcel map was filed for record
or within the time allowed by agreement for the completion of the improvements,
whichever is later; or
   (ac)    No lots shown on the final map or parcel map have been sold within
five (5) years after the date such map was filed for record.
   (2)   The Council may require as conditions of the reversion:
   (i)   That the property owners dedicate or offer to dedicate streets or
other public easements as required and permitted by this Code or the
Subdivision Map Act; and
   (ii)   That all or a portion of the previously paid subdivision fees,
deposits, or improvement securities be retained if they are necessary to
accomplish any of the provisions of this Code.
   (b)   Reversions to acreage permitted to be processed by parcel map shall be
heard by the Planning Commission pursuant to subsection (a) of Section
9-3.702 of Article 7 of this chapter. The provisions of subsections (1) and (2)
of subsection (a) of this section shall govern Planning Commission actions.
Waivers of parcel maps shall be processed pursuant to subsection (b) of said
Section
9-3.702.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980, as amended by § 9, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April
27, 1993)
Sec. 9-3.1207. Filing.
   After the hearing before the Council or Planning Commission, the final map
or parcel map for reversion shall be delivered to the City Engineer for review
pursuant to Section
9-3.946 of Article 9 of this chapter and, after approval by the City Engineer,
shall be delivered to the County Recorder for recordation. The final map or
parcel map for reversion shall contain a certificate signed and acknowledged by
all parties having any record title interest therein consenting to such final
map or parcel map except as provided by State Government Code Section 66436 or
66499.20 1/4.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980, as amended by § 27, Ord. 1250-NS, eff.
January 9, 1996, as amended by part 22, Ord. 1437-NS, eff. July 7, 2005; § 5,
Ord. 1637-NS, eff. January 12, 2018)
Sec. 9-3.1208. Effect of filing reversion maps with the County Recorder.
   Reversions shall be effective upon the final map or parcel map for reversion
being filed for record by the County Recorder. Upon filing, all dedications and
offers of dedication not shown on the final map or parcel map for reversion
shall be of no further force and effect.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1209. Return of fees and deposits and release of securities.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in Section 66499.19 of the
Subdivision Map Act, upon the filing of the final map or parcel map for
reversion by the County Recorder, all original fees and deposits designated for
refund by the Council shall be returned, and all original improvement
securities shall be released. No interest shall accrue on behalf of depositors
of cash placed with the City.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1210. Mergers of nonconforming contiguous parcels.
   The City of Thousand Oaks may, as provided by Section 66451.11 of the
Subdivision Map Act, provide for the merger of a parcel or unit with a
contiguous parcel or unit held by the same owner if any one of the contiguous
parcels or units held by the same owner does not conform the standards for
minimum parcel size, under the zoning ordinance of the City of Thousand Oaks
applicable to the parcels or units of land and if all of the following
requirements are satisfied:
   (a)   At least one of the affected parcels is undeveloped by any structure
for which a building permit was issued or for which a building permit was not
required at the time of construction, or is developed only with an accessory
structure or accessory structures, or is developed with a single structure,
other than an accessory structure, that is also partially sited on a contiguous
parcel or unit.
   (b)   With respect to any affected parcel, one or more of the following
conditions exists:
   (1)   Comprises less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in area at the
time of the determination of merger.
   (2)   Was not created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in
effect at the time of its creation.
   (3)   Does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water
supply.
   (4)   Does not meet slope stability standards.
   (5)   Has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety
equipment access and maneuverability.
   (6)   Its development would create health or safety hazards.
   (7)   Is inconsistent with the applicable general plan and any applicable
specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards.
   (c)   For purpose of determining whether contiguous parcels are held for the
same owner, ownership shall be determined as of the date that notice of
intention to determine status is recorded.
   (d)   This subdivision shall not apply if one of the following conditions
exist:
   (1)   On or before July 1, 1981, one or more of the contiguous parcels or
units of land is enforceably restricted open-space land pursuant to a contract,
agreement, scenic restriction, or open-space easement, as defined and set forth
in Section 421 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.
   (2)   On July 1, 1981, one or more of the contiguous parcels or units of
land is timberland as defined in California Government Code subdivision (f) of
Section 51104, or is land devoted to an agricultural use as defined in
California Government Code subdivision (b) of Section 51201.
   (3)   On July 1, 1981, one or more of the contiguous parcels or units of
land is located within two thousand (2,000) feet of the site on which an
existing commercial mineral resource extraction use is being made, whether or
not the extraction is being made pursuant to a use permit issued by the local
agency.
   (4)   On July 1, 1981, one or more of the contiguous parcels or units of
land is located within two thousand (2,000) feet of a future commercial mineral
extraction site as shown on a plan for which a use permit or other permit
authorizing commercial mineral resource extraction has been issued by the local
agency.
   (e)   For purposes of paragraphs (c) and (d) of this subdivision, “mineral
resource extraction” means gas, oil, hydrocarbon, gravel or sand extraction,
geothermal wells, or other similar commercial mining activity.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980, as amended by § 1, Ord. 974-NS, eff.
September 8, 1987, as amended by part 23, Ord. 1437-NS, eff. July 7, 2005)
Sec. 9-3.1211. Effective date of mergers.
   A merger of parcels becomes effective when the City of Thousand Oaks causes
to be filed for record with the recorder of the county in which the real
property is located, a notice of merger specifying the names of the record
owner and particularly describing the real property.
(§ 1, Ord. 974-NS, eff. September 8, 1987)
Sec. 9-3.1212. Notification of intention to merger: Hearing.
   Prior to recording a notice of merger the City of Thousand Oaks shall cause
to be mailed by certified mail to the then current record owner of the property
a notice of intention to determine status, notifying the owner that the
affected parcels may be merged pursuant to standards specified in Section
9-3.1210 and advising the owner of the opportunity to request a hearing on
determination of status and to present evidence at the hearing that the
property does not meet the criteria for merger. The notice of intention to
determine status shall be filed for record with the recorder of the county in
which the real property is located on the date that notice is mailed to the
property owner.
(§ 1, Ord. 974-NS, eff. September 8, 1987)
Sec. 9-3.1213. Request for hearing.
   At any time within thirty (30) days after recording of the notice of
intention to determine status, the owner of the affected property may file with
the City of Thousand Oaks a request for hearing on determination of status.
(§ 1, Ord. 974-NS, eff. September 8, 1987)
Sec. 9-3.1214. Procedure for hearing.
   Upon receiving a request for hearing on determination of status from the
owner of the affected property pursuant to Section
9-3.1213, the City of Thousand Oaks shall fix a time, date, and place for a
hearing to be conducted by the Planning Commission, and shall notify the
property owner of the time, date and place for the hearing by certified mail.
The hearing shall be conducted no more than sixty (60) days following the
City’s receipt of the property owner’s request for the hearing, but may be
postponed or continued with the mutual consent of the City and the property
owner.
(§ 1, Ord. 974-NS, eff. September 8, 1987)
Sec. 9-3.1215. Procedure for determination following hearing.
   (a)   At the hearing, the property owner shall be given the opportunity to
present any evidence that the affected property does not meet the standards for
merger specified in Section
9-3.1210.
   (b)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the City shall make a determination
that the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged and shall so
notify the owner of its determination. A determination of nonmerger may be made
whether or not the affected property meets the standards for merger specified
in Section
9-3.1210 of the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code. A determination of merger shall
be recorded within thirty (30) days after conclusion of the hearing.
(§ 1, Ord. 974-NS, eff. September 8, 1987)
Sec. 9-3.1216. Determination when no hearing is requested.
   If, within the thirty (30) day period specified in Section
9-3.1213, the owner does not file a request for a hearing in accordance with
Section
9-3.1214 and Section
9-3.1215, the City may, at any time thereafter, make a determination that the
affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged. A determination of
merger shall be recorded as provided for in Section
9-3.1211 no later than ninety (90) days following the mailing of the notice
required by Section
9-3.1214.
(§ 1, Ord. 974-NS, eff. September 8, 1987)
Sec. 9-3.1217. Mergers and resubdivision.
   Subdivided lands may be merged and resubdivided without reverting to acreage
by complying with all the applicable requirements for the subdivision of land
as provided by this chapter. The filing of the final map or parcel map shall
constitute the legal merging of the separate parcels into one parcel and the
resubdivision of such parcel, and the real property shall thereafter be shown
with the new lot or parcel boundaries on the assessment roll. Any unused fees
or deposits previously made pursuant to this chapter pertaining to the property
shall be credited pro rata towards any requirements for the same purposes which
are applicable at the time of the resubdivision. Any streets or easements to be
left in effect after the resubdivision shall be adequately delineated on the
map. After the approval of the merger and the resubdivision, the map shall be
delivered to the County Recorder. The filing of the map shall consist of the
legal merger and the resubdivision of the land affected thereby and shall also
consist of the abandonment of all street and easements not shown on the map.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980, as amended by § 1, Ord. 974-NS, eff.
September 8, 1987)
Sec. 9-3.1218. Voluntary lot mergers.
   (a)   Intent and Purpose. Concurrent Processing with Discretionary Projects.
The purpose of this Article is to establish ministerial procedures for
processing voluntary merger applications to merge contiguous lots under common
ownership into a single lot as authorized by California Government Code Section
66499.20.3. The approval of voluntary merger applications and subsequent review
and approval of the certificate of merger and deeds are ministerial acts not
subject to CEQA. In instances where a voluntary merger is requested in
conjunction with a project involving an application for a development permit or
other discretionary City land use approval involving some or all of the
property subject to the voluntary merger, the voluntary merger application
shall be processed concurrently with the application for the discretionary land
use approval, including for purposes of evaluating the project’s potential
environmental effects. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City’s approval of a
voluntary merger is, in and of itself, a ministerial act.
   (b)   Application. Applications for the approval of a Voluntary Merger shall
be filed with the Community Development Department. No application shall be
accepted for filing and processing if there is an open investigation pertaining
to a documented violation of the TOMC on the subject lot(s) unless:
      (1)   The acceptance of the application is necessary to abate the
existing violation and otherwise conforms to the requirements of this Chapter;
      (2)   Contains in a full, true, and correct manner, the required
information prescribed by the forms supplied by the Community Development
Department; and
      (3)   Is accompanied by the appropriate fees.
   (c)   Filing and Processing Requirements.
      (1)   The application for a Voluntary Merger shall be processed by the
Community Development Department if all information and documents requested in
the application, including each item listed below in Section
9-3.1218(c)(1)(i) through (c)(1)(vii), are submitted and concurrently reviewed
to the satisfaction of the Community Development Department until deemed
complete.
         (i)   A deposit of the required fees pursuant to the City's Fee
Schedule to process and record a certificate of voluntary merger.
         (ii)   A current preliminary title report showing all parties with a
legal or equitable interest in the lots and all easements, covenants, and other
encumbrances and interests in the affected lots at the time of the filing of
the application for the voluntary merger.
         (iii)   All parties having any record title interest in the lots
subject to the voluntary merger application have consented in writing to the
voluntary merger subject to the exceptions set forth in Government Code Section
66436.
         (iv)   If any of the existing lots are developed, a site plan prepared
by the project surveyor that depicts the location of any buildings or
structures with a notation of setback distances from the resulting adjusted lot
lines.
         (v)   Documentation, as required by the Community Development
Department, to establish that each of the lots that are subject to the
voluntary merger are legal lots. The applicant is encouraged to consult with
the Community Development Department prior to submitting a voluntary merger
application that involves illegally created lots to confirm compliance with
Section
9-3.1218(g)(1)(2)(11).
         (vi)   Legal description and map, prepared by a person authorized to
practice land surveying or land surveyor, of the new boundaries of the merged
lot as adjusted by the voluntary merger. The map shall also include: (i) the
boundaries of each of the existing lots at the time of application; and (ii) a
north arrow and the bearings and distances for the merged lot lines. A record
of survey may be voluntarily submitted as a substitute for a map.
         (vii)   Draft certificate of voluntary merger (see Section
9-3.1218(k) below) and deed(s) reflecting the adjusted property boundaries.
      (2)   Unless otherwise specified in this Article, the voluntary merger
application shall be processed ministerially without a public notice or
hearing.
   (d)   Community Development Department and City Engineer Review.
      (1)   The Community Development Department and City Engineer shall review
the voluntary merger application. If additional information is needed, the
applicant shall provide the documents and information requested by the
Community Development Department and City Engineer in order to deem the
application complete. If the application is determined to be incomplete, the
applicant shall be notified in writing of the reasons therefor and informed of
the information needed to make the application complete.
      (2)   The City Engineer or designee shall determine whether the documents
required to effectuate the Voluntary Merger are technically correct, including
the legal description and map. When the City Engineer or designee is satisfied
that the documents to be recorded to complete the voluntary merger are
technically correct, the City Engineer shall transmit the documents to the
Community Development Department for recordation with the Office of the County
Recorder upon final approval of the application by the advisory agency pursuant
to Section
9-3.1218(j) of this Chapter.
   (e)   Termination of Incomplete Application. An incomplete voluntary merger
application may be terminated in the same manner for terminating an incomplete
land use permit application as set forth in Section
9-4.2817(a)(1), and (a)(2) "Applications incomplete for processing.”
   (f)   Designated Advisory Agency. The Community Development Director or
designee is the designated advisory agency for ministerial voluntary merger
applications under this Article.
   (g)   Standards for Approval. The Community Development Director, in
consultation with the City Engineer, shall approve or conditionally approve a
voluntary lot merger without public notice or hearing if, on the basis of the
complete application that demonstrates the following:
      (1)   Each of the lots to be merged are legal lots. However, a legal lot
that was illegally subdivided thus creating two or more illegal lots may be
merged back into its original configuration as the legal lot existed prior to
the illegal subdivision so long as the other criteria of approval set forth in
this section are met;
      (2)   If one or more involved parcels is subject to a conditional
certificate of compliance, the conditions of development must be fully
satisfied by the merger. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a condition of
development that would not be satisfied relates to minimum parcel size, the
merger shall be approved with the condition that the deed or deeds recorded to
effectuate the merger contain an express statement that the resulting parcel
remains subject to the conditional certificate of compliance, whose recording
information shall be noted on the deed or deeds;
      (3)   The lots to be merged are contiguous to each other;
      (4)   The lots to be merged are under the same ownership;
      (5)   If there are any liens or deeds of trust, they shall encumber the
entire merged lot. There cannot be any liens or deeds of trust encumbering only
a portion of the merged lot;
      (6)   The voluntary merger will not adversely affect existing easements
of record on any of the lots or any conditions of approval, dedications, offers
to dedicate, or security arising from a previously recorded map that created
any of the lots subject to the voluntary merger application;
      (7)   The lot merger shall not impair existing easements, or it shall
include the relocation of existing easements, utilities, or infrastructure
serving adjacent lots, parcels, or public lands and streets;
      (8)   The lot merger shall not impair existing access or create a need
for access to adjacent lots or parcels;
      (9)   The lot merger will not alter the exterior boundary of the lots to
be merged;
      (10)   The City Engineer or designee has approved the legal description
as accurately representing the exterior boundaries of the resulting merged lot;
      (11)   The voluntary merger will not render any existing conforming
structures or existing conforming uses on any of the involved lots to become a
nonconforming structure or use. Existing legal nonconforming structures or uses
on any of the lots subject to the application are not grounds to deny the
voluntary merger; and
      (12)   The deed or deeds submitted to the Community Development to
effectuate the merger shall contain an express statement of the grantor(s),
pursuant to section 1093 of the California Civil Code, that the intent of the
grantor(s) and the purpose of the deed(s) is to merge all of the property
described in the deed(s) into a single lot.
   (h)   Conditional Approval:
      (1)   The only conditions the Advisory Agency may impose on the approval
of a voluntary merger are those required:
         (i)   Conform the merged lot to all objective standards and
requirements of the General Plan, Zoning Ordinances and City of Thousand Oaks
Improvement Standards and Specifications; and
         (ii)   Facilitate the relocation of existing utilities,
infrastructure, or easements.
      (2)   If the voluntary merger application is conditionally approved, the
advisory agency shall send a letter of conditional approval notifying the
applicant of the conditions to be fulfilled prior to recordation of the
voluntary merger. If the conditions are not fulfilled within one year of the
date of the letter, the voluntary merger shall expire and become null and void
unless the applicant obtains a written extension from the Advisory Agency
pursuant to Section 9-9-3.1218(i), "Extension of Conditional Approval" of this
Chapter.
      (3)   A conditionally approved voluntary merger shall be deemed ready for
recordation when the advisory agency determines that the conditions have been
fulfilled and is in receipt of the following:
         (i)   An up-to-date preliminary title report;
         (ii)   The voluntary merger documents approved by the City Engineer
(e.g., legal description and a map); and
         (iii)   All deeds prepared for recordation as approved by the
Community Development Director pursuant to Section
9-3.1218(c)(1)(vii) of this Chapter.
      (4)   Upon receipt of the documents required by Section
9-3.1218(h)(3) above, the Advisory Agency shall cause each of the Community
Development Director-approved voluntary merger documents and deeds to be
recorded in the Office of the County Recorder.
         (i)   Extension of Conditional Approval. Prior to the expiration of
the conditional approval of the voluntary merger application pursuant to
Section
9-3.1218(h)(2) above, the Advisory Agency may grant one extension of up to six
(6) months if the applicant demonstrates good cause.
         (ii)   Certificate of Voluntary Merger. The recordation of a
Certificate of Voluntary Merger and the deed(s) shall effectuate the voluntary
merger of the separate lots into a single lot for the purposes of the
Subdivision Map Act and this Chapter, and the lots shall thereafter be treated
in all respects as a single lot. The Certificate of Voluntary Merger shall
constitute a Certificate of Compliance for the merged lot.
         (iii)   Certificate of Voluntary Merger Requirements. A Certificate of
Voluntary Merger shall include all the following:
      (5)   All parties having any record title interest in the merged lot
shall execute the Certificate of Voluntary Merger before a Notary Public and
submit it to the Community Development Department, excepting all those
interests that are excepted pursuant to the provisions of Government Code
Section 66436. The Community Development Director shall also execute the
Certificate of Voluntary Merger, but the signature need not be notarized.
      (6)   The Certificate of Voluntary Merger shall include an express
written statement that the consolidation of the legal descriptions of the lots
is intended by the owner(s) to merge those lots into a single lot as set forth
in the legal description of the merged lot.
      (7)   Either: (a) The deed or deeds that comprise the ownership interests
of each lot subject to the voluntary merger shall be attached to the
certificate of voluntary merger, or (b) the recorder number of each deed to
each lot subject to the Voluntary Merger shall be referenced in the Certificate
of Voluntary Merger.
      (8)   The legal description of the merged lot approved by the City
Engineer shall be attached to the Certificate of Voluntary Merger.
(§ 1, Ord. 1734-NS, eff. January 10, 2025)
Article 13. Monuments
Sec. 9-3.1301. Final map and parcel map monuments.
   At the time of making the survey of the final map or parcel map, the
engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments to conform with the
standards described in Section 66495 of the Subdivision Map Act so that another
engineer or surveyor may readily retrace the survey. One exterior boundary line
of the land being subdivided shall be monumented or referenced before the map
is recorded. The remaining monuments shall be set within one year following the
recordation of the subdivision. The monuments shall be set as follows:
   (a)   Exterior boundary monuments shall be set at or near each boundary
corner and at intermediate points approximately one thousand (1,000’) feet
apart or at such lesser distances as may be necessary by topography to ensure
accuracy in the reestablishment of any point or line without unreasonable
difficulty.
   (b)   Center line monuments shall be set to mark the intersections of all
public and private roads, streets, alleys, or ways. Center tine monuments shall
also be set to mark either the beginning and ending of curves or the points of
intersection of tangents thereof.
   (c)   Corner monuments shall be set at or near each lot corner, except that
the City Engineer may waive certain corner monumenting where standard
monumenting would not be feasible or beneficial in retracing a survey.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1302. Monument construction.
   All exterior boundary monuments set shall be of new galvanized iron pipe not
less than one and one-half (1-1/2") inches inside diameter and eighteen (18")
inches long. All lot corner monuments shall be new galvanized iron pipe not
less than one-half (1/2") inch inside diameter and fifteen (15") inches long, a
cross (+) cut in concrete, a lead and tack, or steel pin. Center line monuments
shall be of new galvanized iron pipe not less than one and one-half (1-1/2")
inches inside diameter and fifteen (15") inches long. At locations designated
by the City Engineer, not exceeding four (4) per one hundred (100) lots or
fraction thereof, monuments constructed to the requirements of the County
Improvement Standards and Specifications shall be placed in lieu of monuments
constructed to the standards otherwise specified in this section. The
subdivider shall also provide proper ties to the location of the center line
monuments, and such ties shall be shown on a tie sheet of a form approved by
the City Engineer. A minimum of three (3) such ties shall be required for each
monument. All monuments set shall be permanently marked or tagged with the
engineer's or surveyor's registration number.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1303. Monument bonds.
   If the monuments are to be set following the submission of the final map or
parcel map to the City Engineer for his certificate a bond meeting the
requirements set forth in Sections 66441 and 66495 through 66498 of the
Subdivision Map Act shall be filed. In determining the amount of the bond, the
City Engineer shall make the necessary estimate of the cost to set monuments
not already existing.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1304. Notices of setting of final monuments: Payment of engineers and
surveyors.
   Within five (5) days after the final setting of all monuments, the surveyor
or engineer shall give written notice to the subdivider and to the City
Engineer that the final monuments have been set.
   Upon payment to the engineer or surveyor for setting the final monuments,
the subdivider shall present to the Council evidence of payment to and receipt
by the engineer or surveyor.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Article 14. Environmental Impact and Grading and Erosion Control
Sec. 9-3.1401. Environmental impact.
   No map filed pursuant to the provisions of this Code, except preliminary
maps filed pursuant to Section
9-3.501 of Article 5 of this chapter, shall be approved until an environmental
impact evaluation is prepared, processed, and considered in accordance with the
provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970 (Public
Resources Code, Sections 21000, et seq). The subdivider shall provide such data
and information and deposit and pay such fees as may be required to reimburse
the City for costs for the preparation and/or processing of environmental
review documents as specified by Council resolution.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1402. Grading and erosion control.
   Every map approved pursuant to this Code shall comply with the requirements
for grading and erosion control, including the prevention of sedimentation or
damages to off-site property, as set forth in the City of Thousand Oaks
Development Standards, Chapter 3 of Title 7 of this Code, and the Land
Development Manual.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Article 15. Improvement Fees, Supplemental Capacity, and Reservations
Sec. 9-3.1501. Costs of bridges and major thoroughfares.
   As a condition of the approval of the final map or parcel map or as a
condition of the issuance of a building permit, the subdivider may be required
to pay fees or other considerations in lieu thereof pursuant to this section
and Section 66484 of the Subdivision Map Act in order to defray the actual or
estimated costs of constructing such bridges over waterways, freeways, and
canyons and for constructing such major thoroughfares, including any necessary
signalization, as may be identified as necessary in the transportation of flood
control or other provisions of the Circulation Element and other elements of
the General Plan of the City or applicable Specific Plans.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1502. Reservations for public uses.
   As a condition of the approval of any subdivision, the tentative map of
which is filed subsequent to the adoption of a Specific Plan or a General Plan
Community Facilities Element, a General Plan Recreation and Parks Element, or a
General Plan Public Building Element containing definite principles and
standards regarding the determination of the need for and location of public
uses of land, the subdivider may be required to reserve areas of real property
within the subdivision for schools, parks, recreational facilities, open space,
fire stations, libraries, or other public uses pursuant to the provisions and
subject to the powers and obligations set forth in Sections 66479, et seq, of
the Subdivision Map Act. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit
the authority of the City to levy fees pursuant to this Code, including, but
not limited to, Section
9-3.1504 of this article.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1503. Costs of drainage and wastewater facilities.
   As a condition of the approval of any subdivision, the tentative map of
which is filed no sooner than thirty (30) days after the adoption of any
applicable drainage or wastewater plan for a particular drainage or wastewater
area, the subdivider may be required to pay fees or considerations in lieu
thereof for the purpose of defraying the actual or estimated costs of
constructing planned drainage facilities for the removal of surface and
stormwaters from local or neighborhood drainage areas and of constructing
planned wastewater facilities for local wastewater areas pursuant to the
provisions of, and subject to the conditions, powers, and obligations set forth
in Section 66483 of the Subdivision Map Act.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1504. Other fees: Improvements.
   As a condition of the approval of any map, the subdivider may be required to
construct improvements or to pay fees or other considerations in lieu thereof
in order to resolve or mitigate problems identified in environmental impact
review documents or to comply with the requirements of the General Plan and
Specific Plans of the City and laws and standards adopted pursuant thereto.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1505. Supplemental improvements.
   (a)   The subdivider may be required to install improvements for the benefit
of the subdivision which may contain supplemental size, capacity, or number for
the benefit of property not within the subdivision as a condition precedent to
the approval of a subdivision or parcel map and thereafter to dedicate such
improvements to the public.
   (b)   The City or appropriate entity shall enter into an agreement for
reimbursement to the subdivider of the costs of the supplement capacity, size,
or number. However, the subdivider shall be reimbursed only for that portion of
the costs of such improvements equal to the difference between the amount it
would cost the subdivider to install improvements to serve the subdivision only
and the actual costs of oversized improvements.
   (c)   To pay the costs of such a reimbursement, the Council, at its
discretion, may:
   (1)   Immediately reimburse the subdivider for the entire cost of oversizing
and thereafter levy a charge upon the real property benefitted thereby; or
   (2)   Collect a reasonable use charge for the account of the subdividers
from persons not within the subdivision using the oversized improvements; or
   (3)   Establish and maintain local benefit districts for the levy and
collection of the charge attributable to the property benefitted by the
supplemental capacity.
   (d)   If the City has adopted a local drainage or wastewater plan or map as
required for the imposition of fees therefor, or has established an area of
benefit for bridges or major thoroughfares as provided in this chapter, the
City may impose a reasonable charge on property within the area benefitted and
may provide for the collection of such charge as set forth in this chapter. The
City may enter into reimbursement agreements with a subdivider who constructs
such facilities, bridges, or thoroughfares, and the charges collected by the
City therefor may be utilized to reimburse the subdivider as set forth in this
section.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Article 16. Additional Fees and Dedications: School Facilities and Park and
Recreational Purposes
Sec. 9-3.1601. Dedication of land and/or payments in lieu of fees for school
facilities.
   The requirements and provisions of Chapter 8 of Title 9 of this Code shall
be applied to maps processed under this chapter.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1602. Dedication of land for park and recreational purposes.
   The Council does hereby find, determine, and declare as follows:
   (a)   In 1965, the Legislature of the State amended the Subdivision Map Act
(formerly Sections 11500, et seq., of the Business and Professions Code of the
State) to enable counties to require either the dedication of land, the payment
of fees, or a combination of both for park or recreational purposes as a
condition of the approval of a subdivision map; and
   (b)   In 1972, the Legislature of the State amended the Subdivision Map Act
(formerly Section 11596 of the Business and Professions Code of the State), to
enable cities and counties to also require either the dedication of land, the
payment of fees, or a combination of both for park or recreational purposes as
a condition of the approval of a parcel map for a division of land not a
subdivision; and
   (c)   Before a city or county may avail itself of said Act, it shall have a
General Plan containing a recreational element with definite principles and
standards for park and recreational facilities to serve the residents of the
city or county; and
   (d)   The Council has amended the General Plan of the City to include such
recreational element; and
   (e)   The revised Subdivision Map Act continues the earlier substantive
provision as Section 66477 of the Government Code of the State.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980, as amended by part 24, Ord. 1437-NS, eff.
July 7, 2005)
Sec. 9-3.1603. Subdividers required to provide park and recreational
facilities.
   Every subdivider who subdivides land requiring either a final map or a
parcel map shall dedicate a portion of such land, pay a fee, or do both, as set
forth in this article, for the purpose of providing park and recreational
facilities to serve the future residents of such divided property.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1604. Application of article provisions.
   The provisions of this article shall apply to all subdivisions, as that term
is defined in Section 66424 of the Government Code of the State, and to time
extensions with regard to any map; provided, however, the provisions of this
article shall not apply to industrial subdivisions or to condominium projects
which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building
which is more than five (5) years old when no new dwelling units are added (see
paragraph (d)of Section 66477 of the Government Code of the State).
Furthermore, the provisions of this article shall only apply to a subdivision
not requiring a final map if the subdivision is to be made by or on behalf of a
person engaged in the business of developing and selling real estate as
distinguished from a private owner making an occasional sale. A person shall
not be deemed to be engaged in the developing and selling of real estate if he
has made no more than four (4) sales in either of the last two (2) preceding
years. Subdivisions containing less than five (5) parcels and not used for
residential purposes shall be exempted from the requirements of this article;
provided, however, a condition may be placed on the approval of the parcel map
for such a division of land to the effect that if a building permit is
requested for the construction of a residential structure or structures on one
or more of the parcels within two (2) years, the fee may be required to be paid
by the owner of each such parcel as a condition to the issuance of such permit.
(See subsection(a)(8) of Section 66477 of the Government Code of the State.)
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980, as amended by part 25, Ord. 1437-NS, eff.
July 7, 2005)
Sec. 9-3.1605. Relation of land required to population density.
   It is hereby found and determined:
   (a)   That the public interest, convenience, health, welfare, and safety
require that the following acreage for each 1,000 persons residing within the
City be devoted to park and recreational purposes:
   (1)   Five (5) acres of neighborhood park lands;
   (2)   Two (2) acres of playfields; and
   (3)   Two (2) acres of community park lands;
   (b)   That one-half (1/2) of such requirements will be satisfied in part by
the City, the Conejo Recreation and Park District, and local school districts;
and
   (c)   That the remaining one-half (1/2) of such requirements amounting to
two and one-half (2-1/2) acres of neighborhood park lands, one acre of
playfields, and one acre of community park lands shall be supplied by
subdividers under the requirements of this article.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1606. Determination of population density.
   Population density, for the purposes of this article, shall be determined in
accordance with the following standards, to wit:
   (a)   Single-family detached dwellings = 3.8 persons per dwelling unit;
   (b)   Single-family attached dwellings less than, or equal to, seven (7)
units per net acre density = 2.8 persons per dwelling unit;
   (c)   Condominiums and other attached dwellings, other than apartments, over
seven (7) units per net acre = 2.4 persons per dwelling unit;
   (d)   Apartments = 2.0 persons per dwelling unit; and
   (e)   Mobile homes = 1.75 persons per dwelling unit.
   The basis for determining the total number of dwelling units shall be the
number of such units permitted by the City on the property included in the
subdivision at the time the tentative subdivision tract map or parcel map is
approved by the City.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1607. Amount of land to be dedicated.
   The amount of land to be dedicated by a subdivider pursuant to this article
shall be based on the following formula:
   (a)   A = 4.5 (D.F. ( D.U.)
   1000
   (b)   Definitions of terms:
   (1)   A shall mean the area in acres required to be dedicated as park sites
or to be approved for a fee payment in lieu of dedication.
   (2)   D.F. shall mean the density factor obtained from Section
9-3.1606 of this article as applicable to the proposed development.
   (3)   D.U. shall mean the number of dwelling units in the subdivision.
   (4)   4.5 shall mean the number of acres per one thousand (1,000) persons to
be provided by the developer.
   (5)   1,000 shall mean the number of persons.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1608. Amount of fees in lieu of land dedication.
   Where a fee is required to be paid in lieu of land dedication, the amount of
such fee shall be based upon the fair market value of the amount of land which
would otherwise be required to be dedicated pursuant to the provisions of
Section
9-3.1607 of this article. The amount of such fee shall be a sum equal to the
fair market value of the amount of land, including full street improvements,
either dedicated or to be maintained by a property owner, that would otherwise
be required to be dedicated pursuant to the provisions of Section
9-3.1607 of this article. The fee shall be calculated by multiplying “A,” as
derived from said Section
9-3.1607, by the fair market value per acre and including the actual cost for
the full street improvements; however, where a subdivision includes a Primary
or controlled access Secondary Highway as designated on the Circulation Element
of the General Plan, the land area and actual costs for street improvements in
excess of the design standards for a collector street shall not be included in
such fee calculation.
   The fair market value shall be determined prior to the approval of the final
map or parcel map in accordance with the following:
   (a)   The fair market value shall be determined by the application of
accepted assessment practices, and the initial determination may be based upon
the current assessed value, modified equal to market value, in accordance with
the standards established by the current practices of the County Assessor; or
   (b)   If either the City, the Conejo Parks and Recreation District, or the
developer objects to such evaluation, either party, at the developer’s expense,
may obtain an appraisal of the property by a neutral qualified real estate
appraiser approved by the City, which appraisal shall be considered in addition
to the provision of subsection (a) of this section by the Council in reaching
its decision as to fair market value; or
   (c)    The City, Conejo Parks and Recreational District, and the developer
may agree to the fair market value.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1609. Credit for private open space.
   Where private open space for park and recreation purposes is provided in a
proposed subdivision, and such space is to be privately owned and maintained by
the future residents of the property, such areas may be credited against the
requirement of dedication for park and recreation purposes, as set forth in
Section
9-3.1607 of this article, or the payment of fees in lieu thereof, as set forth
in Section
9-3.1608 of this article, provided the Planning Commission finds it is in the
public interests to do so and the following standards are met:
   (a)   That yards, court areas, setbacks, and other open areas required to be
maintained by the zoning and building provisions of this Code shall not be
included in the computation of such private open spaces; and
   (b)   That the private ownership and maintenance of the open space is
adequately provided for by written agreement; and
   (c)   That the use of the private open space is restricted for park and
recreational purposes by recorded covenants which run with the land in favor of
the future owners of the property within the tract and which cannot be defeated
or eliminated without the consent of the Planning Commission; and
   (d)   That the proposed private open space is reasonably adaptable for the
use for park and recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors
as size, shape, topography, geology, access, and the location of the private
open space land, and
   (e)   That the facilities proposed for the open space are in substantial
accordance with the provisions of the Recreation Element of the General Plan
and are approved by the Planning Commission.
   The Council, upon a recommendation by the Planning Commission, may adopt
more specific guidelines and standards to be utilized in determining the actual
percentage of credit that may be given for private park and recreational
facilities in any proposed subdivision. Such guidelines and standards shall be
adopted as a resolution by the Council, upon a recommendation by the Planning
Commission, only after a public hearing, noticed and conducted in the manner
required for zone changes, in accordance with the provisions of Article 29 of
Chapter 4 of this title.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1610. Choice of dedication of land or payment of fees or both.
   (a)   Procedure. The procedure for determining whether the subdivider shall
dedicate land, pay a fee, or both shall be as follows:
   (1)   Determination by the subdivider. At the time of filing a tentative
tract map for approval, the owner of the property, as a part of the filing,
shall indicate whether he desires to dedicate property for park and
recreational purposes or whether he desires to pay a fee in lieu thereof. If he
desires to dedicate land for such purposes, he shall designate the area thereof
on the tentative tract map as submitted.
   (2)   Action of the City. At the time of the tentative tract map approval,
the Planning Commission, upon the advice of the Conejo Recreation and Park
District, shall determine as a part of such approval, whether to require a
dedication of land within the subdivision, the payment of a fee in lieu
thereof, or a combination of both.
   (3)   Prerequisites for acceptance of final maps. Where dedication is
required, it shall be accomplished in accordance with the provisions of the
Subdivision Map Act and conveyed to the Conejo Recreation and Park District, or
to the City if the District does not have any jurisdiction within the
subdivision. Where fees are required, they shall be deposited with the Conejo
Recreation and Park District, or with the City if the District does not have
any jurisdiction within the subdivision, prior to the acceptance of the final
tract map. If the Conejo Recreation and Park District refuses to accept either
the park dedication or the fees, such dedication shall be conveyed to the City
or its assignees and/or the fees will be held by the city in a trust fund for
the Conejo Recreation and Park District. Open space covenants for private park
or recreational facilities shall be submitted in a form approved by the City
Attorney and Community Development Director prior to the Council accepting the
final tract map and shall be recorded contemporaneously with the final tract
map.
   (b)   Determination. Whether the Planning Commission, upon the advice of the
Conejo Recreation and Park District, accepts the land dedication or elects to
require the payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, shall
be determined by consideration of the following:
   (1)   The Recreation Element of the General Plan;
   (2)   The topography, geology, access, and location of the land in the
subdivision available for dedication;
   (3)   The size and shape of the subdivision and the land available for
dedication;
   (4)   The location of existing or proposed park sites and trailways; and
   (5)   The desirability of developing the land proposed for dedication for
park and recreational purposes as determined by a schematic site plan submitted
by the subdivider.
   The determination of the Planning Commission as to whether land shall be
dedicated, or whether a fee shall be charged, or a combination thereof shall be
final and conclusive, unless appealed to the Council. On subdivisions involving
fifty (50) lots or less, only the payment of fees shall be required.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1611. Designation of development time.
   Prior to the acceptance of the final tract map, the Council, upon the advice
of and written agreement with the Conejo Recreation and Park District, shall
develop a schedule specifying how and when it will use the land or fees, or
both, to develop park or recreational facilities. Any fees collected shall be
committed within five (5) years after the payment of such fees or the issuance
of building permits on one-half (1/2) of the lots created by the subdivision,
whichever occurs later. If such fees are not committed, they shall be
distributed and paid to the then record owners of the subdivision in the same
proportion that the size of their lot bears to the total area of all lots
within the subdivision.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1612. Limitations on the use of land and fees.
   The land and fees received pursuant to the provisions of this article shall
be used only for the purpose of providing park and recreational facilities to
serve the residences of the development for which received, and the location of
the land and the amount of the fees shall bear a reasonable relationship to the
use of the park and recreational facilities by the future inhabitants of the
property.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Article 17. Correction and Amendment of Maps
Sec. 9-3.1701. Requirements.
   After a final map or parcel map is filed in the office of the County
Recorder, it may be amended by a certificate of corrections or an amending map:
   (a)   To correct an error in any course or distance shown thereon;
   (b)   To show any course or distance that was omitted therefrom;
   (c)   To correct an error in the description of the real property shown on
the map;
   (d)   To indicate monuments set after the death, disability, or retirement
from practice of the engineer or surveyor charged with responsibilities for
setting monuments;
   (e)   To show the proper location of any monument which has been changed in
location or character, originally was shown at the location or incorrectly as
to its character; and
   (f)    To correct any other type of map error or omission as approved by the
City Engineer which does not affect any property right. Such errors and
omissions may include, but shall not be limited to, lot numbers, acreage,
street names, and the identification of adjacent record maps.
   As used in this section, “error” shall not include changes in course or
distance from which an error is not ascertainable from the data shown on the
final or parcel map.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1702. Form and contents.
   The amending map or certificate of correction shall be prepared and signed
by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. The form and contents
of the amending map shall conform to the requirements of this chapter for a
final map or parcel map. The amending map or certificate of correction shall
set forth in detail the corrections made and show the names of the present fee
owners of the property affected by the correction or omission.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1703. Submittal and approval by the City Engineer.
   The amending map or certificate of correction, complete as to final form,
shall be submitted to the City Engineer for his review and approval.
   The City Engineer shall examine the amending map or certificate of
correction and if the only changes made are those set forth in Section
9-3.1701 of this article, he shall certify to this fact on the amending map or
certificate of correction.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1704. Filing with the County Recorder.
   The amending map or certificate of correction certified by the City Engineer
shall be filed in the office of the County Recorder in which the original map
was filed. Upon such filing, the County Recorder shall index the names of the
fee owners and the appropriate tract designation shown on the amending map or
certificate of correction in the general index and map index respectively.
Thereupon, the original map shall be deemed to have been conclusively so
corrected and thereafter shall impart constructive notice of all such
corrections in the same manner as though set forth upon the original map.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1705. Fees.
   The fees for checking, processing, and recording the amended map or
certificate of correction shall be in accordance with the City’s resolution
establishing fees and charges. A deposit to be applied toward such fee may be
required by the City Engineer upon the submittal of the amended map or
certificate of correction for his review.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Article 18. Enforcement of Chapter Provisions
Sec. 9-3.1801. Prohibitions.
   (a)   No person shall offer to sell or lease, contract to sell or lease,
finance any parcel of real property, or commence the construction of any
building for sale, lease, or financing thereof, except for model homes, or
allow the occupancy thereof, for which a final map or parcel map is required by
this chapter until such map thereof in full compliance with the provisions of
this chapter, has been filed with the County Recorder and recorded.
   (b)   No person shall sell, lease, or finance any parcel of real property or
commence the construction of any building for sale, lease, or financing
thereon, except for model homes, or allow the occupancy thereof, for which a
parcel map is required by this chapter or the Subdivision Map Act, until such
map thereof, in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the
Subdivision Map Act, has been filed for record by the County Recorder.
   (c)   The conveyance of any part of a division of real property for which a
final or parcel map is required by this chapter shall not be made by parcel or
block number, initial, or other designation unless and until such map has been
filed for record by the County Recorder.
   (d)   This section shall not apply to any parcel of a subdivision offered
for sale or lease, contracted for sale or lease, or sold or leased in
compliance with or exempt from any law (including a local ordinance) regulating
the design and improvement of subdivisions in effect at the time the
subdivision was established.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1802. Remedies.
   (a)   Any deed of conveyance, sale, or contract to sell real property which
has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the
provisions of this chapter or the Subdivision Map Act shall be voidable at the
sole option of the grantee, buyer, or person contracting to purchase, or his
heirs, personal representative, or trustee in insolvency or bankruptcy, within
one year after the date of the discovery of the violation, but the deed of
conveyance, sale, or contract to sell shall be binding upon any successor in
interest of the grantee, buyer, or person contracting to purchase, other than
those above enumerated, and upon the grantor, vendor, or person contracting to
sell, or his assignee, heir, or devisee.
   (b)   Any grantee, or his successor in interest, of real property which has
been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the
provisions of this chapter or the Subdivision Map Act, within one year of the
date of the discovery of such violation, may bring an action in the Superior
Court to recover any damages he has suffered by reason of such division of
property. The action may be brought against the person who divided the property
in violation and against any successors in interest who have actual or
constructive knowledge of such division of property.
   (c)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the conveyance of
any parcel of real property identified in a certificate of compliance filed
pursuant to this Code and Section 66499.35 of the Subdivision Map Act, or
identified in a recorded final map or parcel map, from and after the date of
recording. The provisions of this section shall not limit or affect in any way
the rights of a grantee or his successor in interest under any other provision
of law.
   (d)   This section shall not bar any legal, equitable, or summary remedy to
which the City or other public agency, or any person, firm, or corporation, may
otherwise be entitled, and the City or other public agency, or such person,
firm, or corporation, may file a suit in the Superior Court to restrain or
enjoin any attempted or proposed subdivision for sale, lease, or financing in
violation of this chapter.
   (e)   The City shall not issue a permit or any approval necessary to develop
any real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a
division, in violation of the provisions of this chapter or the Subdivision Map
Act if the City finds that the development of such real property is contrary to
the public health or the public safety. The authority to deny such a permit or
such approval shall apply whether the applicant therefor was the owner of
record at the time of such violation or whether the applicant therefor is
either the current owner of record or a vendee of the current owner of record
pursuant to a contract of sale of the real property, with or without actual or
constructive knowledge of the violation at the time of the acquisition of his
interest in such real property.
   The City, in issuing a permit or granting approval for the development of
any such real property, may impose such additional conditions as would have
been applicable to the division of the property at the time the applicant
acquired his interest in the property.
   (f)   Whenever any construction activity, including grading or earth moving,
is being done on any property for which an approved final map exists contrary
to the provisions of this chapter or any approval of the map, the Community
Development Director may order the activity stopped by notice in writing served
on any person engaged in doing or causing such activity to be carried out, and
any such person shall forthwith stop the activity until authorized by the
Community Development Director to proceed.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1803. Certificates of compliance.
   (a)   Any person owning real property within the City, or a purchaser under
a contract of sale of such property, may request the Community Development
Director to determine whether such real property complies with the provisions
of this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act.
   (b)   Upon making such determination, the Community Development Director
shall cause a certificate of compliance to be filed for record with the County
Recorder. The certificate of compliance shall identify the real property and
shall state that the division of land complies with the applicable provisions
of this Code and the Subdivision Map Act.
   (c)   If the Community Development Director determines that such real
property does not comply with the provisions of this Code or the Subdivision
Map Act, he may, as a condition to granting a certificate of compliance, impose
any of the conditions permitted by this Code or the Subdivision Map Act. The
condition shall be set out in and recorded with the certificate. Such
conditions may be fulfilled and implemented by the property owner who has
applied for a certificate of compliance pursuant to this section or by a
purchaser of such property owner. If such conditions are not fulfilled or
implemented by the applicant property owner or the purchaser, the certificate
of compliance shall have no force or effect upon any subsequent transfer of the
property, and any subsequent transferee or assignee shall make a new
application for a certificate of compliance pursuant to this section, and the
City may impose such conditions as would have been applicable at the time such
assignee or transferee acquired the property.
   (d)   A validly recorded final map or parcel map shall constitute a
certificate of compliance with respect to the parcels of real property
described therein. It shall be at the discretion of the Community Development
Director as to whether a conditional certificate of compliance or subdivision
map is appropriate.
   (e)   A fee in the amount of the actual cost to the City shall be charged to
the applicant for making the determination and processing the certificate of
compliance. A deposit may be required by the Community Development Director to
be applied toward such fee.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1804. Certificates of noncompliance.
   (a)   Whenever the Community Development Director or City Engineer has
knowledge that real property has been divided in violation of the provisions of
this chapter or the Subdivision Map Act, he shall cause to be filed for record
with the County Recorder a notice of intention to record a notice of violation
(certificate of noncompliance), describing the real property in detail, naming
the owners thereof, describing, the violation, and stating that an opportunity
will be given to the owner to present evidence.
   (b)   The notice, specifying a time, date, and place at which the owner may
present evidence to the Community Development Director and why the notice of
violation should not be recorded, shall be mailed to the owner.
   (c)   If, after the owner has presented evidence, the Community Development
Director determines there has been no violation, a release of the notice of
intention to record a notice of violation shall be recorded with the County
Recorder. If, however, the Community Development Director determines that there
has been a violation, or if, within sixty (60) days after the receipt of such
copy, the owner of real property fails to inform the Community Development
Director of his objection to recording the notice of violation, the notice of
violation shall be recorded with the County Recorder.
   (d)   The notice described in this section shall be deemed to be
constructive notice, when recorded, of the violation to all successors in
interest of the property.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
Sec. 9-3.1805. Certificates of compliance and noncompliance: Appeals of
determinations of the Community Development Director.
   In accordance with the provisions and time limitations set forth in
subsection (b) of Section
9-3.702 of Article 7 of this chapter, any interested person may appeal any
decision of the Community Development Director to the Planning Commission and
may appeal any decision of the Planning Commission to the Council.
(Ord. 744-NS, eff. April 17, 1980)
CHAPTER 4. ZONING
Article 1. Title, Purpose, and Interpretation
Sec. 9-4.101. Title.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Zoning Regulations” of the City.
(§ 8110, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 9-4.102. Purpose.
   The text and zoning maps of this chapter constitute the comprehensive zoning
plan and regulations for the City and are adopted to protect and promote the
public health, safety, morals, and welfare and to provide the economic and
social advantages which result from an orderly, planned use of land resources.
Such regulations are designed and intended to lessen congestion in the streets;
to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to promote the health and
general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding
of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate
provision for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, roads, and other
public facilities and improvements, and to establish the most beneficial and
convenient relationships among the residential, commercial, industrial,
agricultural, recreational, and undeveloped areas, having regard to their
suitability for the various uses appropriate to each of them and their
potentiality for such uses, as indicated by existing conditions and trends in
population, in the direction and manner of the uses of land, in building
development, and in economic activity.
(§ 8111, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 9-4.103. Interpretation.
   (a)   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare.
   (b)   It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or
annul any easement, covenant, or other agreement between parties.
   (c)   When the provisions of this chapter impose a greater restriction upon
the use of buildings or land or upon the height of buildings, or require larger
open spaces than are imposed or required by other laws, rules, and regulations,
or by easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall
govern.
(§ 8166.3, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 9-4.104. Pending actions and proceedings.
   No action or proceeding commenced before the Commission or Council before
this chapter takes effect shall be terminated by the enactment of this chapter,
but such action or proceeding shall thereafter conform to the provisions of
this chapter so far as possible.
   No prosecution or action resulting from a violation of zoning regulations
heretofore in effect shall be abated or abandoned by reason of the enactment of
this chapter, but such prosecution or action shall be prosecuted to its
finality under the former law the same as if this chapter had not been adopted,
and, to this end, the former law shall remain in effect and be applicable until
such prosecution or action has been terminated. Any violation of the provisions
of the former law for which prosecution or legal action has not been instituted
prior to January 14, 1965, may be hereafter subject to prosecution or action as
if this chapter had not been adopted, and, to this end, the former law shall
remain in effect and be applicable until such prosecution or action has been
terminated.
(§ 8166.2, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 9-4.105. Continuation of existing laws.
   The provisions of this chapter, insofar as they are substantially the same
as provisions existing on December 7, 1961, relating to the same subject
matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as
new enactments.
(§ 8166.1, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 9-4.106. Public utilities.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply as specified within the various
articles of this chapter to communication lines, electric transmission and
distribution lines, and gas pipelines, regulators, and meters used directly or
indirectly for service to the public, or any portion thereof, except as
preempted by the authority and regulations of the Public Utilities Commission
of the State.
(§ 8166.8, T.O.O.C., as amended by § IV, Ord. 506-NS, eff. December 12, 1974)
Sec. 9-4.107. City project review.
   The City Council finds that the use, size, design, budget, site and
construction plans for public buildings, real property, or facilities to be
built or owned by the City of Thousand Oaks should have a formal City permit
issued for such and have received a Planning Commission decision approving or
denying such permit and project. No review by the Planning Commission,
administrative officer or other board or commission shall be required by this
title for other City facilities or projects such as, but not limited to,
structures not open to the general public, water and wastewater lines, water
facilities, wastewater treatment plan additions or modifications, installation
of signs, street work, or minor public works projects.
(§ 1, Ord. 1219-NS, eff. October 11, 1994, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1243-NS,
eff. October 3, 1995, and § 1, Ord. 1419-NS, eff. December 17, 2003)
Article 2. Definitions*
*   Sections 9-4.202 through 9-4.294, codified by various ordinances, were
renumbered as Section
9-4.202 by Ordinance No. 1547-NS, effective January 12, 2011.
Sec. 9-4.201. Scope.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined in this
article.
Sec. 9-4.202. Definitions.
   “Access” shall mean the place or way by which pedestrians and vehicles shall
have safe, adequate, and usable ingress and egress to a property or use
required by the provisions of this chapter. (§ 8170.1, T.O.O.C.)
   “Accessory” shall mean a use customarily incidental to a building or part of
a building or structure, which use is subordinate to, and the use of which is
incidental to and detached from, the main building, structure, or use on the
same lot. If an accessory building is attached to the main building by a common
wall, or if the roof of the accessory building is a continuation of the roof of
the main building, such accessory building shall be considered a part of the
main building. (§ 8170.2, T.O.O.C.)
   “Accessory dwelling unit” shall mean an attached or a detached residential
dwelling unit that provides complete independent living facilities for one or
more persons and is located on a lot with a proposed or existing primary
dwelling. It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating,
cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family or multifamily
dwelling is or will be situated. An accessory dwelling unit may be an
efficiency unit or a manufactured home as defined in Section 18007 of the
Health and Safety Code. (§ 3, Ord. 1631-NS, eff. July 14, 2017)
   “Adult” shall mean any person of eighteen (18) years of age or older, or any
emancipated minor. (§1, Ord. 1139-NS, eff. March 17, 1992)
   "Adult-use cannabis" or "adult-use product" means cannabis or a cannabis
product, respectively, intended to be sold for use by adults 21 years of age
and over and who do not possess a physician's recommendation.
(§ 16, Ord. 1703-NS, eff. August 5, 2022)
   “Aggrieved person” shall mean any person, who, in person or through a
representative, appeared at a public hearing of the City decision-making
officer or Commission in connection with the decision or action appealed, or
who, by other appropriate means, informed the City decision-making official or
Commission prior to the public hearing of the nature of his or her concerns, or
who, for good cause, was unable to do either. (Part 5, Ord. 1446-NS, eff.
October 25, 2005)
   “Agriculture” shall mean the science and art of farming, producing crops,
floriculture, horticulture, and the work of cultivating the soil. (§ 8170.3,
T.O.O.C.)
   “Alley” shall mean a public or private way, other than a street or highway,
permanently reserved as a secondary means of vehicular access to adjoining
property. (§ 8170.4, T.O.O.C.)
   “Apartment” shall mean a dwelling unit located within an apartment house. (§
8170.5, T.O.O.C.)
   “Apartment house” shall mean a building under one ownership, containing
three (3) or more dwelling units that are rented by the residents of each unit.
Apartment house does not include buildings configured for individual unit
ownership. (§ 8170.6, T.O.O.C.)
   “Appeal, scope of.” The scope of matters to be heard on appeals of permits
filed pursuant to this chapter shall be confined to the project as proposed to
the original or first decision maker, without change. However, nothing herein
shall be construed to prevent the applicant or a person appearing on appeal
from submitting information concerning the unchanged proposal which had not
theretofore been submitted to a decision maker. (§ I, Ord. 739-NS, eff. March
13, 1980)
   “Arcade” shall mean an establishment with five (5) or more amusement devices
which are coin-operated or slug-operated, or which are available for rent or
hire for stated periods of time, and which are maintained for use by the
public, including video games, pinball games, and shooting games.
For the purposes of this section, “amusement devices” shall not include motion
picture projectors, slide projectors, video tape machines, or similar machines,
each for the purpose of showing films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
slides, or other photographic reproductions. (§ I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5,
1981)
   “Assisted living facility” shall mean a facility which is licensed by the
State of California to provide 24-hour, non-medical care for more than six (6)
persons 60 years of age or over in need of personal services, supervision or
assistance essential for the activities daily living.
   “Attached ADU” shall mean an ADU that shares at least one common wall with
the primary dwelling unit at least ten feet in length; and is not fully
contained within the existing space of the primary dwelling unit. (§ 9, Ord.
1732-NS, eff. November 22, 2024)
   “Auto body repair” shall mean any use or activity involving body, frame,
fender straightening or repair, or the overall painting and undercoating of
motor vehicles. Auto body repair shall not include the rebuilding of vehicles
beyond repair as determined by an insurance company or the dismantling or
storage of wrecked or junked vehicles. (§ 4, Ord. 1168-NS, eff. January 5,
1993)
   “Auto painting” shall mean any use or activity involving the overall
painting and undercoating of motor vehicles, including minor dent removal and
surface refinishing. Auto painting does not include auto bodywork such as body,
frame, fender straightening or repair. (§ 2, Ord. 1561-NS, eff. October 14,
2011)
   “Auto repair” shall mean any motor vehicle repair such as tire, brake,
engine, radiator, transmission, tune-up, electrical, battery, exhaust system,
suspension, air conditioning, smog, auto detailing, glasswork, window tinting,
upholstery, and shall include car stereo, car alarm, and cellular phone
maintenance, repair or installation, and not including the work of auto body
repair. (§ 4, Ord. 1168-NS, eff. January 5, 1993)
   “Basement” shall mean the portion of a building between the floor and
ceiling, which portion is partly below and partly above grade, but so located
that the vertical distance from the grade to the floor below is less than the
vertical distance from the grade to the ceiling. (§ 8170.7, T.O.O.C., as
renumbered by § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Boarding school” shall mean a school providing lodging and meals for
pupils. (§ 8170.9, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5,
1981)
   “Boatel” shall mean one or more buildings containing guest rooms or dwelling
units which are designed, used, or intended to be used, wholly or in part, for
the accommodation of boat transients or tourists and which are located near or
abutting a river, lake, or ocean. (§ 8170.10, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § I,
Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Bona fide single housekeeping unit” shall mean one or more persons living
together in and sharing a dwelling unit in a relatively permanent single
housekeeping relationship based upon a bond of social, economic and
psychological commitments to each other, as distinguished from a group living
together in a boardinghouse, lodging house, multiple-occupancy apartment
relationship, fraternity, sorority, club, motel, hotel, short-term tenancy of
less than thirty (30) days, rehabilitation center, or rest home. (§ 1, Ord.
1139-NS, eff. March 17, 1992)
   “Building” shall mean any structure having a roof supported by columns or by
walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals,
chattel, or property of any kind. (§ 8170.11, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § I,
Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Building height” is limited to a vertical dimension measured from existing
grade or the finished grade, whichever is less, up to a warped plane equal to
the height limit of the underlying zone.
All portions of the building must be located at or below the building height
limit, unless otherwise specified within the code as a building height
exception. The “warped plane” is an imaginary plane projected parallel to the
topography of the site at the height limit of the applicable zoning district.
(§ 8170.12, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981, as
amended by § 1, Ord. 1698-NS, eff. April 29, 2022)
   “Building materials” shall mean materials used for building construction,
fencing and paving, such as stone, brick, block, sand, gravel, cement, steel,
lumber, pipe, drywall, insulation and roofing.
   “Building materials storage and sales yard” shall mean a store in which
building materials take up fifty (50%) percent or more of the merchandise
display and storage area, including all indoor and outdoor areas.
   “Business” shall mean a use or activity involving the sale or rental of
goods or the sale or furnishing of services of any kind. (§ 8170.13, T.O.O.C.,
as renumbered by § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Cannabis” or “marijuana” shall mean all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa
L., whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any
part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture,
or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. It does not include: (a)
Industrial hemp as defined in Health and Code Section 11018.5; or (b) the
weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or
oral administrations. (§ 2, Ord. 1612-NS, eff. February 26, 2016; § 2, Ord.
1627-NS, eff. December 6, 2016; § 2, Ord. 1629-NS, eff. April 14, 2017)
   "Cannabis Retailer" means a commercial cannabis business facility where
medicinal or adult-use cannabis, cannabis products, or devices for the use of
cannabis or cannabis products are offered, either individually or in any
combination, for retail sale, including an establishment (whether fixed or
mobile) that delivers, pursuant to express authorization, cannabis and cannabis
products as part of a retail sale, and where the operator holds a valid
commercial cannabis business permit from the City of Thousand Oaks authorizing
the operation of a retailer, and a valid state license as required by state law
to operate a retailer. (§ 16, Ord. 1703-NS, eff. August 5, 2022)
   “Cannabis testing laboratory” shall mean a laboratory, facility, or entity
in the state that offers or performs tests of cannabis or cannabis products and
that is both of the following:
      (1)   Accredited by an accrediting body that is independent from all
other persons involved in commercial cannabis activity in the state.
      (2)   Licensed by the State of California. (§ 3, Ord. 1636-NS, eff.
December 29, 2017)
   “Car share vehicle station” means as a site or a portion of a site used for
the purpose of storing motor vehicles, where the vehicle is operated as part of
a regional fleet by a public or private car-sharing company or organization and
provides hourly or daily service rental service to the general public. A car
share vehicle does not include vehicles used as part of ride-hailing companies
or taxicabs. (§ 3, Ord. 1704-NS, eff. November 25, 2022)
   “Caregiver” or “primary caregiver” shall have the same meaning as set forth
in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7 and as amended from time to time. (§
2, Ord. 1612-NS, eff. February 26, 2016)
   “Caretaker Unit” shall mean a dwelling unit provided as an accessory use for
a person employed to take care of the building and property on which the
caretaker unit is located. (§ 2, Ord. 1706-NS, eff. December 2, 2022)
   “Cellar” shall mean that portion of a building between the floor and
ceiling, which portion is wholly or partly below grade and so located that the
vertical distance from the grade to the floor below is equal to or greater than
the vertical distance from the grade to the ceiling. (§ 8170.14, T.O.O.C., as
renumbered by § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Club” shall mean any building or premises used by an association of
persons, whether incorporated or unincorporated, organized for somecommon
purpose, but not including a group organized solely or primarily to render a
service customarily carried on as a commercial enterprise. (§ 8170.15,
T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Columbarium” shall mean a structure in the form of a small building or wall
containing niches, or single compartments, designed to store the cremated
remains of a deceased person within an urn, or enclosed vase. (part 1, Ord.
1710-NS, eff. March 17, 2023)
   “Commercial cannabis activity” or “commercial marijuana activity” shall mean
any and all activities requiring licensing through the State of California
including but not limited to the cultivation, manufacturing, testing, retail
dispensing from a fixed location or other mobile dispensary, and any other type
of distribution, for both medical marijuana and marijuana meant for personal
use. (§ 2, Ord. 1612- NS, eff. February 26, 2016; § 2, Ord. 1627-NS, eff.
December 6, 2016; § 2, Ord. 1629-NS, eff. April 14, 2017)
   “Commercial residential use” shall mean the residential use of real property
where the lessor or owner receives compensation, in any form of consideration,
from any person for that person’s residential use of any dwelling. (§ 4, Ord.
1139-NS, eff. March 17, 1992)
   “Commission” shall mean the Planning Commission of the City. (§ 8170.16,
T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Community center” shall mean a meeting place where people living in the
same community may carryon cultural, recreational, or social activities and
possessing outdoor recreational facilities, such as golf courses, tennis
courts, or polo grounds. (§ 8170.17, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § I, Ord. 772-
NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Condominium” shall mean a unit (a dwelling unit in a residential building
or a space in a non-residential building) within a condominium project, as
defined in Section 1351(f) of the California Civil Code. A unit includes air
space in the building and may include other incidental parts of the real
property. A condominium involves a form of ownership consisting of a separate
interest in the individual unit and an undivided interest in the balance of the
development which is owned in common by the owners of the individual units. A
dwelling unit in a subdivision consisting of one-family dwellings on separate
lots and one or more lots owned in common by the owners of the separate lots
shall not be construed to be a condominium.
   “Convalescent hospital” shall mean any place or institution which makes
provisions for bed care or for chronic convalescent care for one or more
persons, exclusive of relatives, who, by reason of illness or physical
infirmity, are unable to care for themselves. Alcoholics, drug addicts, persons
with mental diseases, and persons with communicable diseases, including
contagious tuberculosis, shall not be admitted or cared for in convalescent
hospitals. For the purposes of this chapter, convalescent hospitals shall be
considered the same as hospitals in the permitted use and special use permit
categories. (§ IV, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, as renumbered by § I, Ord,
772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Conversion ADU” shall mean an ADU that is created within existing space,
including a portion of a primary dwelling unit or existing non habitable space
in an existing primary or accessory structure. (§ 9, Ord. 1732-NS, eff.
November 22, 2024)
   “Country club” shall mean a chartered, nonprofit membership club, with or
without dining facilities and a cocktail lounge, catering primarily to its
membership and providing one or more of the following recreational and social
amenities: golf, riding, outdoor recreation, club house, locker room, and pro
shop. (§ V, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, as renumbered by § I, Ord, 772-NS,
eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Cultivation” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Business and
Professions Code Section 19300.5(k) and as amended from time to time. (§ 2,
Ord. 1612-NS, eff. February 26, 2016; § 2, Ord. 1627-NS, eff. December 6, 2016;
§ 2, Ord. 1629-NS, eff. April 14, 2017)
   “Dancing establishments” shall mean any restaurant, bar, hotel or motel,
club or lodge, nightclub, or other gathering place open to the public, whether
or not admission is charged, wherein dancing is allowed and participated in on
a recurring basis by one or more persons, whether or not they are compensated
for their dancing. This shall not include dance academies, schools, or studios
where dancing is permitted only by students and instructors engaged in dancing
instruction, nor shall this include public or private schools, which host
dances solely for students, or adult-supervised youth organizations, City, park
district or other governmental facilities which host dances, nor shall this
include motels, hotels or restaurants or businesses which only rent enclosed
banquet rooms or space for private parties. (§ 3, Ord. 1187-NS, eff. October 5,
1993)
   “Dance studio” shall mean any public or private dance academy, school, or
studio where dancing is permitted only by students and instructors engaged in
dance instruction. (§ 1, Ord. 1380-NS, eff. August 23, 2001)    
   “Day nursery” shall mean any type of group child day care program, including
nurseries for children of working parents, nursery schools for children under
the minimum age for education in public schools, parent cooperative nursery
schools, educational schools, play groups for preschool children, and programs
covering after-school care for school children, provided such establishment is
institutional in character and is licensed by the State or County and conducted
in accordance with State requirements. Day nursery shall not include small and
large family day care homes. (§ 8170.24, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § III, Ord.
149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981, and § 1, Ord.
1189-NS, eff. November 2, 1993)
   “Delivery” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Business and
Professions Code Section 19300.5(m) and as amended from time to time. (§ 2,
Ord. 1612-NS, eff. February 26, 2016)
   “Detached ADU” shall mean an ADU that does not share a common wall with the
primary dwelling unit and is not an internal ADU. (§ 9, Ord. 1732-NS, eff.
November 22, 2024)
   “Director” shall mean the Community Development Director of the City. (§
8170.18, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § III, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, and §
I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Dish antenna” shall mean an apparatus capable of receiving or transmitting
communications from a transmitter or a transmitter relay located in planetary
orbit. This definition does not include eighteen (18") inches of smaller
diameter dish antennas which are not visible from the public right-of-way and
in residential zones are not roof-mounted or do not exceed six (6’) feet in
height when measured from ground level to the top of the antenna, including all
other components thereof. (§ 1, Ord. 1227-NS, eff. January 17, 1995)
   “Dispensary” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Business and
Professions Code Section 19300.5(n) and as amended from time to time.
Dispensary shall not mean any of the following:
      (1)   A clinic licensed pursuant to Chapter 1 of Division 2 of the
California Health and Safety Code.
      (2)   A health care facility licensed pursuant to Chapter 2 of Division 2
of the California Health and Safety Code.
      (3)   A residential care facility for persons with chronic life
threatening illnesses licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.01 of Division 2 of the
California Health and Safety Code.
      (4)   A residential care facility for the elderly licensed pursuant to
Chapter 3.2 of Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code.
      (5)   A residential hospice or home health agency licensed pursuant to
Chapter 8 of Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code. (Part 2, Ord.
1612-NS, eff. February 26, 2016)
   “Dispensing” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Business and
Professions Code Section 19300.5(o) and as amended from time to time. (Part 2,
Ord. 1612-NS, eff. February 26, 2016)
   “Distribution” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Business and
Professions Code 19300.5(p) and as amended from time to time. (Part 2, Ord.
1612-NS, eff. February 26, 2016)
   “Drive-through restaurant” shall mean an eating establishment designed and
operated to serve foodand drinks to customers who drive their vehicles up to a
service window to receive the food and drinks that they ordered, regardless of
whether service is also provided to customers inside the restaurant or at a
walk up window. (§ VII, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, as renumbered by § I,
Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981, § III, Ord. 1477-NS, eff. June 14, 2007)
   “Driveway” shall mean an improved (by means of application of concrete,
asphalt or other material approved by the Public Works Director) surface area
leading to City approved and required enclosed parking space for any
residential use, structure or building subject to this chapter. (§1, Ord. 1220-
NS, eff. October 11, 1994)
   “Dwelling” shall mean a building, or portion thereof, designed for or
occupied exclusively for residential purposes. (§ 8170.19, T.O.O.C., as
renumbered by § VIII, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, and § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff.
March 5, 1981)
   “Dwelling, multiple-family” “multiple-family dwelling” also known as
"multifamily dwelling," shall mean a dwelling in an apartment house,
condominium project, community apartment project or stock cooperative that
contains three (3) or more dwelling units. (§ 8170.23, T.O.O.C., as renumbered
by § VIII, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, and § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5,
1981)
    “Dwelling, one-family” “one-family dwelling” also known as "single-family
dwelling," shall mean a dwelling unit on a lot that is not part of a
condominium project, which is detached from any other dwelling unit on the lot
except an accessory dwelling unit which is fixed on a permanent foundation
including a manufactured home, as defined in section 18007 of the Health and
Safety Code. (§ 8170.21, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § VIII, Ord. 149-NS, eff.
May 7, 1970, and § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981; as amended by § 3, Ord.
1631-NS, eff. July 14, 2017; § 1, Ord. 1733- NS, eff. January 3, 2025)
   “Dwelling, two-family” “two-family dwelling” shall mean a building
containing two (2), and only two (2), dwelling units on a single lot. (§
8170.22, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § VIII, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, and
§ I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Dwelling unit, zero lot line” shall mean a one family dwelling, which is
located so that the structure abuts one or more of the side lot lines of the
lot on which the dwelling unit is located. (§ 2, Ord. 1414-NS, eff. October 2,
2003)
   “Dwelling unit” shall mean a building or rooms inside a building that are
used as a domicile by one family, and contain common interior access and
permanent living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation facilities which is
fixed on a permanent foundation including a manufactured home, as defined in
section 18007 of the Health and Safety Code. (§ 8170.20, T.O.O.C., as
renumbered by § VIII, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff.
March 5, 1981, and § 2, Ord. 1704-NS, eff. November 25, 2022; § 1, Ord. 1733-
NS, eff. January 3, 2025)
   “Efficiency kitchen” shall mean a kitchen that contains a cooking facility
with appliances, a food preparation counter, and storage cabinets that are of
reasonable size in relation to the size of the dwelling unit. An efficiency
kitchen may or may not contain a sink. (§ 3, Ord. 1631-NS, eff. July 14, 2017)
   “Efficiency unit” shall mean a dwelling unit with a separate bedroom,
closet, and kitchen, per California Building Code Section 1208.4. (§ 3, Ord.
1631-NS, eff. July 14, 2017)
   “Eligible facilities request” shall mean the same as defined by Section 6409
(a) of the Middle-Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012 and the Federal
Communications Commission in 47 C.F.R. § 1.6100(b)(3), as may be amended or
superseded. (§ 4, Ord. 1661-NS, eff. March 5, 2019)
   “Emergency shelter” shall mean housing with minimal supportive services for
homeless persons that is limited to occupancy for six (6) months or less by a
homeless person, excluding low-barrier navigation centers. (§ 2, Ord. 1730,
eff. May 24, 2024)
   “Family” shall mean one or more persons living together as a single
housekeeping unit. (§ 8170.25, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § VIII, Ord. 149-NS,
eff. May 7, 1970, and § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Family day care home” shall mean a facility that regularly provides care,
protection, and supervision for fourteen (14) or fewer children, in the
provider's own home, for periods of less than twenty- four (24) hours per day,
while the parents or guardians are away, and is either a large family day care
home or a small family day care home, as defined in Health and Safety Code
Section 1596.78 (a). (§ 1, Ord. 1729-NS, eff. May 24, 2024)
   “Farmworker Dwelling Unit” shall mean a dwelling unit occupied by one or
more farmworkers, employed full-time and working on-site where the dwelling
unit is located, or employed on other land that is under the same ownership or
lease as the subject lot pursuant to Section 17021.5 of the Health and Safety
Code. Farmworkers who are principally employed offsite in activities associated
with agricultural packing and storage facilities, and transportation of
agricultural products to the market may not occupy a farmworker dwelling unit.
Members of the farmworker’s household may also occupy said dwelling unit. (§ 1,
Ord. 1733-NS, eff. January 3, 2025)
   “Farmworker Housing Complex” shall mean a residential development distinct
from a farmworker dwelling unit where the units are rented to persons who are
principally employed within the City of Thousand Oaks for activities associated
with agriculture. Farmworker housing complexes may include studios, one-, two-,
or three-bedroom units within the complex. Members of the farmworker’s
household may also occupy said unit within the complex. Objective development
standards must be met as detailed in section 17021.8 of the Health and Safety
Code. (§ 1, Ord. 1733-NS, eff. January 3, 2025)
   “Flagpole” shall mean a freestanding structure or a structure attached to a
building or to the roof of a building on a parcel of record and used for the
sole purpose of displaying flags of political entities. (§ III, Ord. 166-NS,
eff. September 24, 1970, as renumbered by § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Food cooperative” shall mean a nonprofit enterprise that is collectively
owned and operated and is engaged in the purchase and distribution of food and
produce among its members with no profit motive. The purchase of the food shall
be by prior order and distribution shall occur within the same day of the
arrival of the food at the residential property. The food cooperative shall be
conducted solely within properties developed with single-family detached
residences and shall be incidental to the primary use as a residence.
Commercial vehicles are permitted for deliveries, however this activity shall
not be so intense as to destroy the character and integrity of the residential
neighborhood. (§ I, Ord. 834-NS, eff. June 21, 1983)
   “Garage, private” shall mean an accessory building, or an accessory portion
of the main building, designed and used primarily for the shelter or storage of
operable vehicles owned or operated by the occupants of the main building. (§
8170.27, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § VIII, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, §
II, Ord. 166-NS, eff. September 24, 1970, and § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5,
1981)
   “Garage, public” shall mean a building, other than a private garage, used
for the storage, care, repair, or servicing of automobiles. (§ 8170.27,
T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § VIII, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § I, Ord.
166-NS, eff. September 24, 1970, and § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Garbage” shall mean all waste food or discarded food of all kinds,
including, but not restricted to, meat, fish, fruit, bakery goods, and
vegetable refuse, or any putrid or offensive organic matter, except manure or
fertilizer used for agricultural purposes. (§ 8170.28, T.O.O.C., as renumbered
by § VIII, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § II, Ord. 166-NS, eff. September 24,
1970, and § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Garden Center” shall mean a commercial establishment in which the primary
use is the sale of plants, trees and shrubs, which are grown under cover or
outdoors. The sale of gardening items including, but not limited to packaged
fertilizers, lawn and landscape supplies, nursery products and stock, potting
soil, chemicals, hardware, hoes, rakes, shovels and other garden tools are
considered incidental to the primary use. (§ 1, Ord. 1485-NS, eff. October 11,
2007)
   “Gazebo and/or pool house cabana” shall mean a freestanding structure
(similar to a detached open patio cover), with a pitched roof design, having a
maximum height of fifteen (15’) feet, and a maximum area of six hundred (600)
square feet, and shall be designed for recreational use only and not for
habitation. (§ 2, Ord. 1177-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, as amended by § 1, Ord.
1210-NS, eff. May 24, 1994)
   “Golf course” shall mean a lot or portion of a lot used for the playing of
golf and shall include pitch and putt courses but shall not include driving
ranges, miniature golf courses, or other similar commercial enterprises. (§ IX,
Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, as renumbered by § II, Ord. 166-NS, eff.
September 24, 1970, and § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Grade” shall mean the average of the finished ground level at the center of
all walls of a building. In the event walls are parallel to, and within five
(5’) feet of, a sidewalk, the above-ground level shall be measured at the
sidewalk. (§ 8170.29, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § X, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7,
1970, § II, Ord. 166-NS, eff. September 24, 1970, and § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff.
March 5, 1981)
   “Grade, existing” means the ground elevation and topography before grading
or site preparation for development or redevelopment. (§ 1, Ord. 1698-NS, eff.
April 29, 2022)
   “Grade, finished” means the final ground elevation after the completion of
grading or site preparation for development. (§ 1, Ord. 1698-NS, eff. April 29,
2022)
   “Gross floor area” shall mean the total dimensions on each floor as measured
from the outside wall. (§ XI, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, as renumbered by §
II, Ord. 166-NS, eff. September 24, 1970, and §I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5,
1981)
   “Gross lot area” shall mean the total dimensions on the lot measured along
property lines. (§ XII, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, as renumbered by § II,
Ord. 166-NS, eff. September 24, 1970, and § I, Ord. 772, NS, eff. March 5,
1981)
   “Group houses” shall mean two (2) or more separate buildings, each
containing one or more dwelling units. (§ 8170.30, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by §
XIII, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § II, Ord. 166-NS, eff. September 24,
1970, and § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Guest house” shall mean living quarters, having no kitchen facilities,
located within an accessory building located on the same premises with a main
building and occupied for the sole use of members of the family, temporary
guests, or persons permanently employed on the premises. (§ 8170.31, T.O.O.C.,
as renumbered by § XIII, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § II, Ord. 166-NS, eff.
September 24, 1970, and § I Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Hardware store” shall mean a store involving less than sixty thousand
(60,000) square feet of total building and outdoor display and sales area, that
sells a wide variety of home improvement merchandise (e.g. tools, fasteners,
electrical and plumbing fixtures, paint, flooring, garden supplies and building
materials), in which no single product type (e.g. paint, flooring, garden
supplies or building materials) takes up fifty (50%) percent or more of the
merchandise display and storage area, including all indoor and outdoor areas.
   “Health club and health studio” means public and private clubs (athletic,
health, or recreational), reducing salons, weight control establishments, and
aerobics. (Ord. 1082-NS, eff. July 31, 1990)
   “Hedge” shall mean a continuous visual barrier formed by a dense row of
trees, bushes, shrubs or other vegetation. The term hedge shall not mean:
      (1)   A visual barrier created solely by a tree canopy when the canopy
commences no less than seven feet above the highest point of the grade level
inside the dripline; or,
      (2)   A visual barrier created by oak trees, historic trees, or landmark
trees as they are defined by their respective preservation and protection
ordinances. (Ord. 1423-NS, eff. 1-13- 2004)
   “Highway” shall mean a highway as shown on the General Plan of the City, as
adopted by Chapter 2 of this title. (§ 8170.32, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by §
XIII, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § II, Ord. 166-NS, eff. September 24,
1970, and § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Home improvement center” shall mean a store involving sixty thousand
(60,000) or more square feet of total building and outdoor display and sales
area, that sells a wide variety of home improvement merchandise (e.g. tools,
fasteners, electrical and plumbing fixtures, paint, flooring, garden supplies
and building materials), in which no single product type (e.g. paint, flooring,
garden supplies or building materials) takes up fifty (50%) percent or more of
the merchandise display and storage area, including all indoor and outdoor
areas.
   “Home occupation” shall mean any use customarily conducted entirely within a
dwelling or building accessory thereto and carried on by the inhabitants
thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the
structure for dwelling purposes and which use does not change the character
thereof and does not adversely affect the uses permitted in the zone of which
it is a part. Home occupations shall be subject to home occupation permits as
set forth in Section 9-4.2518 of Article 25 of this chapter. (§ 8170.33,
T.O.O.C., as amended by § I, Ord. 231, as renumbered by § XIII, Ord. 149-NS,
eff. May 7, 1970, § II, Ord. 166-NS, eff. September 24, 1970, and § I, Ord.
772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Hospital” shall mean an institution providing physical or mental health
services, in-patient or overnight accommodations, and medical or surgical care
of the sick or injured. (§ 8170.34, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIII, Ord.
149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § II, Ord. 166-NS, eff. September 24, 1970, and § I,
772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Hotel” shall mean a building containing six (6) or more rooms intended or
designed to be used, or which are used, rented, or hired out to be occupied, or
which are occupied, for sleeping purposes by guests. (§ 8170.35, T.O.O.C., as
renumbered by § XIII, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § II, Ord. 166-NS, eff.
September 24, 1970, and § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Household pet” shall mean domesticated dog, cat, bird, tropical fish,
rabbit, small rodents or small reptiles traditionally raised as household pets.
(§ 4, Ord. 1041-NS, eff. September 12, 1989)
   “Indoor customer dining area” shall be defined as a dining area with seats
and/or tables located entirely inside the building walls of a restaurant,
coffee shop and other food service establishment, or enclosed on three (3)
sides by the walls of the building with a solid roof cover. (§ 1, Ord. 1248-NS,
eff. January 9, 1996)
   “Internal ADU” shall mean an ADU that is fully contained within the existing
space of the primary dwelling unit or an accessory structure. (§ 9, Ord. 1732-
NS, eff. November 22, 2024)
   “Junior accessory dwelling unit” shall mean a unit that is no more than 500
square feet in size and contained entirely within a single-family residence. A
junior accessory dwelling unit may include separate sanitation facilities, or
may share sanitation facilities with the existing structure. (§ 3, Ord. 1631-
NS, eff. July 14, 2017; § 9, Ord. 1732-NS, eff. November 22, 2024)
   “Junior department store” shall mean a retail store intermediate in size
between typical specialty retail stores and a full-line department store and
carrying lines of merchandise mainly oriented to “soft” goods, such as apparel,
with lesser merchandising of “hard” goods, such as appliances and furniture. (§
IV, Ord. 563-NS, eff. March 18, 1976, as renumbered by § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff.
March 5, 1981)
   “Junk yard” shall mean an area, improved or unimproved, in excess of two
hundred (200) square feet:
      (1)   Upon or in which is stored or kept junk, salvage materials, scrap
materials, or inoperative vehicles or equipment, or any combination thereof; or
      (2)   Upon or in which vehicles or equipment or other property is
dismantled or wrecked; or
      (3)   Upon or in which salvage materials, inoperative vehicles or
equipment, or parts therefrom, or scrap metals, or any combination thereof, is
kept for resale.
   Materials or equipment kept on any premises for use in the construction of
any building on such premises, and materials or equipment customarily used on a
farm or ranch, and so situated, shall not be deemed “junk” or “salvage
material” within the meaning of this section. (§ 8170.36, T.O.O.C., as
renumbered by § XIII, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § II, Ord. 166-NS, eff.
September 24, 1970, § IV, Ord. 563-NS, eff. March 18, 1976, and § I, Ord. 772-
NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Kennel” and “dog kennel” shall mean any lot or premises on which five (5)
or more dogs and cats at least four (4) months of age are kept, boarded, or
trained, whether in special buildings or runways or not. (§ 8170.37, T.O.O.C.,
as amended by § 19, Ord. 86, as renumbered by § XIII, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7,
1970, § II, Ord. 166-NS, eff. September 24, 1970, § IV, Ord. 563-NS, eff. March
18, 1976, and § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Kitchen” shall mean any room with a sink, a cooking appliance, and
refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of not less than
thirty (30) inches in front. Light and ventilation conforming to the City
adopted Building Code shall be provided. A microwave shall not be considered a
cooking appliance for purpose of determination of a kitchen. (§ 8170.38,
T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIII, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § II, Ord.
166-NS, eff. September 24, 1970, § IV, Ord. 563-NS, eff. March 18, 1976, § I,
Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981, and § 3, Ord. 1412-NS, eff. August 14, 2003)
   “Labor supply camp” shall mean any place, area, or building where living
accommodations are maintained or intended for persons performing agricultural
or other types of labor on property other than property owned or leased by the
owner of such accommodations. (§ 8170.39, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIII,
Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § II, Ord. 166-NS, eff. September 24, 1970, §
IV, Ord. 563-NS, eff. March 18, 1976, and § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Large family day care home” shall mean a facility that provides care,
protection, and supervision of seven (7) to fourteen (14) children, inclusive,
including children under ten (10) years of age who reside at the home, as set
forth in Section 1596.78(b) of the Health and Safety Code. (§ 2, Ord. 1189-NS,
eff. November 2, 1993; § 1, Ord. 1729-NS, eff. May 24, 2024)
   “Livable space” means a space in a dwelling intended for human habitation,
including living, sleeping, eating, cooking, or sanitation. (Part 1, Ord. 1735-
NS, eff. April 25, 2025)
   “Live entertainment” shall mean any musical act (including karaoke),
theatrical act (including stand-up comedy), play, revue, scene, dance act, or
song and dance act, or any combination thereof, performed by one or more
persons, whether or not they are compensated for the performance, in a
privately owned premises which is open to the public, whether or not admission
is charged. (§ 4, Ord. 1187-NS, eff. October 5, 1993)
   “Livestock” shall mean and include horses, mules, burros, jacks, jennies,
cows, bulls, calves, heifers, sheep, lambs, llamas, alpacas, goats, swine,
hogs, pigs, and any miniature specimen of these animals, and all other domestic
or domesticated animals. Household pets as that term is defined in this chapter
shall not be considered livestock. (§ 8170.40, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by §
XIII, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § II, Ord. 166-NS, eff. September 24,
1970, § IV, Ord. 563-NS, eff. March 18, 1976, § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5,
1981 and § 3, Ord. 1041-NS, eff. September 12, 1989)
   “Livestock feeding pen” shall mean any area in which livestock are kept for
fattening or dairy purposes and are fed by any method other than grazing. (§
8170.41, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIII, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, §
II, Ord. 166-NS, eff. September 24, 1970, § IV, Ord. 563-NS, eff. March 18,
1976, and § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Living area” means the interior habitable area of a dwelling unit,
including basements and attics, but does not include a garage or any accessory
structure, except accessory dwelling units. (§ 3, Ord. 1631-NS, eff. July 14,
2017)
   “Lot” shall mean a parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet the
minimum zoning requirements for uses, coverage, and area and to provide such
yards and other open spaces as are required by the provisions of this chapter.
Such lots shall have frontage on an improved driveway, private access, public
street, or private road, and may consist of:
      (1)   A single lot of record;
      (2)   A portion of a lot of record;
      (3)   A combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of
record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record; or
      (4)   A parcel of land described by metes and bounds; provided, however,
in no case of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be
created which does not meet the requirements of this chapter.
   A lot of record shall mean any lot shown as a part of a recorded subdivision
or any parcel of land described by metes and bounds in a recorded deed, record
of survey, or other appropriate document recorded in the office of the County
Recorder; provided, however no lot or parcel of land created without compliance
with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act (former Sections 11500 et seq.
of the Business and Professions Code of the State) or this Code shall be
entitled to the waiver of this section. (§ 8170.43, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by
§ XIII, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § II, Ord. 166-NS, eff. September 24,
1970, § IV, Ord. 563-NS, eff. March 18, 1976, and § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March
5, 1981, as amended by part 26, Ord. 1437-NS, eff. July 7, 2005)
   “Lot area” shall mean the total area, measured in a horizontal plane, within
the lot lines of a lot. (§ 8170.49, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIII, Ord.
149-NS, eff. May 7,1970, § II, Ord. 166-NS, eff. September 24, 1970, § IV, Ord.
563-NS, eff. March 18, 1976, and § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “ Lot, corner” shall mean a lot of parcel of land situated at the
intersection of two (2) or more streets or highways, which streets or highways
have an angle of intersection, measured within such lot or parcel of land, of
not more than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. (§ 8170.50, T.O.O.C., as
renumbered by § XIII, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § IV, Ord. 563-NS, eff.
March 18, 1976, and § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Lot depth” shall mean the horizontal distance between the front and rear
lot lines, measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines. (§ 8170.48,
T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIII, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § IV, Ord.
563-NS, off. March 18, 1976, and § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Lot, interior” shall mean a lot other than a corner lot. (§ 8170.52,
T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIII, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § II, Ord.
166-NS, eff. September 24, 1970, § IV, Ord. 563-NS, eff. March 18, 1976, and §
I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Lot, key” shall mean the first lot to the rear of a reverse-corner lot and
not separated therefrom by an alley. (§ 8170.53, T.O.O.C., as renumbered §
XIII, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § II, Ord. 166-NS, eff. September 24,
1970, § IV, Ord. 563-NS, eff. March 18, 1976, and §I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March
5, 1981)
   “Lot line, front” shall mean a line separating an interior lot from a street
or a line separating the narrower street frontage of a corner lot from the
street. (§ 8170.44, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIII, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7,
1970, § II, Ord. 166-NS, eff. September 24, 1970, § IV, Ord. 563-NS, eff. March
18, 1976, and § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Lot line, rear” shall mean a lot line which is opposite and most distant
from the front lot line. For a triangle or gore-shaped lot, the rear lot line
shall mean a line ten (10’) feet in length within the lot, which line is
parallel to the front lot line or parallel to the cord of a curved front lot
line, and at the maximum distance from the front lot line. (§ 8170.45,
T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIII, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § II, Ord.
166-NS, eff. September 24, 1970, § IV, Ord. 563-NS, eff. March 18, 1976, and §
I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Lot line, side” shall mean any lot boundary line which is not a front lot
line or a rear lot line. (§ 8170.46, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIII, Ord.
149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § II, Ord. 166-NS, eff. September 24, 1970, § IV,
Ord. 563-NS, eff. March 18, 1976, and § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Lot, reverse-corner” shall mean a corner lot, the side line of which is
substantially a continuation of the front lot line of a lot or parcel of land
which adjoins the rear lot line of such corner lot. (§ 8170.51, T.O.O.C., as
renumbered by § XIII, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § II, Ord. 166-NS, eff.
September 24, 1970, § IV, Ord. 563-NS, eff. March 18, 1976, and § I, Ord. 772-
NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Lot, through” shall mean a lot other than a corner lot having frontage on
two (2) parallel streets. (§ 8170.54, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIII, Ord.
149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § II, Ord. 166-NS, eff. September 24, 1970, § IV,
Ord. 563-NS, eff. March 18,1976, and § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Lot width” shall mean the horizontal distance between the side lot lines,
measured at right angles to the depth at a point midway between the front and
rear lot lines. (§ 8170.47, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIII, Ord. 149-NS,
eff. May 7, 1970, § II, Ord. 166-NS, eff. September 24, 1970, § IV, Ord. 563-
NS, eff. March 18, 1976, and § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Low-barrier navigation center” is a type of emergency shelter that is a
housing first, low-barrier, service-enriched shelter focused on moving people
into permanent housing that provides temporary living facilities while case
managers connect individuals experiencing homelessness to income, public
benefits, health services, shelter, and housing. There shall be no statutory
limitation on the amount of time individuals stay at the facility. “Low
barrier” means best practices to reduce barriers to entry, and may include, but
is not limited to, the following:
      (1)   The presence of partners if it is not a population-specific site,
such as for survivors of domestic violence or sexual assault, women, or youth.
      (2)   Pets.
      (3)   The storage of possessions.
      (4)   Privacy, such as partitions around beds in a dormitory setting or
in larger rooms containing more than two (2) beds, or private rooms. (§ 1, Ord.
1730-NS, eff. May 24, 2024)
   "Medicinal cannabis" or "medicinal cannabis product" means cannabis or a
cannabis product, respectively, intended to be sold for use pursuant to the
Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Proposition 215), found at Section 11362.5 of
the Health and Safety Code, by a medicinal cannabis patient in California who
possesses a physician's recommendation.
(§ 16, Ord. 1703-NS, eff. August 5, 2022)
   “Medical Marijuana Regulation and Safety Act” or “MMRSA” shall mean the
following bills signed into law on October 9, 2015 and as amended from time to
time: AB 243, AB 266 and SB 643. (§ 2, Ord. 1612-NS, eff. February 26, 2016)
   “Mezzanine” shall be considered a portion of the story below. Such
mezzanines shall not contribute to number of stories but the mezzanine’s area
shall be included in the total building square footage. The clear height above
and below the mezzanine floor construction shall be not less than seven (7’)
feet. (§ 2, Ord. 1706-NS, eff. December 2, 2022)
   “Mobile car detailing” shall mean a business engaged in the commercial
activity of performing a detailed cleaning of motor vehicles at a nonfixed
location, on a prearranged appointment basis, which activity includes a broader
scope of services than mobile car washing, such as, but not limited to, handing
washing, polishing and detail cleaning of the outside of the vehicle, and
vacuuming, detail cleaning and applying protective agents to the interior,
generally requiring more than ninety (90) minutes for one worker to complete
the service call on a vehicle. (§ 1, Ord. 1195-NS, eff. January 25, 1994)
   “Mobile car washing” shall mean a business engaged in the commercial
activity of washing motor vehicles at a nonfixed location by means of a mobile
service truck utilizing water tanks and high pressure water spray equipment to
dislodge dirt and other foreign materials from the exterior surface of
vehicles, with more limited services provided than mobile car detailing. (§ 1,
Ord. 1195-NS, eff. January 25, 1994)
   “Mobile home park” means an area or land where two or more spaces are rented
or leased for mobile homes or manufactured homes to be used as dwellings. The
dwellings may be either owned or rented by the occupants. A mobile home park is
defined in State Law, Civil Code, § 798.4, and does not include residences
provided by employers for farmworkers or other employees, nor does it include
campgrounds or other sites for temporary lodging. (Part 2, Ord. 1718-NS, eff.
September 12, 2023)
   “Motel” shall mean one or more buildings containing guest rooms with one or
more such rooms or units having a separate entrance leading directly from the
outside of the building or from an inner court, which facilities are designed,
used, or intended to be used, rented, or hired out for temporary or overnight
accommodations for guests and are offered primarily to automobile tourists or
transients by signs or other advertising media. “Motel” shall include auto
courts, motor lodges, and tourist courts. (§ 8170.55, T.O.O.C., as amended by §
20, Ord. 86, as renumbered by § XIII, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § II, Ord.
166-NS, eff. September 24, 1970, § IV, Ord. 563-NS, eff. March 18, 1976, and §
I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Nightclub” shall mean any establishment in which at least twenty (20%)
percent of the customer area consists of one or more of the following:
      (a)   An area or floor for dancing;
      (b)   A stage for live entertainment;
      (c)   A bar, cantina, or similar area for the service of beverages, where
seating is provided.
   Any restaurant that provides dancing or live entertainment, regardless of
floor area utilized, during hours in which the restaurant no longer serves full
meals from its menu, shall also be deemed a nightclub. This definition shall
not apply to establishments which operate solely as a bar or tavern and have no
dancing or live entertainment. (§ 5, Ord. 1187-NS, eff. October 5, 1993)
   “Nonconforming building” shall mean a building or structure, or portion
thereof, which was lawfully erected or altered and maintained but which,
because of the application of the provisions of this chapter to it, no longer
conforms to the regulations of the zone in which it is located. (§ 8170.56,
T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIII, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § II, Ord.
166-NS, eff. September 24, 1970, § IV, Ord. 563-NS, eff. March 18, 1976, and §
I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Non-conforming condition” means a feature or site condition which was
lawfully erected or altered and maintained but which, because of the
application of the provisions of this chapter to it, no longer conforms to the
regulations of the zone in which it is located. (§ 3, Ord. 1704-NS, eff.
November 25, 2022)
   “Nonconforming use” shall mean a use, land, or any property which was
lawfully established and maintained but which, because of the application of
the provisions of this chapter to it, no longer conforms to the regulations of
the zone in which it is located. (§ 8170.57, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIII,
Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § II, Ord. 166-NS, eff. September 24, 1970, §
IV, Ord. 563-NS, eff. March 18, 1976, and § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981)
   “Non-habitable area” means bathrooms, closets, halls, storage or utility
spaces, and garages. (§ 3, Ord. 1631-NS, eff. July 14, 2017)
   “Open space” shall mean any parcel or area of land or water which is
essentially unimproved and devoted to an open space use as defined in this
section, and which is designated on the local open space plan as any of the
following: (1) for the preservation of natural resources; (2) for the managed
production of resources; (3) for outdoor recreation; (4) for public health and
safety. (§ II, Ord. 1108-NS, eff. June 20, 1991)
   “Outdoor customer dining area” shall be defined as a dining area with seats
and/or tables located outdoors of a restaurant, coffee shop or other food
service establishment, and which is (a) located entirely outside the walls of
the subject building, (b) enclosed on two (2) sides or less by the walls of the
building with or without a solid roof cover, or (c) enclosed on three (3) sides
by the walls of the building without a solid roof cover. (§ 2, Ord. 1248-NS,
eff. January 9, 1996)
   “Public parking area” shall mean an open area, other than a street, alley,
or place, used for the temporary parking of automobiles and available for
public use. (§ 8170.58, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIII, Ord. 149-NS, eff.
May 7, 1970, § II, Ord. 166-NS, eff. September 24, 1970, § IV, Or. 563-NS, eff.
March 18, 1976, § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981, and § II, Ord. 1108-NS,
eff. June 20, 1991)
   “Parking Structure” shall mean any structure used for parking vehicles that
contains both parking spaces and drive aisles to those parking spaces. The
structure may consist of single or multiple levels, and may be attached or
detached, above or below grade. (§ 1, Ord. 1156-NS, eff. July 7, 1992, and § 1,
Ord. 1569-NS, eff. March 9, 2012)
   “Passageway” means a pathway that is unobstructed clear to the sky and
extends from a street to one entrance of the accessory dwelling unit. (§ 3,
Ord. 1631-NS, eff. July 14, 2017)
   “Pilaster” shall mean an upright architectural member, including but not
limited to a column, shaft or base. (§ 2, Ord. 1249-NS, eff. January 9, 1996)
   “Playhouse” shall mean a freestanding structure, exclusively for the use of
children, with a maximum height of twelve feet (12’) and an area not to exceed
one hundred twenty (120) square feet. (§ 3, Ord. 1177-NS, eff. April 27, 1993)
   “Poultry” shall mean domestic fowl, chickens, ducks, geese, and similar
fowl, but specifically excluding turkeys and guinea fowl. (§ 8170.59, T.O.O.C.,
as renumbered by § XIII, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § II, Ord 166-NS, eff.
September 24, 1970, § IV, Ord. 563-NS, eff. March 18, 1976, § I, Ord. 772-NS,
eff. March 5, 1981, and § II, Ord. 1108-NS, eff. June 20, 1991)
   “Public road or street” shall mean any road, street, or thoroughfare of
whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for the
purposes of vehicular travel. (§ 8170.60, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIII,
Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § II, Ord. 166-NS, eff. September 24, 1970, §
IV, Ord. 563-NS, eff. March 18, 1976, § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981, and
§ II, Ord. 1108-NS, eff. June 20, 1991)
   “Qualifying patient” or “Qualified patient” shall have the same meaning as
set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7 and as amended from time to
time. (Part 2, Ord. 1612-NS, eff. February 26, 2016)
   “Racing homing pigeons” shall mean a breed of pigeons specifically bred and
used for racing purposes. (§ 8170.79, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIII, Ord.
149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § II, Ord. 166-NS, eff. September 24, 1970, § IV,
Ord. 563-NS, eff. March 18, 1976, § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981, and §
II, Ord. 1108-NS, eff. June 20, 1991)
   “Recreational vehicle” shall mean a vehicle self-propelled or towed,
licensed or unlicensed, including but not limited to motorhomes, travel
trailers, tent trailers, watercraft, vehicles designed primarily for off-road
use, animal trailers, multi-use trailers, and camper/truck combinations that
have integrated sleeping and cooking facilities. (Part 1, Ord. 1449-NS, eff.
November 1, 2005)
   “Religious Facility” shall mean a permanently located building used for
public or private purposes, including prayer, worship, weddings, or special
services. Such building shall be fully enclosed with walls (including windows
and doors) and shall conform to applicable legal requirements affecting design
and construction. (§ VI, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, as renumbered by § I,
Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981, as amended by §7, Ord. 1392-NS, eff. June 7,
2002)
   "Residential care facilities, large" shall mean State-licensed facilities
that provide 24-hour-a-day, non-medical care and supervision for seven (7) or
more physically, mentally and/or developmentally disabled persons in need of
assistance essential for sustaining the basic activities of daily living, such
as bathing, dressing, eating, transferring and toileting.
   “Residential care facilities, small” shall mean licensed or unlicensed
residential facilities. An unlicensed facility also means that the owners,
possessors, occupiers, managers, and tenants are exempt from federal or State
licensing requirements for the uses being conducted and managed at said
facility. Small residential care facilities are required by law to be treated
as residential uses for zoning purposes, including the following facilities
serving six (6) or fewer persons:
      (1)   Residential care facilities for the elderly as set forth in Health
and Safety Code Sec. 1569.85;
      (2)   Residential facilities (family homes, group care facilities for 24-
hour-a-day non-medical care of persons in need of personal services,
supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily
living or for the protection of the individual) as set forth in Health and
Safety Code Sec. 1502 (a) (1) and 1566.3;
      (3)   Alcoholism or drug abuse recovery or treatment facilities as set
forth in Health and Safety Code Sec. 11834.02 and 11834.23;
      (4)   Residential care facilities for persons with chronic life-
threatening illnesses as set forth in Health and Safety Code Sec. 1568.0831;
      (5)   Intermediate care facilities for the developmentally disabled
habilitative, intermediate care facility/developmentally disabled-nursing and
congregate health living facilities as set forth in Health and Safety Code Sec.
1267.8, 1267.9 and 1267.16;
      (6)   Pediatric day health and respite care facilities as set forth in
Health and Safety Code Sec. 1760.2 and 1760.4;
      (7)   Family care homes, foster homes and group homes providing care on a
24 hour basis for mentally disordered or otherwise handicapped persons or
dependent and neglected children as set forth in Welfare & Institutions Code
Sec. 5115 and 5116. (as amended by § 1, Ord. 1733-NS, eff. January 3, 2025)
   “Residential Sports Facility” is any structure or improvement, with or
without lighting, built for the purpose of and upon which any form of athletic
activity is carried on or conducted, including but not limited to, basketball,
racquetball, tennis, batting cages, skateboard ramps, and volleyball. A
residential sports facility shall not include temporary facilities established
for a period of less than ten (10) consecutive days, or ten (10) nonconsecutive
days in any thirty (30) day period. (§ 3, Ord. 1486-NS, eff. October 11, 2007)
   “Resource collection center” or “collection center” shall mean a central
location for the collection, storage, processing, shipping and/or disposal of
goods to be recycled. Those goods may include but are not limited to: paper,
aluminum, plastics, glass and other metals, as limited by the California
Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act (Public Resources Code
Section 14500, et seq.). (§ 1, Ord. 980-NS, eff. November 3, 1987, as
renumbered by § II, Ord. 1108-NS, eff. June 20, 1991)
   “Resource collection receptacle” shall mean a mechanical or nonmechanical
type of container, designed and used for the receiving of material to be
recycled and located at collection points off-site from a resource collection
center. Those goods may include but are not limited to: aluminum, plastics,
glass and other metals, as limited by the California Beverage Container
Recycling and Litter Reduction
Act (Section 14500, et seq.). (§ 1, Ord. 980-NS, eff. November 3, 1987, as
renumbered by § II, Ord. 1108-NS, eff. June 20, 1991)
   “Secretary” shall mean the Secretary of the Planning Commission. (§ 8170.63,
T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XV, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § II, Ord. 166-
NS, eff. September 24, 1970, § IV, Ord. 563-NS, eff. March 18, 1976, § I, Ord.
772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981, § 1, Ord. 980-NS, eff. November 3, 1987, and § II,
Ord. 1108-NS, eff. June 20, 1991)
   “Self-storage” shall mean a building or buildings containing various sizes
of storage compartments, stationary or portable, wherein each compartment is
offered for rent or lease for the private storage of materials to the general
public or businesses, who are to have access to space for the purpose of
storing and removing property or for individual storage containers but not the
sale of materials. Self-storage does not include a garage or other storage area
in a private residence, warehouse, or a public utility. Also known as “mini-
storage”, “mini-warehousing”, and “personal storage”, as commonly referred to
in the industry. (§ 2, Ord. 1706-NS, eff. December 2, 2022)
   “Senior mobile home park” means a mobile home park as defined in Section
798.4 of the California Civil Code where the occupancy of a mobile home space
is restricted such that at least one person occupying the mobile home as a
permanent resident must be age 55 or older and that person must own or be a
part-owner of that mobile home or the direct beneficiary of a trust or estate
that owns that mobile home. To comply with federal law, a senior park may
permit up to 20 percent of the coach owners under the age of 55. (Part 2, Ord.
1718-NS, eff. September 12, 2023)
   “Service station” shall mean a place or station selling motor fuel and oil
for motor vehicles; servicing batteries; furnishing repair service, excluding
painting, body work, steam cleaning, and tire recapping; and at which accessory
sales or incidental activities are conducted. (§ 8170.70, T.O.O.C., as
renumbered by § XV, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § II, Ord. 166-NS, eff.
September 24, 1970, § IV, Ord. 563-NS, eff. March 18, 1976, § I, Ord. 772-NS,
eff. March 5, 1981, § 1, Ord. 980-NS, eff. November 3, 1987, and § II, Ord.
1108-NS, eff. June 20, 1991)
   “Sign” shall mean any outdoor advertising display, outdoor advertising
structure, indoor advertising display, or indoor advertising structure designed
and placed so as to be readable principally from the outside. (§ 8170.62,
T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XV, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § II, Ord. 166-
NS, eff. September 24, 1970, § IV, Ord. 563-NS, eff. March 18, 1976, § I, Ord.
772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981, § 1, Ord. 980-NS, eff. November 3, 1987, and § II,
Ord. 1108-NS, eff. June 20, 1991)
   “Single room occupancy housing” shall mean an apartment house within which
the eating, sleeping and living areas for each dwelling unit are all situated
within one room.
   “Small family day care home” shall mean a facility that provides care,
protection, and supervision for eight (8) or fewer children including children
under ten (10) years of age who reside at the home, as set forth in Section
1596.78(c) of the California Health and Safety Code. (§ 3, Ord. 1189-NS, eff.
November 2, 1993; § 1, Ord. 1729-NS, eff. May 24, 2024)
   "Small family day care home or large family day care home" shall mean a
detached single-family dwelling, a townhouse, a dwelling unit within a
dwelling, or a dwelling unit within a covered multifamily dwelling in which the
underlying zoning allows for residential uses. A small family day care home or
large family day care home is where the day care provider resides and includes
a dwelling or a dwelling unit that is rented, leased, or owned as set forth in
Section 1596.78(d) of the Health and Safety Code. (§ 1, Ord. 1729-NS, eff. May
24, 2024)
   “Small wireless facility” or “small wireless facilities” shall mean the same
as defined by the Federal Communications Commission in 47 C.F.R. § 1.6002(l),
as may be amended or superseded. (§ 4, Ord. 1661-NS, eff. March 5, 2019)
   “Commercial stable” shall mean a stable other than a private stable. (§
8170.65, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XV, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § II,
Ord. 166-NS, eff. September 24, 1970, § IV, Ord. 563-NS, eff. March 18, 1976, §
I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981, § 1, Ord. 980-NS, eff. November 3, 1987,
and § II, Ord. 1108-NS, eff. June 20, 1991)
   “Private stable” shall mean an accessory building or structure used for the
keeping of horses owned by the occupants of the premises and not kept for
remuneration, hire, or sale. (§ 8170.66, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XV, Ord.
149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § II, Ord 166-NS, eff. September 24, 1970, § IV, Ord.
563-NS, eff. March 18, 1976, § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981, § 1, Ord.
980-NS, eff. November 3, 1987, and § II, Ord. 1108-NS, eff. June 20, 1991)
   “Story” shall mean the portion of a building included between the upper
surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except
thatthe topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the
upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above, including the
basement. (§ 8170.67, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XV, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7,
1970, § II, Ord. 166-NS, eff. September 24, 1970, § IV, Ord. 563-NS, eff. March
18, 1976, § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981, § 1, Ord. 980-NS, eff. November
3, 1987, and § II, Ord. 1108-NS, eff. June 20, 1991)
   “Structural alteration” shall mean any change in the supporting members of a
building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, floor joists, roof
joists, or rafters, and any change in the roof or exterior lines. (§ 8170.69,
T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XV, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § II, Ord. 166-
NS, eff. September 24, 1970, § IV, Ord. 563-NS, eff. March 18, 1976, § I, Ord.
772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981, § 1, Ord. 980-NS, eff. November 3, 1987, and § II,
Ord. 1108-NS, eff. June 20, 1991)
   “Structure” shall mean anything constructed or erected which requires a
location in or on the ground, or which is attached to something having a
location on or in the ground, such as signs, flagpoles, or similar
appurtenances, including a building or a building’s architectural features and
roof appurtenances required to operate and maintain the building, but not
including fences, or walls used as fences, less than six (6’) feet in height.
(§ 8170.68, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XV, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, as
amended by § I, Ord. 166-NS, eff. September 24, 1970, as renumbered by § II,
Ord. 166-NS, § IV, Ord. 563-NS, eff. March 18, 1976, § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff.
March 5, 1981, § 1, Ord. 980-NS, eff. November 3, 1987, and § II, Ord. 1108-NS,
eff. June 20, 1991)
   “Substance abuse treatment facility” shall mean any premises, building or
group of buildings that is operated with a license from the State of California
to provide 24-hour residential nonmedical alcoholism or drug abuse recovery or
treatment services to more than 6 persons. (Part 3, Ord. 1614-NS, eff. April
22, 2016)
   “Supportive housing” shall mean a residential care facility with no limit on
length of stay that is occupied by the target population as defined in
California Health and Safety Code Sec. 50675.14 and that is linked to onsite or
offsite services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining
housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability
to live and, when possible, work in the community. (§ 1, Ord. 1733-NS, eff.
January 3, 2025)
   “Swimming pool” shall mean a tank or pool created by artificial means
designed for the purpose of containing a body of water and offering the
possibility of use for swimming, bathing, and/or total bodily immersion by any
person, any portion of which tank or pool exceeds thirty-six (36") inches in
depth and which pool or tank is not portable in design or construction. (§ XVI,
Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, as renumbered by § II, Ord. 166-NS, eff.
September 24, 1970, § IV, Ord. 563-NS, eff. March 18, 1976, § I, Ord. 772-NS,
eff. March 5, 1981, §1, Ord. 980-NS, eff. November 3, 1987, and § II, Ord.
1108-NS, eff. June 20, 1991)
   “Tandem parking” shall mean where one vehicle, as defined by the Vehicle
Code, is parked immediately behind another vehicle. (§2, Ord. 1220-NS, eff.
October 11, 1994)
   “Technology and life sciences” shall mean technical research and the design,
development, and testing of technological and/or/with biological com- ponents
and products in advance of product manufacturing. Includes assembly of related
products from parts produced off-site and limited on-site manufacturing of
components where the manufac- turing activity is secondary to the primary
activities. Excludes any use classified under Chapter 21 of Title 3 (Cannabis
Business Tax) and Chapter 29 of Title 5 (Cannabis) of the TOMC. (§ 1, Ord.
1664-NS, eff. October 25, 2019)
   “Total floor area” shall have the same definition as “building area” as set
forth in Title 24 Part 2, Chapter 2 of the California Building Code, as may be
amended, which states: “The area included within surrounding exterior walls, or
exterior walls and fire walls, exclusive of vent shafts and courts. Areas of
the building not provided with surrounding walls shall be included in the
building area if such areas are included within the horizontal projection of
the roof or floor above.” (§ 9, Ord. 1732-NS, eff. November 22, 2024)
   “Townhouse” shall mean a dwelling unit configured as a condominium in which
each unit extends from foundation to roof.
   “Automobile trailer” shall mean a vehicle without motor power, designed to
be drawn by a motor vehicle and to be used for human habitation or for carrying
persons and property, including trailer coaches and mobile homes, and any self-
propelled vehicle having a body designed for, or converted to, the same uses as
an automobile trailer without motor power. (§ 8170.71, T.O.O.C., as renumbered
by § XVII, Ord. 149-NS, eff, May 7, 1970, § II, Ord, 166-NS, eff. September 24,
1970, § IV, Ord. 563-NS, eff. March 18, 1976, § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5,
1981, §1, Ord. 980-NS, eff. November 3, 1987, and § II, Ord. 1108-NS, eff. June
20, 1991)
   “Trailer park,” “trailer court,” and “public trailer camp” shall mean any
area or tract of land used or designed to accommodate two (2) or more
automobile trailers, including trailer camps as defined by law. (§ 8170.72,
T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XVII, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § II, Ord.
166-NS, eff. September 24, 1970, § IV, Ord. 563-NS, eff. March 18, 1976, § I,
Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981, §1, Ord. 980-NS, eff. November 3, 1987, § II,
Ord. 1108-NS, eff. June 20, 1991, and § III, Ord. 1459-NS, eff. April 21, 2006)
   “Transitional housing” shall mean rental housing operated under program
requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of
the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined
future point in time, which shall be no less than six months.
   “Transport” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Business and
Professionals Code Section 19300.5(am) and as amended from time to time. (Part
2, Ord. 1612-NS, eff. February 26, 2016)
   “Transporter” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Business and
Professions Code 19300.5(an) and as amended from time to time. (§ 2, Ord. 1612-
NS, eff. February 26, 2016; § 2, Ord. 1627-NS, eff. December 6, 2016; § 2, Ord.
1629-NS, eff. April 14, 2017)
   “Use” shall mean the purpose for which land or a building or structure is
arranged, designed, or intended to be used or for which it is or may be used,
occupied, or maintained. (§ 8170.73, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XVII, Ord.
149-NS, eff, May 7, 1970, § II, Ord, 166-NS, eff. September 24, 1970, § IV,
Ord. 563-NS, eff. March 18, 1976, § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981, §1,
Ord. 980-NS, eff. November 3, 1987, and § II, Ord. 1108-NS, eff. June 20, 1991)
   “Veterinary establishment” shall mean an establishment in which veterinary
services, clipping, bathing, boarding, and other services are rendered to dogs,
cats, and other small animals and domestic pets.
(§ 8170.74, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XVII, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, §
II, Ord. 166-NS, eff. September 24, 1970, § IV, Ord. 563-NS, eff. March 18,
1976, § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981, § 1, Ord. 980-NS, eff. November 3,
1987, and § II, Ord. 1108-NS, eff. June 20, 1991)    “Warehousing” shall mean
the storage of materials to be used in manufacturing processes and or finished
products which are intended to be distributed and or sold. These materials and
products are to be kept entirely within a building. Such facilities may include
loading facilities and management offices. Product distribution facilities
where the materials, products and or goods to be moved/transferred are stored
entirely within a building are also included. No assembly, manufacturing, or
retail operation is conducted within the building. This use class does not
include self-storage facilities, storage and transport of recycled/solid waste
or storage of hazardous materials. (§ 2, Ord. 1706-NS, eff. December 2, 2022)
   “Wholesaling” shall mean the indoor storage and distribution of merchandise,
packages, and bulk goods. Retail sales to the public are not included. This
classification includes importing and sale of imported goods, wholesale
distribution, and the wholesale of vehicles, provided there are no retail sales
or repair, and the vehicles are stored within a building. Associated
activities, such as packaging and crating, and incidental loading facilities
and management offices are included. (§ 2, Ord. 1706-NS, eff. December 2, 2022)
   “Wireless communications facility” is any structure which transmits and/or
receives radio frequency signals. It includes antennas, towers, poles,
equipment shelters, support structures and other equipment for the transmission
and receipt of signals that enable people to communicate independent of
location. This includes the current technologies of cellular communications and
personal communications services. It does not include non-commercial antennas,
radio and television signals, and non-commercial satellite dishes. (§ 1, Ord.
1292-NS, eff. August 28, 1997)
   “Yard” shall mean an open space, other than a court, on a lot, which space
is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise
expressly provided in this chapter. (§ 8170.75, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by §
XIX, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § II, Ord. 166-NS, eff. September 24, 1970,
§ IV, Ord. 563-NS, eff. March 18, 1976, § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981, §
1, Ord. 980-NS, eff. November 3, 1987, and § II, Ord. 1108-NS, eff. June 20,
1991)
   “Yard, Front” shall mean a yard extending between the side lot lines across
the front of a lot, the depth of which is the required minimum horizontal
distance between the front lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot. (§
8170.76, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIX, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § II,
Ord. 166-NS, eff. September 24, 1970, § IV, Ord. 563-NS, eff. March 18, 1976, §
I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981, § 1, Ord. 980-NS, eff. November 3, 1987,
and § II, Ord. 1108-NS, eff. June 20, 1991)
   “Yard, Rear” shall mean a yard extending across the rear of the lot between
the inner side lot lines, which yard is the required minimum horizontal
distance between the rear lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot. (§
8170.77, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIX, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § II,
Ord. 166-NS, eff. September 24, 1970, § IV, Ord. 563-NS, eff. March 18, 1976, §
I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981, § 1, Ord. 980-NS, eff. November 3, 1987,
and § II, Ord. 1108-NS, eff. June 20, 1991)
   “Yard, Side” shall mean a yard extending from the front yard, or front lot
line where no front yard is required, to the rear yard, and the width of the
required side yard shall be measured horizontally from the nearest part of the
side lot line. (§ 8170.78. T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIX, Ord. 149-NS, eff.
May 7, 1970, § II, Ord. 166-NS, eff. September 24, 1970, § IV, Ord. 563-NS,
eff. March 18, 1976, § I, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981, § 1, Ord. 980-NS,
eff. November 3, 1987, and § II, Ord. 1108-NS, eff. June 20, 1991)
(§§ 3 - 11, Ord. 1547-NS, eff. January 12, 2011, amended by §§ 1 - 4, Ord.
1554-NS, eff. May 13, 2011, and amended by Part 3, Ord. 1678-NS, eff. February
28, 2020)
Article 3. Establishment and Designation of Zones
Sec. 9-4.301. Use zones.
   In order to classify, regulate, restrict, and segregate the uses of lands
and buildings; to regulate and restrict the height and size of buildings; to
regulate the area of yards and other open spaces about buildings; and to
regulate the density of population, the following classes of use zones are
hereby established:
R-A    Rural-Agricultural Zones
R-E    Rural-Exclusive Zones
R-O    Single-Family Estate Zones
R-1    Single-Family Residential Zones
R-2    Two-Family Residential Zones
R-P-D  Residential Planned Development Zones
R-3    Multiple-Family Residential Zones
C-O    Commercial Office Zones
C-1    Neighborhood Shopping center Zones
C-2    Highway and Arterial Business Zones
C-2/CC Highway and Arterial Business/Civic Center Zone
C-2/AM Highway and Arterial Business/Auto Mall Zones
C-3    Community Shopping Center Zones
C-4    Regional Shopping Center Zones
M-1    Industrial Park Zones
M-2    Light Manufacturing Zones
MU     Mixed-Use
MUOZ   Mixed-Use Overlay Zones
T-P-D  Trailer Park Development Zones
O-S    Open Space Zones
H-P-D  Hillside Planned Development Zones
P-L    Public, Quasi-Public, and Institutional Lands and Facilities Zones
 
(§ 8112, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 2, Ord. 126, §§ I, V, VIII, XIV, Ord. 173-
NS, eff. November 5, 1970, § III, Ord. 1108-NS, eff. June 20, 1991, § 2, Ord.
1128-NS, eff. December 17, 1991, § 2, Ord. 1168-NS, eff. January 5, 1993, § 3,
Ord. 1503-NS, passed August 14, 2008,§ 28, Ord. 1555-NS, eff. May 13, 2011, and
§ 1, Ord. 1726, eff. April 26, 2024)
Sec. 9-4.302. Sub-zones.
   Sub-zones of each of the R Zones may be established. The requirements for
the parent R Zone shall apply to the respective sub-zones except as to the
minimum lot area required per family and the minimum lot width. The minimum lot
area per family and lot width in each subzone shall be fixed by the use of
suffix numbers on the zoning map applicable to the area. The required lot width
in any zone shall be determined in accordance with the required lot area for
the zone and the applicable width set forth in this section. In order to
increase or decrease the minimum lot size for any zoned land, the zoning symbol
or designation of the sub-zone shall be the same as for the parent zone except
that a suffix shall be added, indicating the required minimum lot area per
family in square feet and the minimum lot width.
   For the purpose of establishing sub-zones, an acre contains forty-three
thousand five hundred and sixty (43,560) square feet. The suffixes for sub-
zones and their meanings shall be as follows:
Minimum Lot Suffix Minimum Lot Area Required Width Required
Minimum Lot Suffix Minimum Lot Area Required                   Width Required
6                  6,000 square feet                           60 feet
7                  7,000 square feet                           70 feet
8                  8,000 square feet                           75 feet
9                  9,000 square feet                           75 feet
10                 10,000 square feet                          80 feet
13                 13,000 square feet                          90 feet
20                 20,000 square feet                          100 feet
30                 30,000 square feet                          125 feet
1 Ac.              43,560 square feet                          150 feet
2 Ac.              87,120 square feet                          150 feet
3 Ac. or more      Area equivalent to the number of acres, and 150 feet
                   fraction thereof, multiplied by 43,560
 
   The following are examples of sub-zones:
   (a)   The sub-zone of the R-1 Zone which requires a minimum lot area per
family of eight thousand (8,000) square feet and a minimum lot width of
seventy-five (75') feet shall be R-1-8.
   (b)   The sub-zone of the R-A Zone which requires a minimum lot area per
family of five (5) acres and a minimum lot width of one hundred fifty (150')
feet shall be R-A-5Ac.
(§ 8112, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 9-4.303. Additional sub-zones.
   (a)   Additional sub-zones may be established for the R-1-8, R-1-9, R-1-10,
R-E, R-1-13, R-E-13, R-1-20, R-E-20, R-O, R-1-30, R-E-30, R-O-30, R-1-1Ac., R-
E-1Ac., R-O-1Ac., R-1-2Ac., R-E-2Ac., and R-0-2Ac. Zones by adding suffix “Av.”
to any of such zones.
   Lands classified in any of the “Av.” sub-zones may contain lots of a minimum
lot area as prescribed in the following table, provided that the average lot
area of all the lots so zoned shall not be less than the square footage
required by that sub-zone and provided, further, that in computing such
average, only those lots not exceeding one and one-half (1- 1/2) times the
square feet of the sub-zone will be considered. The following table shows the
minimum and average lot areas allowed for each sub-zone classification:
Sub-Zone Classification Minimum Lot Area Allowed Area Average Lot Area
Sub-Zone Classification Minimum Lot Area Allowed Area Average Lot Area
8000 Av.                7000 Square feet              8000 Square feet
9000 Av.                7000 Square feet              9000 Square feet
10000 Av.               7000 Square feet              10000 Square feet
13000 Av.               8000 Square feet              13000 Square feet
20000 Av.               13000 Square feet             20000 Square feet
30000 Av.               20000 Square feet             30000 Square feet
1 Ac. Av.               30000 Square feet             1 Ac.
2 Ac. Av.               1 Ac.                         2 Ac.
 
   (b)   Sub-zones for the R-P-D Zone may be established. The requirements for
the R-P-D Zone shall apply to the respective R-P-D sub-zones except that the
suffix for the R-P-D designation shall be the maximum average number of
dwelling units per acre, followed by the letter "U." Land proposed for
development in the R-P-D Zone pursuant to an approved specific plan may be
zoned with an overall density for the entire residential area of master plan
without regard to ownership. Land so zoned shall be designated with the letters
"SP" and shall be subject to the land use and development requirements
specified in the underlying specific plan.
   The following are examples of sub-zones:
   (1)   The sub-zone of the R-E-20 Zone which requires a minimum average lot
area of 20,000 square feet shall be R-E-20 Av.
   (2)   The Residential Planned Development Zone (R-P-D) which permits a
maximum average of twenty (20) dwelling, units per acre shall be R-P-D-20U; a
maximum average of six (6) dwelling units per acre shall be R-P-D-6U.
   (3)   The sub-zone of R-P-D-3U-SP would permit a total density of three (3)
dwelling units per acre, multiplied by the total number of acres for the total
area. Assuming one thousand (1,000) acres were subject to R-P-D-3U-SP, the
total density available would be three thousand (3,000) dwelling units.
Assuming eight hundred (800) acres were devoted to open space or park areas,
the three thousand (3,000) dwelling units would be permitted to be applied over
the remaining two hundred (200) acres.
(§ 8112, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 1, Ord. 89, § 1, Ord. 117, § 1, Ord. 135-NS,
eff. January 27, 1970, and § 29, Ord. 1555-NS, eff. May 13, 2011)
Sec. 9-4.304. Establishment.*
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to, and govern the use or
maintenance or keeping of, any land or other property in the City.
   The term "zoning map" shall be substituted for the term "land use plan"
wherever the latter appears in any paper, record, or document relating to
previous zoning ordinances or regulations of the City.
   The zones established by this article and the boundaries of such zones are
shown upon a map which is made a part of this chapter and which is designated
as the "Official Zoning Map." Such zoning map may, for convenience, be divided
into parts, and each such part may, for purposes of more readily identifying
areas within such zoning map, be subdivided into units, and each such part and
unit may be separately used for purposes of amending the zoning map or for any
official reference to the zoning map. Such map, and each such part and unit,
and the notations, references, and other information shown thereon, shall be as
much a part of this chapter as if the matters and information set forth by such
map were all fully described in this chapter.
(§§8113 and 8117, T.O.O.C. as amended by § 3, Ord. 1503, eff. August 14, 2008)
*Editor’s note: Zoning maps are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
Sec. 9-4.305. Uncertainty of zone boundaries.
   Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any zone as shown on any
zoning map, or part thereof, the following rules of construction shall apply:
   (a)   Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following street
and alley lines or lot lines, such lines shall be construed to be such
boundaries.
   (b)   In the case of unsubdivided property and where a zone boundary divides
a lot, the locations of such boundaries, unless the same are indicated by
dimensions, shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on such
zoning map.
   (c)   Where a public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the
zoning regulations applicable to abutting property on each side of the center
line shall apply up to the center line of such vacated or abandoned street or
alley on each respective side thereof.
   The Commission shall determine such uncertainties.
(§ 8116, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 9-4.306. Ambiguities.
   (a)   If ambiguity arises concerning the appropriate classification of a
particular use within the meaning and intent of this chapter, or if ambiguity
exists with respect to matters of height, yard, or area requirements, or the
determination of the exact location of zone boundaries, it shall be the duty of
the Commission to ascertain all pertinent facts concerning such use or matter
and, by resolution of record, to set forth its findings and its interpretation.
Such resolution shall be forwarded to the Council for review and determination,
and thereafter the administrative interpretation fixed by the Council shall
govern the matter until and unless changed by subsequent administrative
interpretation or by an amendment to the provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   For the purposes of this section and for determining conditions and
limitations for variances and permits of any kind, the following matters shall
be considered:
   (1)   Technical evidence and scientific means of measurement, where
available, in determining the form and intensity of conditions;
   (2)   Effects or results typically associated with the maintenance or
operation of identifiable uses;
   (3)   The ambient level of sound;
   (4)   Sound measured in decibels; and
   (5)   Vibrations above and below the auditory range; odors, fumes, smoke,
and other emissions and whether toxic or nontoxic; the incidence of hazards,
including explosion or contamination; the chemical identification and
classification of emissions from any use, whether industrial, commercial, or
domestic; the traffic generating capacity, in terms of peak, average, and
minimum flow, and the volume of passengers or freight, or both; the need and
consuming capacity for electrical energy, natural gas, oil, water, and sewage
disposal; and the existing and needed transportation facilities.
(§ 8166.7, T.O.O.C.)
Sec. 9-4.307. Height Limit Overlay Zone (H).
   There is hereby established the Height Limit Overlay Zone (H) in order to
provide an overlay zone within the C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1, and M-2 use zones
wherein a waiver of the maximum height limits of such zones may be granted
under the conditions set forth in Article 33 of this chapter.
   Property designated in the Height Limit Overlay Zone (H) may be considered
for building heights of up to seventy-five (75’) feet. The purpose of the
Height Limit Overlay Zone (H) is to designate those locations of the City in
which high-rise structures (defined as buildings over thirty-five (35’) feet in
height) may be developed in a manner compatible with adjacent land uses,
circulation and utility systems. and the visual character of the area. The
requirements of the underlying C or M Zone shall apply to property in the
Height Limit Overlay Zone (H), except as modified by the requirements of
Article 33 of this chapter. Rezoning to the Height Limit Overlay Zone (H) shall
be in the manner set forth in Article 29 of this chapter.
(§ X, Ord. 495-NS, eff. October 10, 1974)
Sec. 9-4.308. Historic Landmark Overlay Zone (HL).
   There is hereby established the Historic Landmark Overlay Zone (HL) in order
to provide an overlay zone within any use zone wherein properties so zoned are
identified as having particular historic or cultural significance as defined in
Section
1-9.205 of Article 2 of Chapter 9 of Title 1 of this Code. Rezoning to the HL
Zone shall be in the manner set forth in Article 29 of this chapter, and the
development of land within the HL Zone shall conform to the regulations set
forth in Article 34 of this chapter.
(§ II, Ord. 632-NS, eff. June 2, 1977)
Sec. 9-4.309. Establishment and designation of zones.
   There is hereby established the Senior Mobile Home Park Overlay Zone (SMHP)
that provides an overlay zone within any use zone wherein properties so zoned
are identified as parcels containing mobile home parks. The development of land
within the SMHP Zone shall conform to the regulations set forth in Article 20
of this chapter.
(Part 3, Ord. 1718-NS, eff. September 12, 2023)
Sec. 9-4.310 Mixed-Use Overlay Zone (MUOZ).
   There is hereby established the Mixed-Use Overlay Zone (MUOZ) that provides
an overlay zone within any existing specific plan areas wherein properties so
zoned are identified as parcels allowing a mix of commercial and residential
uses. The development of land within the MUOZ shall conform to the regulations
of the underlying specific plan except where specifically superseded by Article
10.5 of this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 1726-NS, eff. April 26, 2024)
Article 4. Rural-Agricultural Zones (R-A)
Sec. 9-4.401. Permitted uses (R-A).
   Only the uses identified in Article 21 of this chapter as being permitted in
the Rural Agricultural (R-A) Zone shall be established or maintained on
property located therein, subject to the permitting requirements and
limitations set forth in said Article 21 and the general provisions and
exceptions set forth in Articles 23 through 30 of this chapter.
(§ 8121, T.O.O.C., as amended by §§ 1 and 2, Ord. 95, § II, Ord. 220-NS, eff.
August 19, 1971, § II, Ord. 834-NS, eff. June 21, 1973, § 1, Ord. 1379-NS, eff.
August 9, 2001, § 8, Ord. 1392-NS, eff. June 7, 2002, § 1, Ord. 1401-NS, eff.
February 6, 2003, § 5, Ord. 1412-NS, eff. August 14, 2003, § 21, Ord. 1547-NS,
eff. January 12, 2011; § 8, Ord. 1614-NS. eff. April 22, 2016, and § 1, Ord.
1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.402. Reserved.
(§ 8121.1, T.O.O.C., as amended by § III, Ord. 220-NS, eff. August 19, 1971, §
I, Ord. 815-NS, eff. September 7, 1982, § 1, Ord. 858-NS, eff. April 24, 1984,
§ 10, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, § 4, Ord. 1189-NS, eff. November 2,
1993, § 2, Ord. 1273-NS, eff. January 8, 1997, § 1, Ord. 1306-NS, eff. November
20, 1997, § 15, Ord. 1412-NS, eff. August 14, 2003, § 3, Ord. 1555-NS, eff. May
13, 2011, and repealed by § 2, Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.403. Animals and fowl (R-A).
   No animal or fowl, except dogs and cats kept as domestic pets, shall be
housed, stabled, lodged, maintained, or confined within forty (40’) feet of any
school, religious facility, hospital, public place, business, residence,
dwelling house, or other building used for human habitation, other than the
personal dwelling or residence of the owner or keeper thereof, except as
specifically provided otherwise in this article.
(§ 8121.2, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 9, Ord. 1392-NS, eff. June 7, 2002)
Sec. 9-4.404. Reserved.
(§ 8121.3, T.O.O.C., and repealed by § 3, Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.405. Food cooperatives (R-A).
(§ II, Ord 834-NS, eff. June 21, 1983, and repealed by § 10, Ord. 1178-NS, eff.
April 27, 1993)
Article 5. Rural-Exclusive Zones (R-E)
Sec. 9-4.501. Permitted uses (R-E).
   Only the uses identified in Article 21 of this chapter as being permitted in
the Rural Exclusive (R-E) Zone shall be established or maintained on property
located therein, subject to the permitting requirements and limitations set
forth in said Article 21 and the general provisions and exceptions set forth in
Articles 23 through 30 of this chapter.
(§ 8123, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 1, Ord. 86, § 1, Ord. 94, §§ 3 and 4, Ord.
95, § IV, Ord. 220-NS, eff. August 19, 1971, § III, Ord. 834-NS, eff. June 21,
1983, § 4, Ord. 989-NS, eff. February 23, 1988, § 2, Ord. 1195-NS, eff. January
25, 1994, § 2, Ord. 1379-NS, eff. August 9, 2001, § 10, Ord. 1392-NS, eff. June
23, 2002, § 1, Ord. 1401-NS, eff. February 6, 2003, § 6, Ord. 1412-NS, eff.
August 16, 2003, and § 4, Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.502. Reserved.
(§ 8123.1, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 2, Ord. 86, § V, Ord. 220-NS, eff. August
19, 1971, § II, Ord. 815-NS, eff. September 7, 1982, § 2, Ord. 858-NS, eff.
April 24, 1984, § 11, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993; § 5, Ord. 1189-NS,
eff. November 2, 1993, § 3, Ord. 1273-NS, eff. January 8, 1997, § 2, Ord. 1306-
NS, eff. November 20, 1997, § 11, Ord. 1392-NS, eff. June 7, 2002, § 16, Ord.
1412-NS, eff. August 14, 2003, § 22, Ord. 1547-NS, eff. January 12, 2011, § 4,
Ord. 1555-NS, eff. May 13, 2011; §§ 9 and 13, Ord. 1614-NS, eff. April 22,
2016, and repealed by § 5, Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.503. Animals and fowl (R-E).
   No animal or fowl, except dogs and cats kept as domestic pets, shall be
housed, stabled, lodged, maintained, or confined within forty (40’) feet of any
school, religious facility, hospital, public place, business, residence,
dwelling house, or other building used for human habitation, other than the
personal dwelling or residence of the owner or keeper thereof, except as
specifically provided otherwise in this article.
(§ 8123.2, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 2, Ord. 94, and § 12, Ord. 1392-NS, eff.
June 7, 2002)
Sec. 9-4.504. Food cooperatives (R-E).
(§ III, Ord. 834-NS, eff. June 21, 1983; repealed by § 11, Ord. 1178-NS, eff.
April 27, 1993)
Article 6. Single-Family Estate Zones (R-O)
Sec. 9-4.601. Permitted uses (R-O).
   Only the uses identified in Article 21 of this chapter as being permitted in
the Single-Family Estate (R-O) Zone shall be established or maintained on
property located therein, subject to the permitting requirements and
limitations set forth in said Article 21 and the general provisions and
exceptions set forth in Articles 23 through 30 of this chapter.
(§ 8124, T.O.O.C., as amended by §§ 5 and 6, Ord. 95, § I, Ord. 157-NS, eff.
July 16, 1970, § I, Ord. 203-NS, eff. April 22, 1971, § VI, Ord. 220-NS, eff.
August 19, 1971, § I, Ord. 604-NS, eff. December 23, 1976, § IV, Ord. 834-NS,
eff. June 21, 1983, § 3, Ord. 1379-NS, eff. August 9, 2001, § 1, Ord. 1401-NS,
eff. February 6, 2003, § 7, Ord. 1412-NS, eff. August 14, 2003, and § 6, Ord.
1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.602. Reserved.
(§ 8124.1, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 3, Ord. 86, § VII, Ord. 220-NS, eff.
August 19, 1971, § III, Ord. 815-NS, eff. September 7, 1982, § 3 Ord. 858-NS,
eff. April 24, 1984, § 12, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, § 6, Ord. 1189-
NS, eff. November 2, 1993, § 4, Ord. 1273-NS, eff. January 8, 1997, § 3, Ord.
1306-NS, eff. November 20, 1997, § 17, Ord. 1412-NS, eff. August 14, 2003, § 5,
Ord. 1555-NS, eff. May 13, 2011, and repealed by § 7, Ord. 1620- NS, eff.
August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.603. Animals and fowl (R-O).
   No animal or fowl, except dogs and cats kept as domestic pets, shall be
housed, stabled, lodged, maintained, or confined within forty (40’) feet of any
school, religious facility, hospital, public place, business, residence,
dwelling house, or other building used for human habitation, other than the
personal dwelling or residence of the owner or keeper thereof, except as
specifically provided otherwise in this article.
(§ 8124.2, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 13, Ord. 1392-NS, eff. June 7, 2002)
Sec. 9-4.604. Food cooperatives (R-O).
(§ IV, Ord. 834-NS, eff. June 21, 1983; repealed by § 12, Ord. 1178-NS, eff.
April 27, 1993)
Article 7. Single-Family Residential Zones (R-1)
Sec. 9-4.701. Permitting uses (R-1).
   Only the uses identified in Article 21 of this chapter as being permitted in
the Single-Family Residential (R-1) Zone shall be established or maintained on
property located therein, subject to the permitting requirements and
limitations set forth in said Article 21 and the general provisions and
exceptions set forth in Articles 23 through 30 of this chapter.
(§ 8125, T.O.O.C., as amended by §§ 7 and 8, Ord. 95, § II, Ord. 157-NS, eff.
July 16, 170, § VII, Ord. 220-NS, eff. August 19, 1971, § V, Ord. 834-NS, eff.
June 21, 1983, § 1, Ord. 989-NS, eff. February 23, 1988, § 4, Ord. 1379-NS,
eff. August 9, 2001, § 1, Ord. 1387-NS, eff. November 2, 2001, § 14, Ord. 1392-
NS, eff. June 7, 2002, § 1, Ord. 1401-NS, eff. February 6, 2003, § 8, Ord.
1412-NS, eff. August 14, 2003, and § 8, Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.702. Reserved.
(§ 8125.1, T.O.O.C., as amended by § IX, Ord. 220-NS, eff. August 19, 1971, §
IV, Ord. 815-NS, eff. September 7, 1982, § 4, Ord. 858-NS, eff. April 24, 1984,
§ 13, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, § 7, Ord. 1189-NS, eff. November 2,
1993, § 5, Ord. 1273-NS, eff. January 8, 1997, § 4, Ord. 1306-NS, eff. November
20, 1997, § 15, Ord. 1392-NS, eff. June 7, 2002, § 18, Ord. 1412-NS, eff.
August 14, 2003, § 23, Ord. 1547-NS, eff. January 12, 2011, § 6, Ord. 1555-NS,
eff. May 13, 2011; § 5, Ord. 1614- NS, eff. April 22, 2016, and repealed by §
9, Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.703. Animals and fowl (R-1).
   The Community Development Director may authorize animals and fowl, subject
to the limitations of this article, for a period of not more than one year at a
time without holding a public hearing provided the applicant submits:
   (a)   An application is provided by the Community Development Director;
   (b)   A plot in duplicate and drawn to scale showing the applicant’s
property and each adjacent property, the residences on each, and the area and
structures to be devoted to animal or fowl uses. Such plot plan shall show
compliance with the requirement that no animal or fowl, except dogs and cats
kept as domestic pets, shall be housed, stabled, lodged, maintained, or
confined within forty (40’) feet of any school, religious facility, hospital,
public place, business, residence, dwelling house, or other building used for
human habitation, other than the personal dwelling or residence of the owner or
keeper;
   (c)   A list of all the property owners or residents adjacent to the subject
property with an affirmative showing of evidence of notice to the adjacent
property owners, such as the showing of a sample copy of a letter sent to all
adjacent property owners, with a post office certification or registration to
show that the letter was actually received, together with a statement that each
owner or resident has been notified as to the types and numbers of animals
requested. Such list shall also contain the address, telephone number, and a
statement as to whether the resident is the legal owner of the property. The
Community Development Director shall issue the requested permit within thirty
(30) days if no complaint is received; and
   (d)   A filing fee in an amount prescribed by Council resolution.
(§ II, Ord. 157-NS, eff. July 16, 1970, as amended by § XI, Ord. 581-NS, eff.
August 12, 1976, § VI, Ord. 776-NS, eff. April 16, 1981, § 2, Ord. 1387-NS,
eff. November 2, 2001, and § 16, Ord. 1392-NS, eff. June 7, 2002)
Sec. 9-4.704. Food cooperatives (R-2).
(§ V, Ord. 834-NS, eff. June 21, 1983; repealed by § 13, Ord. 1178-NS, eff.
April 27, 1993)
Article 8. Two-Family Residential Zones (R-2)
Sec. 9-4.801. Permitted uses (R-2).
   Only the uses identified in Article 21 of this chapter as being permitted in
the Two-Family Residential (R-2) Zone shall be established or maintained on
property located therein, subject to the permitting requirements and
limitations set forth in said Article 21 and the general provisions and
exceptions set forth in Articles 23 through 30 of this chapter.
(§ 8126, T.O.O.C., as amended by §§ 9 and 10, Ord. 95, § X, Ord. 220-NS, eff.
August 19, 1971, § VI, Ord. 834-NS, eff. June 21, 1983, § 5, Ord. 1379-NS, eff.
August 9, 2001, § 1, Ord. 1401-NS, eff. February 6, 2003, § 9, Ord. 1412-NS,
eff. August 14, 2003, and § 10, Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.802. Reserved.
(§ 8126.1, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 4, Ord. 86, § XI, Ord. 220-NS, eff. August
19, 1971, § V, Ord. 815-NS, eff. September 7, 1982, § 5, Ord. 858-NS, eff.
April 24, 1984, § 14, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, and § 8, Ord. 1189-NS,
eff. November 2, 1993; § 6, Ord. 1273-NS, eff. January 8, 1997, § 5, Ord. 1306-
NS, eff. November 20, 1997, § 17, Ord. 1392-NS, eff. June 7, 2002, § 19, Ord.
1412-NS, eff. August 14, 2003, § 24, Ord. 1547-NS, eff. January 12, 2011, § 7,
Ord. 1555-NS, eff. May 13, 2011; § 6, Ord. 1614-NS, eff. April 22, 2016, and
repealed by § 11, Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.803. Food cooperatives (R-2).
(§ VI, Ord. 834-NS, eff. June 21, 1983; repealed by § 14, Ord. 1178-NS, eff.
April 27, 1993)
Article 9. Residential Planned Development Zones (R-P-D)*
*   Article 9 consisting of Sections 9-4.901 through 9-4.904, recodified from
Sections 8137 and 8137.1 through 8137.3, T.O.O.C., as amended by ordinance Nos.
95, 117, 229, 189-NS, effective February 11, 1971, 203-NS, effective April 22,
1971, 220-NS, effective August 19, 1971, 311-NS and 312-NS, effective November
2, 1972, 354-NS, effective March 22, 1973, and 376-NS, effective May 31, 1973,
Section 9-4.905, added by ordinance No. 354-NS, effective March 22, 1973, and
Section 9-4.906, added by Ordinance No. 163-NS, effective August 27, 1970, as
amended by Ordinance Nos. 220-NS, effective August 19, 1971, 311-NS and 312-NS,
effective November 2, 1972, and 354-NS, effective March 22, 1973, amended in
its entirety by Section I, Ordinance No. 459-NS, effective July 4, 1974.
Sec. 9-4.901. Intent and purpose (R-P-D).
   The intent and purposes of the Residential Planned Development Zone are as
follows:
   (a)   To provide a means for encouraging creative and innovative
developments that are environmentally pleasing through the application of
imaginative land planning techniques not permitted within other residential
zones by the enforcement of more rigid standards;
   (b)   To assure conformance of the project with the stipulations of the
General Plan with respect to use, density, open space, circulation, public
facilities, and the preservation of natural features, as well as with the
standards, principles, and goals as set forth within the General Plan;
   (c)   To maximize the preservation and development of a natural landscaped
public and private open space areas. Such areas may include, but not be limited
to, scenic easements, historical areas, scenic areas, active and passive
recreational areas, pedestrian ways, equestrian and hiking trails, plazas, and
distinct spatial separations between pedestrian and vehicular areas;
   (d)   To provide for an orderly and cohesive urban growth and physical
development pattern in the City by discouraging fragmentation with unrelated
elements and encouraging the efficient delivery of City services;
   (e)   To encourage the design of all residential planned developments to be
compatible to both existing and potential land uses, including a proper
functional relationship with such adjacent areas;
   (f)   To encourage the optional utilization of the land to provide a degree
of diversity of dwelling unit types, sites, and a range of rents or sales
prices;
   (g)   To relate the residential development to public and private support
services through the submittal of a fiscal impact report (cost-revenue
analysis) to determine the effect on such services and City revenues;
   (h)   To promote an equitable distribution of public facilities by
encouraging developers to provide such facilities as allowed by the Government
Code of the State in order to avoid the overcrowding of existing facilities
used by established residents and provide for a balance of community services;
   (i)   To provide a planning process involving public participation in the
review of residential projects; and
   (j)   To provide the City and developer with reciprocal latitude to consider
alternate standards in return for increased amenities to serve the inhabitants
of the development and surrounding areas.
   The Commission may grant a residential planned development permit for land
in the R-P-D Zone which the Commission finds meets the requirements of this
article. The Commission may impose such additional conditions and requirements
upon a residential planned development permit as the Commission finds are
reasonable and necessary to carry out the purposes and requirements of the R-P-
D zone.
(§ I, Ord. 459-NS, eff. July 4, 1974)
Sec. 9-4.902. Permitted uses (R-P-D).
   Only the uses identified in Article 21 of this chapter as being permitted in
the Residential Planned Development (R-P-D) Zone shall be established or
maintained on property located therein, subject to the permitting requirements
and limitations set forth in said Article 21.
(§ I, Ord. 459-NS, eff. July 4, 1974, as amended by § VII, Ord. 834-NS, eff.
June 21, 1983, §§ 2 and 5, Ord. 989-NS, eff. February 23, 1988, § 6, Ord. 1379-
NS, eff. August 9, 2001, § 18, Ord. 1392-NS, eff. June 7, 2002, § 1, Ord. 1401-
NS, February 6, 2003, § 10, Ord. 1412-NS, eff. August 14, 2003, and § 12, Ord.
1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.903. Reserved.
(§ I, Ord. 459-NS, eff. July 4, 1974, as amended by § III, Ord. 779-NS, eff.
June 11, 1981, § VI, Ord. 815-NS, eff. September 7, 1982, § 6, Ord. 858-NS,
eff. April 24, 1984, § 15, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, § 9, Ord. 1189-
NS, eff. November 2, 1993; § 7, Ord. 1273-NS, eff. January 8, 1997, § 6, Ord.
1306-NS, eff. November 20, 1997, § 19, Ord. 1392-NS, eff. June 7, 2002, § 20,
Ord. 1412-NS, eff. August 14, 2003, § 8, Ord. 1555-NS, eff. May 13, 2011; § 10,
Ord. 1614-NS, eff. April 22, 2016, and repealed by § 13, Ord. 1620-NS, eff.
August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.904. Development standards (R-P-D).
   Unless otherwise specifically waived or modified by the Commission, the
following development standards are established as the minimum deemed necessary
to ensure the public health, safety, and welfare within the R-P-D Zone and to
accomplish the intent and purpose of this article:
   (a)   Construction sequence. The applicant shall submit a construction
sequence for the land covered by the permit showing the order in which
particular structures will be constructed, and, upon the approval of the
sequence, the applicant shall not deviate from such sequence without written
approval by the Community Development Director. At no time shall there be more
than an average of the allowable units per net acre constructed, or under
construction, on the portion of the land which has been developed or is under
development.
   (b)   Parking spaces. The number of parking spaces required shall be based
on the requirements by type of residential development as set forth in Sec.
9-4.2402 of this chapter. The Commission may require additional uncovered
parking spaces when it is found that such parking is necessary for the
development, taking into consideration the availability of on-street parking
facilities in and adjacent to the development. All covered parking shall be
obscured from the public view where visible from perimeter streets by means of
a wall enclosure or landscape screening consisting of dense vegetation and
earth mounding.
   (c)   Open parking areas, driveways, and parking lots. The general
requirements for open parking areas, including driveway and parking lots, shall
be as follows:
   (1)   Size. Each off-street parking space shall be at least nine (9’) feet
by twenty (20’) feet, exclusive of drives and aisles. The twenty (20’) foot
depth may be reduced to eighteen (18’) feet, and bumper stops may be waived;
provided the parking space faces a minimum six (6’) foot wide planter for each
row of parking, and the area of car overhang will not damage or interfere with
plant growth and its irrigation. Concrete bumper guards or wheel stops shall be
provided for all parking spaces where deemed necessary by the Community
Development Director, i.e., to channelize traffic flow, protect structures and
landscaping, and prevent overhang into a pedestrian area, except as otherwise
set forth in this subsection or for parallel parking.
   (2)   Improvements. Improvements shall conform to those requirements set
forth in subsection (1) of subsection (c) of Section
9-4.2404 of Article 24 of this chapter.
   (3)   Driveways.
   (i)   Each entrance and exit to a parking lot shall be constructed and
maintained so that any vehicle entering or leaving the parking lot shall be
clearly visible at a distance of not less than ten (10’) feet to a person
approaching such entrance or exit on any pedestrian walk or footpath.
   (ii)   Exits from parking lots shall be clearly posted with “Stop” signs.
   (iii)    Appropriate directional signs shall be maintained where needed and
as required by the Community Development Director.
   (iv)   Driveway access to parking spaces for single-family dwellings shall
not be less than ten (10’) feet in width throughout, and turnaround areas may
be used for the required parking spaces.
   (v)   Driveway and vehicular access ways shall have thirty-six (36') feet of
pavement width when:
   (aa)    The design indicates that parallel parking may occur which is
permitted on one side of the driveway only;
   (ab)    A hazardous type of construction is allowed;
   (ac)    Access drives are longer than one hundred fifty (150') feet, or
structures are three (3) stories or more in height and are located on both
sides of the drive; and
   (ad)    It is a main access route through the proposed development, which
route either directly or indirectly services the entire project.
   (vi)   Driveways and vehicular access ways may have thirty (30’) feet of
pavement width when:
   (aa)    The design indicates that perpendicular parking will not allow
parallel parking, and structures are not over two (2) stories in height on both
sides of the access drives;
   (ab)    Structures are not more than two (2) stories in height and have
tuck-under parking on one side of the access drive and a carport or open
parking on the opposite side. All parking shall be perpendicular parking; and
   (ac)    Access driveways are not more than one hundred fifty (150') feet in
length, and structures are not more than three (3) stories in height.
   (vii)    Driveways and vehicular access ways may have twenty-five (25’) feet
of pavement width when the driveways are used strictly for vehicle parking, and
the driveway is not used for direct access to any structure within the project.
All parking shall be perpendicular.
   (4)   General conditions. Access requirements for all residential planned
development permits shall be as follows:
   (i)   At least two (2) different routes of entrance and exit for emergency
vehicles where streets are longer than 800 feet; and
   (ii)   Cul-de-sacs shall be limited to eight hundred (800’) feet in length
and shall be terminated by a turnaround not less than eighty (80’) feet in
diameter, or a hammerhead, or T-shaped turnaround area.
   (5)   Circulation.
   (i)   No parking spaces shall be located so that a vehicle will maneuver
within ten (10’) feet of a vehicular entrance to the property.
   (ii)   A turnaround area shall be provided of at least twenty-five (25’)
feet for ninety (90) degree parking, eighteen (18’) feet for sixty (60) degree
parking, fourteen (14’) feet for forty-five (45) degree parking, and twelve
(12’) feet for thirty (30) degree or parallel parking (provided there are at
least four (4’) feet between each two (2) parallel spaces).
   (iii)    The length of all private driveways connecting with major private
roads and all public streets shall be a minimum of twenty (20’) feet.
   (6)   Landscaping.
   (i)   Five (5%) percent of any open parking and driveway areas containing
parking spaces for at least ten (10) vehicles, and not more than twenty-one
(21) vehicles, shall be landscaped. Ten (10%) percent of any open parking and
driveway areas containing more than twenty-one (21) parking spaces shall be
landscaped. Such landscaped areas shall be distributed through the entire
parking area as required by the Community Development Director. All such
required landscaped areas shall be computed on the basis of the total amount of
parking and driveway areas provided (except spaces provided for enclosed
vehicle storage areas).
   (ii)   Four (4) copies of separate landscape and irrigation plans meeting
the City’s standards shall be submitted, with a landscape plan check fee as
specified in the City’s Master Fee Resolution, to the Community Development
Department and be approved by the Landscape Supervisor before issuance of an
occupancy permit.
   (iii)   Landscape trees shall be selected and planted in such a manner as to
minimize root damage to parking lot hardscape. All trees planted shall be from
the planting pallets contained within the Forestry Master Plan unless another
species is approved by the Community Development Director. Trees known to have
shallow or invasive roots shall not be planted within parking lot areas. Tree
species should be chosen to maximize canopy coverage of parking lot areas.
Trees shall be provided with a minimum four (4’) foot by six (6’) foot planting
hole (six (6’) feet by six (6’) feet preferred) or the largest planting area
possible within any landscape design. In addition, deep root watering methods
shall be designed and incorporated to supply water for parking lot trees and
root guards shall be placed behind any curb in the vicinity of the planted tree
(s).
   (iv)   No approved landscaping shall be removed or tree pruned of live
tissue in any parking lot area without the written authorization of the
Community Development Department upon the submittal of a tree pruning proposal
by a certified arborist or landscape architect. Topping of trees or pruning to
reduce canopy coverage within parking lots is prohibited.
   (v)   Plant material of a drought tolerant nature shall be used to the
greatest extent possible in any parking area landscape design and planting.
   (vi)   Approved landscaping shall be permanently maintained in accordance
with Section
1-6.01(e) of this Code. Any redesign or alteration of an existing project
landscaping shall be subject to approval of the Community Development
Department and shall be accomplished through the filing of a Landscape Plan
Check application, provided such alteration is consistent with all City codes,
policies, and project entitlement conditions.
   (d)   Height, yards, and setbacks.
   (1)   Building height. Refer to Sec.
9-4.2501(a) of this chapter for standards pertaining to building height in the
R-P-D zone.
   (2)   Yards.
   (i)   Front yards. Front yards shall have a minimum of a twenty (20’) foot
setback to all structures when adjacent to any public street, but this may be
reduced to fifteen (15’) feet except where adjacent to primary or secondary
highways and provided the structures are staggered by ten (10’) feet or more.
   (ii)   Side yards.
   (aa)    Apartment dwellings shall have side yards of fifteen (15’) feet or
more, and the sum of the yards to the nearest foot shall equal or exceed thirty
(30’) feet.
   (ab)    Single-family detached dwellings shall have a minimum side yard of
five (5’) feet for one-story walls, or portions thereof, and a minimum of ten
(10’) feet for two (2) story walls, except in the case of zero lot line
dwellings or other types of housing utilizing a wall constructed on the lot
line. Directly opposite side walls shall have a minimum separation of ten (10’)
feet for one-story walls and twenty (20’) feet for two-story walls. Single-
family detached dwellings built as zero lot line dwellings shall have a minimum
side yard as specified in Section
9-4.904(d)(2)(ii)(ad) of this section.
   (ac)    “Townhouse” or “rowhouse” dwellings shall provide a side yard as
required by the Uniform Building Code and by the residential planned
development permit conditions.
   (ad)    Zero lot line dwellings that have no side yard on one side of the
structure shall have a minimum side yard of ten (10’) feet on the opposite side
of the structure. In addition, if the zero lot line dwelling is greater than
one story in height, the second story shall be set back at least ten (10’) feet
from the property line upon which the structure directly abuts.
   (iii)    Rear yards.
   (aa)    Rear yards for multiple-family or townhouse dwellings shall be
specified as part of the residential planned development permit where deemed
necessary by the Commission.
   (ab)    Single-family detached dwellings shall have a minimum rear yard of
at least twenty (20’) feet for one and two (2) story structures, and there
shall be a minimum distance between directly opposite rear walls of at least
forty (40') feet.
   (iv)    Yards: General.
   (aa)    No part of any structure shall be constructed less than twenty
(20’') feet from any property line which is adjacent to a primary or secondary
highway. If such structure exceeds a height of twenty-five (25’) feet, it shall
be set back from the property line an additional five (5’) feet for each ten
(10’) feet in height, or portion thereof, by which such structure exceeds
twenty-five (25’) feet.
   (ab)    For single-family dwellings when walls facing different yards or
walls of different heights are directly opposite, there shall be a minimum
separation of the sum of one-half (1/2) the required distance that each wall
would require if it faced on an identical wall. The walls of structures facing
adjoining undeveloped land (including parks, greenbelts, channels, and the
like) shall have a minimum of fifty (50%) percent of the applicable separation
between opposite wall requirements unless adequate evidence is provided that
future construction will conform to these requirements.
   (ac)    For single-family detached and townhouse dwellings, no accessory
building or covered patio shall be erected closer than five (5’) feet to any
side or rear property line. Such structure shall, however, observe the standard
side yard requirements for corner lots (ten (10’) feet) on the street side. No
covered patio shall cover more than forty (40%) percent of any required rear
yard and no accessory building shall cover more than twenty-five (25%) percent
of any required rear yard.
   (e)   Lot size, usable open space, and recreational requirements.
   (1)   There shall be provided for each single-family detached dwelling on
each lot in a subdivision one thousand (1,000) square feet of usable open
space, as defined in this subsection, plus an additional two hundred (200)
square feet of usable open space for each sleeping room over two (2) in such
dwelling. However, if a dwelling is on a lot contiguous to permanent open space
available to and usable by adjacent owners or the public, the area of required
usable open space may be reduced by not more than twenty-five (25%) percent.
   “Usable open space,” for the purposes of this subsection, shall mean an open
area on each lot for each single-family detached dwelling which is designed and
intended to be used for outdoor living or recreation. An area of usable open
space shall not exceed a grade of ten (10%) percent, shall have a minimum
dimension of at least twenty (20’) feet, and shall be adequately screened from
the view of the general public; provided, however, up to twenty-five (25%)
percent of this requirement may be provided in a side yard with a minimum
dimension of not less than ten (10’) feet for a dwelling facing upon and
orienting to such side yard. “Usable open space” may include private deck areas
or balconies with direct access to the dwelling and a minimum dimension of six
(6’) feet and a minimum area of seventy (70) square feet. “Usable open space”
shall not include any portion of off-street parking spaces, driveways,
turnaround areas, rooftops, required front yards or required side yards on the
street side of a corner lot, covered patio pedestrian access ways between
buildings, or any accessory building except those portions of any accessory
building used for recreational purposes.
   (2)   There shall be an average of five thousand five hundred (5,500) square
feet of lot area of a detached single-family dwelling unit in a residential
planned development subdivision; provided, however, no lot area shall be less
than five thousand (5,000) square feet.
   (3)   Wherever common greenbelts are provided contiguous to or integrated
with lots containing detached single-family dwelling units in a residential
planned development subdivision, such lots may be reduced to a minimum of five
thousand (5,000) square feet without being computed within the average lot size
as set forth in subsection (2) of this subsection. However, such greenbelt
areas shall be:
   (i)   Less than ten (10%) percent grade;
   (ii)   A minimum of five hundred (500) square feet for each contiguous lot;
   (iii)    At least thirty (30’) feet wide; and
   (iv)   In addition to the usable open space requirements for such lot as set
forth in subsection (1) of this subsection.
   (4)   All townhouse ownership units with a density of seven (7) units per
net acre or less shall have a minimum private yard area of four hundred (400)
square feet with a minimum dimension of fifteen (15’) feet and with direct
access to the unit. Townhouse ownership units in excess of the density set
forth in this subsection shall have private yard areas as required by the
residential planned development permit.
   (5)   All apartment units shall have a minimum private patio or balcony area
of one hundred (100) square feet and a minimum dimension of seven (7’) feet and
with direct access to the unit.
   (6)   The provisions of Article 26 of this chapter relating to the
dedication of land, payment of fees, or both, for park and recreational
purposes shall be applicable to land for which R-P-D permits are required. Said
provisions shall serve to supplement the on-site recreational facilities as
required in each R-P-D permit. The applicant is also encouraged to provide on-
site recreational facilities consisting of, but not limited to, those park
elements as described in an adopted Council resolution for granting credit.
   (f)   Space allocation formula. The formula set forth in this subsection is
an evaluative tool to assist in determining the adequacy of space relationships
involving structural covering, paved areas, and the open space system based on
the density category of each project. The definition of the space allocation
components consists of:
   (1)   Structural coverage: all buildings, including carports and garages;
   (2)   Paved areas: driveways and parking areas; and
   (3)   Open space: all greenbelts, private yards, and open areas which are
not less than fifteen (15’) feet in dimension and are not located in the
setback area adjacent to frontage streets that are public rights-of-way.
   The following is a breakdown of the formula which should be used as a
guideline in composing and evaluating the plot plans for each project:
 
                    Structured Coverage Paved Areas Open Space All Other Areas
Low density (0 to
4.5 units per net   40%                 15%         40%        5%
acre)
Medium density (4.5
to 15 units per net 30%                 20%         45%        5%
acre)
High density (15 to
30 units per net    35%                 25%         35%        5%
acre)
 
   (g)   General standards.
   (1)   All new and existing utilities adjacent to or on the subject property
shall be placed underground unless otherwise waived through the approval of an
underground utility waiver application.
   (2)   All oak trees on the subject property shall be preserved in accordance
with Article 42 of this chapter. Such trees shall be integrated within the
landscaping plan, unless otherwise authorized for removal or relocation by an
oak tree permit.
   (3)   The expiration of permits and the time extensions therefor shall be as
set forth in Section
9-4.2811 of Article 28 of this chapter.
   (4)   For townhouse and apartment projects, adequate trash areas shall be
provided and enclosed by a six (6’) foot high decorative block or slumpstone
wall in locations approved by the Community Development Director. Adequate
solid gates and vehicular access to such areas shall be provided. This may be
waived where individual pick-up service to the units is provided.
   (5)   All surface-mounted mechanical equipment, including transformers,
terminal boxes, or meter cabinets, shall be screened by landscaping and/or
treated to match the materials and colors of the surrounding buildings.
   (6)   There shall be no open storage of materials or equipment within the
project area except as approved by each permit.
   (7)   The storage of recreational vehicles within this zone shall only be
permitted subject to the following provisions:
   (i)   Single-family residences. Recreational vehicles may be stored on a lot
occupied by a single- family detached home subject to the provisions of Section
9-4.2503(d). Recreational vehicles may also be stored within a common storage
facility, as provided herein.
   (ii)   Multiple-family residences. Recreational vehicles may only be stored
within an enclosed or covered parking space, or within a common storage
facility, as provided herein.
   (iii)   Common storage facilities. Recreational vehicles may be stored in a
separate common storage facility for a development within the Residential
Planned Development Zone. The storage facilities shall be enclosed with a six
(6') foot or higher decorative block wall with exterior landscaping, and the
location and size shall be subject to the approval of the Commission.
   (iv)   Relationship to prior entitlements. The regulations of this
subsection shall supersede conflicting conditions of any Residential Planned
Development permit granted prior to December 1, 2005, where the conditions may
prohibit the storage of recreational vehicles or restrict the storage to a
greater degree than provided by this section.
   (8)   The Commission may allow minor specified commercial uses, subject to
the approval of a special use permit (within an area covered by the residential
planned development permit) when the Commission finds that:
   (i)   The commercial uses are primarily designed for the use of residents
within the permit area; and
   (ii)   The proposed commercial uses are incidental to, and compatible with,
the nature and type of development proposed for the permit area.
   (9)   Approved landscaping shall be permanently maintained in accordance
with Section
1-6.01(e) of this Code. Any redesign or alteration of an existing project
landscaping shall be subject to approval of the Community Development
Department and shall be accomplished through the filing of a Landscape Plan
Check application, provided such alteration is consistent with all City codes,
polices, and project entitlement conditions.
   (h)   Building expansions and other improvements within existing townhouse,
multi-family condominium, and apartment projects.
   (1)   Proposed expansions and improvements limited to an individual
townhouse or multi-family condominium unit shall be reviewed and processed in
accordance with the provisions of Article 18 (Design Review: Requirements and
Procedure), including the filing of a Precise Plan of Design application where
required by that article. Applications for modifications that deviate from any
development standard shall require the filing and processing of a major
modification application.
   (2)   Proposed expansions and improvements that involve more than one
individual townhouse or multi-family condominium unit, or that involve the
common area of a townhouse or condominium project, or that involve improvements
or expansions at an apartment building or project shall be processed as a
modification to the underlying Residential Planned Development permit.
Applications for said modifications may be processed as minor modifications
where they comply with all the conditions and limitations set forth in this
chapter and the guidelines and standards adopted pursuant to Section
9-4.1806 of this chapter. In other cases, filing and processing of a major
modification application is required.
(§ I, Ord. 459-NS, eff. July 4, 1974, as amended by § 1, Ord. 629-NS, eff. May
12, 1977, and §§ I and II, Ord. 997-NS, eff. June 17, 1988, as amended by §§
14, 15 and 17, Ord. 1217-NS, eff. October 28, 1994, § 1, Ord. 1314-NS, eff.
March 5, 1998, and §§ 3, 4, Ord. 1414-NS, eff. October 2, 2003, as amended by
Part 2, Ord. 1449-NS, eff. December 2, 2005, § 3, Ord. 1481-NS, eff. July 12,
2007, §§ 3 - 4, Ord. 1493-NS, eff. December 6, 2007, § 4, Ord. 1534-NS, eff.
April 8, 2010, § 6, Ord. 1556- NS, eff. July 1, 2011, § 3, Ord. 1569-NS, eff.
March 9, 2012, Part 17, Ord. 1610-NS, eff. January 15, 2016; and Part 11, Ord.
1614-NS, eff. April 22, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.905. Residential planned development permits (R-P-D).
   (a)   The pre-application program provides an opportunity to establish a
working relationship between the City staff and prospective applicants prior to
filing a formal development request. A basic purpose for this procedure is to
provide the staff the opportunity to inform the applicant’s design team
regarding the City’s development policies, Code requirements, and other
pertinent information which may affect the proposal during the early inception
stages of a project. External relationships, including parks, schools, and
major streets, will also be discussed. The steps of the preapplication program
are as follows:
   (1)   The prospective applicant may request a work session involving the
City staff to discuss the project’s conceptual design elements and the property
owners’ development objectives prior to preparing specific project plans.
   (2)   A preapplication session shall be required prior to filing the request
in order to inform the prospective applicant regarding certain requirements
before substantial expense in preparing the detailed plans is incurred and to
avoid processing delays. Materials for the work session should include, but not
be limited to, the following:
   (i)   A conceptual site plan drawn to scale, including the location and
description of all the physical and natural elements within the project area.
The relationship to surrounding properties and public facilities shall also be
defined; and
   (ii)   The architectural theme and the project’s overall design
characteristics shall also be identified on conceptual elevation plans and
shall include specific exterior features.
   The substance of the project details shown on these conceptual site and
elevation plans will have a direct bearing on the amount of City staff input
and guidance. It is, therefore, encouraged that the prospective applicant
provide the staff with as much detailed information as possible.
   (b)   Applications for the approval of construction plans for four (4) or
fewer single-family detached dwellings within the R-P-D Zone may be processed
as an administrative approval. Applications for all other uses permitted in the
R-P-D Zone shall require an application to the Commission for a residential
planned development permit. Applications for administrative approvals and
residential planned development permits under this subsection shall be
submitted in the manner set forth in Article 28 of this chapter provided there
will not be more than an average of the number of dwelling units per net acre
as specified by the applicable R-P-D sub-zone.
   (c)   The applicant shall submit to the Commission complete development
plans showing the proposed uses for the property, including the dimensions and
locations of all proposed structures, parking spaces, streets, parks,
playgrounds, school sites, and open spaces, and such additional information as
may be requested by the Commission.
   (d)   The applicant shall submit a fiscal impact report for all residential
planned development permits, the contents of which are set forth in this
subsection. At the discretion of the Community Development Director, any of the
following reports required to be submitted pursuant to the provisions of this
section may be waived or the required content reduced if the reports would not
be necessary in view of existing adequate capacity and the close proximity of
urban services and facilities:
   (1)   Reports that describe the existing systems, community facilities, and
services, to include: the vehicular circulation system, the sewer and water
supply system; the flood control system; community facilities, i.e., schools,
parks and recreation, open space, etc., and community services; i.e., police
protection, fire protection, etc.
   The reports for such systems, community facilities, and services shall
state: the name of the responsible agency; the present capacity of the system;
the present amount of demand or use of the system; the programmed additions of
capacity; and the anticipated load resulting from the proposed development;
   (2)   Reports that describe the proposed systems, community facilities and
services to be constructed and/or operated by the applicant. The reports for
such systems, facilities, and services shall state: the name of the agency
which will assume responsibility; the proposed capacity of the system; and the
projected demand which is anticipated at the completion of the entire
development;
   (3)   Reports that describe the total number of dwelling units and the
percent of proposed dwelling units that are within each residential density
category. Such reports shall identify and describe the potential assessed value
as applied to the percentages of the proposed dwelling units that are within
each density category. From this the applicant will derive the projected
population of the proposed development by the proposed density categories and
will project the general socioeconomic characteristics of the proposed new
residents, i.e., the number of persons per dwelling unit, the number of school-
aged children per dwelling unit, the average income, etc.; and
   (4)   Reports that describe the cost/revenue relationship for the existing
and proposed public utilities, i.e., sewer and water, schools, community
facilities and services, special districts, and service areas.
   (e)   The applicant shall submit evidence showing that the proposed
development is designed to be consistent with the provisions of Section
9-4.901 of this article.
(§ 1, Ord. 459-NS, eff. July 4, 1974, as amended by § 1, Ord. 626-NS, eff.
April 21, 1977)
Sec. 9-4.906. Residential Planned Development Single-Family Detached sub-zone
(R-P-D-SFD).
   Only the uses identified in Article 21 of this chapter as being permitted in
the Residential Planned Development Single-Family Detached (R-P-D-SFD) sub-zone
shall be established or maintained on property located therein, subject to the
permitting requirements and limitations set forth in said Article 21. All other
provisions of this article shall apply in the R-P-D-SFD sub-zone.
(§ 1, Ord. 459-NS, eff. July 4, 1974, as amended by § 15, Ord. 1620-NS, eff.
August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.907. Density transfer considerations (R-P-D).
   The transfer of density within the confines of a residential planned
development permit area shall be subject to review by the Commission to
determine the appropriateness of transferring density from hillside terrain
over ten (10%) percent slope to more developable land. The Commission shall
find, before approving a residential planned development permit involving
density transfer, that such a transfer of density is substantially in
compliance with all the following criteria:
   (a)   That the proposed plot plan density is in compliance with the
provisions of the General Plan;
   (b)   That the design and improvement of the proposed project is in
compliance with the General Plan;
   (c)   That the site is physically suitable for the type of development;
   (d)   That the site is physically suitable to tolerate the proposed density
of the development; and
   (e)   That the design of the proposed project and the improvement will not
cause substantial environmental damage.
(§ 1, Ord. 459-NS, eff. July 4, 1974)
Sec. 9-4.908. Residential planned development permits: Lands designated  SP (R-
P-D).
   Applicants for permits for lands zoned RPD-SP shall follow and be subject to
an approved specific plan and, except as provided in this section as follows,
shall be subject to all the other provisions governing the R-P-D Zones:
   (a)   No R-P-D permit shall be issued upon any portion of land zoned R-P-
D with an "SP" designation until there has been submitted to the Commission a
specific plan of the entire area, showing the proposed densities and the open
space or park areas for all portions of such land, and the specific plan is
approved by the Council.
   (b)   Any application for an R-P-D permit deviating from the approved
specific plan shall require a new specific plan to be submitted and approved as
a condition precedent for the issuance of the R-P-D permit; provided, however,
the Community Development Director may approve up to a ten (10%) percent
transfer of areas of density as approved on the specific plan so long as no
other deviations are involved.
(§ I, Ord. 459-NS, eff. July 4, 1974, as amended by § 30, Ord. 1555-NS, eff.
May 13, 2011)
Sec. 9-4.909. Development allotment or reservation of allotment required (R-P-
D).
(§ 1, Ord. 757-NS, eff. September 4, 1980, as amended by Ord. 867-NS, eff.
September 4, 1984 and repealed by § 34, Ord. 1555-NS, eff. May 13, 2011)
Sec. 9-4.910. Food cooperatives (R-P-D).
(§ VII, Ord. 834-NS, eff. June 21, 1983; repealed by § 15, Ord. 1178-NS, eff.
April 27, 1993)
Sec. 9-4.911. Residential planned development: Single-family detached dwellings
within an R-P-D sub-zone with a density greater than 4.5 dwelling units per net
acre.
   (a)   The standards referred to in subsection (b) may be applied to R-P-
D Zones for construction of detached dwelling units on land zoned at a density
greater than R-P-D four and one-half (4.5) dwelling units per net acre in “in-
fill” areas, which are defined as being substantially surrounded by existing or
approved development, to: (1) provide for more efficient land utilization for
startup and retirement families, (2) substitute for single-family and
multifamily attached dwelling units, (3) improve housing product with smaller
lot sizes for variety within the City, (4) enhance streetscape variety within
the City, (5) provide housing with less exterior yard maintenance and
maintenance cost, (6) facilitate clustered development with greater expansion
of common open space areas, (7) avoid the cost and added regulations by a
homeowners association or condominium restrictions, and (8) simplify insurance
requirements for homeowners.
   (b)   Reduced building setbacks, reduced driveway lengths, reduced guest
parking, smaller lot sizes, reduced useable private open space, greater
building heights but limited to two stories and different configurations of
single-family detached dwelling units may be considered on property zoned for
single-family attached and multi-family projects with an R-P-D sub-zone or
Specific Plan designation with a density greater than four and one-half (4.5)
dwelling units per net acre in “in-fill” areas. The development standards for
such single-family detached projects shall be as established by the Planning
Commission, with findings of justification for any modification from current R-
P-D standards in conjunction with the approval of the R-P-D permit and the
permit will comply with the intent and purpose of the R-P-D Zone and this
section.
(§ 1, Ord. 1257-NS, eff. March 26, 1996)
Article 10. Multiple-Family Residential Zones (R-3)
Sec. 9-4.1001. Permitted uses (R-3).
   Only the uses identified in Article 21 of this chapter as being permitted in
the Multiple-Family Residential (R-3) Zone shall be established or maintained
on property located therein, subject to the limitations, general provisions,
and exceptions set forth in said Article 21.
(§ 8127, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 5, Ord. 86, §§ 11 and 12, Ord. 95, § III,
Ord. 203-NS, eff. April 22, 1971, § XIV, Ord. 220-NS, eff. August 19, 1971, §
VIII, Ord. 834-NS, eff. June 21, 1983, § 7, Ord. 1379-NS, eff. August 9, 2001,
§ 20, Ord. 1392-NS, eff. June 7, 2002, § 1, Ord. 1401-NS, eff. February 6,
2003, § 11, Ord. 1412-NS, eff. August 14, 2003; § 12, Ord. 1614-NS, eff. April
22, 2016, and § 16, Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.1002. Reserved.
(§ 8127.1, T.O.O.C.; as amended by § 7, Ord. 1614-NS, eff. April 22, 2016, and
repealed by § 17, Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.1003. Reserved.
(§ 8127.2 T.O.O.C., as amended by § II, Ord. 163-NS, eff. August 27, 1970, §
XV, Ord. 220-NS, eff. August 19, 1971, § VII, Ord. 321-NS, eff. November 2,
1972, § IV, Ord. 779-NS, eff. June 11, 1981, § VII, Ord. 815-NS, eff. September
7, 1982, § 7, Ord. 858-NS, eff. April 24, 1984, Ord. 1102-NS, eff. May 16,
1991, § 16, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, § 10, Ord. 1189-NS, eff.
November 2, 1993, § 8, Ord. 1273-NS, eff. January 8, 1997, § 7, Ord. 1306-NS,
eff. November 20, 1997, § 9, Ord. 1555-NS, eff. May 13, 2011, and repealed by §
17, Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.1004. Residential planned development permits (R-3).
   In order to provide a method whereby land in the R-3 Zone may be designed
and developed as a unit for residential uses by taking advantage of modern site
planning techniques, and in order to produce an environment of stable,
desirable character which will be in harmony with the existing or potential
development of the surrounding neighborhood, and in order to produce
development which meet standards of open space, light, air, pedestrian and
vehicular circulation, and maximum density of dwelling units, the Commission
may grant a residential planned development permit for land in the R-3 Zone
which the Commission finds meets the requirements of this section. The
residential planned development permit may modify the requirements of Articles
22 and 24 of this chapter, which would otherwise be applicable to land in R-
3 Zones, in the manner and to the extent set forth in this section. The
Commission may impose such additional conditions and requirements upon a
residential planned development permit as the Commission finds are reasonable
and necessary to carry out the purposes and requirements of this section.
   (a)   The applicant may submit to the Commission an application for a
residential planned development permit pursuant to the provisions of this
section in the manner set forth in Article 27 of this chapter.
   (b)   The applicant shall submit to the Commission complete development
plans showing the proposed uses for the property, including dimensions and
locations of all proposed structures, parking spaces, streets, parks,
playgrounds, school sites, and open spaces, and such additional information as
may be requested by the Commission or may be pertinent to a determination that
contemplated uses shall be allowed pursuant to the provisions of this section
rather than the provisions otherwise applicable to R-3 property.
   (c)   The applicant shall submit evidence showing that the proposed
development is designed to produce an environment of stable and desirable
character and that areas of open space and parking and recreational facilities
are consistent with the anticipated population of the development.
   (d)   The Commission may allow, within an area covered by the permit
referred to in this section, minor specified commercial uses when the
Commission finds:
   (1)   The commercial uses are designed for the sole use of residents within
the permit area; and
   (2)   The proposed commercial uses are incidental to, and compatible with,
the nature and type of development proposed for the permit area and shall be
confined within the units of the development.
   (e)   Each residential planned development permit shall contain the
following conditions and such other conditions deemed by the Commission to be
reasonably necessary to accomplish the purposes of this section:
   (1)   The land shall be developed with a maximum average density of not more
than thirty (30) units per acre of land covered by the permit.
   (2)   The applicant shall submit a construction sequence for the land
covered by the permit showing the order in which particular structures will be
constructed, and, upon approval of the sequence, the applicant shall not
deviate from such sequence without written approval by the Community
Development Director. At no time shall there be more than an average of thirty
(30) units per acre constructed, or under construction, on the portion of the
land covered by the permit, which land has been developed or is under
development.
   (3)   Unless otherwise authorized by the Commission, no part of any
structure shall be constructed less than twenty (20’) feet from any property
line which is adjacent to a perimeter street. If part of any structure exceeds
a height of twenty-five (25’) feet, such part shall be set back from the
property line an additional five (5’) feet for each ten (10’) feet in height,
or portion thereof, by which such part of any structure exceeds twenty-five
(25’) feet.
   (4)   Parking shall be provided in accordance with Article 24 of this
chapter.
   (5)   Landscape trees shall be selected and planted in such a manner as to
minimize root damage to parking lot hardscape. All trees planted shall be from
the planting pallets contained within the Forestry Master Plan unless another
species is approved by the Community Development Director. Trees known to have
shallow or evasive roots shall not be planted within parking lot areas. Tree
species should be chosen to maximize canopy coverage of parking lot areas.
Trees shall be provided with a minimum four (4’) foot by six (6’) foot planting
hole (six (6’) feet by six (6’) feet preferred) or the largest planting area
possible within any landscape design. In addition, deep root watering methods
shall be designed and incorporated to supply water for parking lot trees and
root guards shall be placed behind any curb in the vicinity of the planted tree
(s).
   (6)   No approved landscaping shall be removed or pruned of live tissue in
any parking lot area without the written authorization of the Community
Development Department upon the submittal of a tree pruning proposal by a
certified arborist or landscape architect. Topping of trees or pruning to
reduce canopy coverage within parking lots is prohibited.
   (7)   Plant material of a drought-tolerant nature shall be used to the
greatest extent possible in any parking area landscape design and planting.
   (8)   Approved landscaping shall be permanently maintained in accordance
with Section
1-6.01(e) of this Code. Any redesign or alteration of an existing project
landscaping shall be subject to approval of the Community Development
Department and shall be accomplished through the filing of a Landscape Plan
Check application, provided such alteration is consistent with all City codes,
policies, and project entitlement conditions.
   (f)   The provisions of Articles 24 and 25 of this chapter shall not be
applicable to land for which a residential planned development permit has been
granted so long as such land is developed and maintained in accordance with the
provisions of this section and all the conditions of the permit.
   (g)   The provisions of Article 26 of this chapter relating to the
dedication of land, payment of fees, or both for park and recreational purposes
shall be applicable to land for which R-P-D permits are required.
   (h)   Refer to Section
9-4.904(h) of this article for regulations regarding building modifications and
expansions within existing multi-family apartment projects.
(§ 8127.3, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 6, Ord. 86, and § V, Ord. 376-NS, eff. May
31, 1973, §§ 16 and 18, Ord. 1217-NS, eff. September 27, 1994, § 2, Ord. 1314-
NS, eff. March 5, 1998, and § 2, Ord. 1368-NS, eff. November 23, 2000, § 5,
Ord. 1493-NS, eff. December 6, 2007)
Sec. 9-4.1005. Food cooperatives (R-3).
(§ VIII, Ord. 834-NS, eff. June 21, 1983; repealed by § 16, Ord. 1178-NS, eff.
April 27, 1993)
Article 10.5. Mixed-Use (MU) and Mixed-Use Overlay (MUOZ) Zones
Sec. 9-4.1050 Purpose (MU/MUOZ).
   The MU or Mixed-Use Zone and the MUOZ or Mixed-Use Overlay Zone are intended
to provide a method by which land located in the zone may be designed and
developed for both commercial and residential uses compatible and harmonious
with the existing or potential development of adjacent areas. This zone will be
implemented on all parcels designated as Mixed-Use per the zoning map. For
areas where there is an existing specific plan, the Mixed-Use Zone is applied
as a Mixed-Use Overlay Zone (MUOZ). The Mixed-Use Overlay Zone standards
supersede the specific plan standards. The specific plan standards still apply
except where specifically modified by the Mixed-Use Overlay Zone.
(§ 3, Ord. 1726-NS, eff. April 26, 2024)
Sec. 9-4.1051 Permitted uses (MU/MUOZ).
   Only the uses identified in Article 21 of this chapter as being permitted in
the Mixed-Use Zone (MU) and Mixed-Use Overlay Zone (MUOZ) shall be established
or maintained on property located therein, subject to the limitations, general
provisions, and exceptions set forth in said Article 21.
(§ 3, Ord. 1726-NS, eff. April 26, 2024)
Sec. 9-4.1052 Development standards (MU/MUOZ).
   Unless otherwise specifically waived or modified by the Planning Commission,
the following development standards are established as the minimum deemed
necessary to ensure the public health, safety, and welfare within the MU Zone
and MUOZ Zone and to accomplish the intent and purpose of this article:
Development standard MU/MUOZ
Development standard                                       MU/MUOZ
Residential density – minimum                            20 du/ac
Residential density – maximum                            30 du/ac
Residential floor area – minimum                         50% in mixed-use projects
Residential floor area – maximum                         100%
Non-residential FAR – maximum                            1.0
Building coverage – maximum                              80%
Height – minimum                                         20 feet
                                                           50 feet
                                                           Within 50 feet of residential zone or exclusively residential
Height – maximum1                                        use:
                                                              30 feet from property line - 25 feet maximum
                                                              30 feet to 50 feet from property line - 45 feet maximum
                                                              Over 50 feet from property line - 50 feet maximum
Front setback – minimum2                                 15 feet
Front setback – maximum3                                 30 feet
Side setback – minimum                                   20 feet from a residential zone
Rear setback – minimum                                   20 feet from a residential zone
Third floor setback – minimum                            10 foot average from first floor street building facade
Building separation – minimum                            20 feet
Minimum ground floor windows (% ground floor facade)       65% for Commercial or Mixed-Use
                                                           45% for ground floor residential
Minimum average depth of retail – minimum                60 feet
Sidewalk width – minimum                                 15 feet from the curb
Ground floor plate height – minimum                      14 feet
Residential in Mixed-Use Development – minimum4          50%
Display window height – minimum                          4.0 feet
Height from adjacent grade to bottom of display window – 3.5 feet
maximum
Vehicular access – maximum                               1 access point for lots < 100 feet wide;
                                                           2 access point for lots > 100 feet wide
Parking location                                           Side and rear yards only
Public exterior space – minimum                          3% of area of building footprint
(Commercial and Mixed-Use projects)
Parking and driveway landscaping – minimum (%)           10%
Parking requirements – minimum
   Retail                                               1/300 sf
   Residential:                                          
      Studio                                         1.0 spaces/unit
      1 bedroom                                      1.0 spaces/unit
      2 bedroom                                      1.5 spaces/unit
      3+ bedroom                                     2.0 Spaces/unit
      Guest parking                                  0.5 Spaces/unit
   Restaurant                                           1/200 for the first 2,000 square feet gross leasable area
                                                           1/100 for greater than 2,000 square feet gross leasable area
   Medical                                              1/250 square feet
   Outdoor dining area                                  0 spaces for the first 500 square feet
                                                           1/100 for greater than 500 square feet
   Gyms, health clubs                                   1/300 square feet
   Exercise, dance, aerobics studios                    1/75 square feet assembly
                                                           1/300 square feet other
   On-street parking along site frontage                100% credit toward off-street requirement for non-residential
                                                           and residential guest parking
                                                           50% of spaces maximum to be shared within a 700 foot walking
   Shared parking                                       distance from the entrance(s) to the use(s) entrances that
                                                           are subject to a shared parking agreement
                                                           1Listed height standards apply except where the previous
                                                           allowed height for that lot exceeds the standards of the
                                                           Mixed-Use Zone. This includes sites in the Height Limit
                                                           Overlay Zone (H) or the former C-4 Zone noted in Sec. 9-
                                                           4.307.
                                                           2Setbacks to be measured from the back of the curb.
Footnote                                                   3The maximum setback shall be 30 feet from the back of the
                                                           curb, except that up to 40% of the lot frontage may be
                                                           occupied by public courtyards, plazas, recessed entries, or
                                                           driveways.
                                                           4Mixed-Use developments in the Village Centers shall retain
                                                           at least 50% of existing commercial square footage pursuant
                                                           to GP Policy 20.1.
                                                            
 
(§ 3, Ord. 1726-NS, eff. April 26, 2024)
Article 11. Commercial Office Zones (C-O)
Sec. 9-4.1101. Purpose (C-O).
   To provide a method by which land located in or adjacent to residential
areas may be designed and developed as a unit for professional and limited
commercial offices, and to produce a professional and limited commercial office
development which will be compatible and harmonious with the existing or
potential development of adjacent residential or other areas, and to foster
professional and limited commercial office developments which meet high
standards of open space, the concentration of buildings, parking facilities,
landscaping, and pedestrian and vehicular circulation, Commercial Office Zones
(C-O) are established to provide suitable alternative locations for offices and
services of a professional, clerical, or administrative nature.
(§ 8138, T.O.O.C., as added by § 1, Ord. 85)
Sec. 9-4.1102. Permitted uses (C-O).
   Only the uses identified in Article 21 of this chapter as being permitted in
the Commercial Office (C-O) Zone shall be established or maintained on property
located therein, subject to the permitting requirements and limitations set
forth in said Article 21.
(§ 8138.2, T.O.O.C., as added by § 1, Ord. 85, as amended by § 1, Ord. 662-NS,
eff. January 12, 1978, § 1, Ord. 1025-NS, eff. May 16, 1989, § 17, Ord. 1178-
NS, eff. April 27, 1993, § 2, Ord. 1292-NS, eff. August 28, 1997, and § 18,
Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.1103. Reserved.
(§ 8138.4, T.O.O.C., as added by § 1, Ord. 85, as amended by § III, Ord. 163-
NS, eff. August 27, 1970, § XVI, Ord. 220-NS, eff. August 19, 1971, § VIII,
Ord. 312-NS, eff. November 2, 1972, § II, Ord. 662-NS, eff. January 12, 1978, §
II, Ord. 833-NS, eff. May 21, 1983 § 18, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, §
9, Ord. 1273-NS, eff. January 8, 1997, § 21, Ord. 1392-NS, eff. June 7, 2002, §
25, Ord. 1547- NS, eff. January 12, 2011, § 10, Ord. 1555-NS, eff. May 13,
2011; § 15, Ord. 1614-NS, eff. April 22, 2016, and repealed by § 19, Ord. 1620-
NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.1104. Planned development permits (C-O).
(§ 8138.1, T.O.O.C., as added by § 1, Ord. 85, as amended by §§ 2, 3, and 4,
Ord. 142-NS, eff. March 26, 1970, and § VI, Ord. 162-NS, eff. August 27, 1970;
repealed by § 19, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993)
Sec. 9-4.1105. Signs (C-O).
   Subject to the requirements and conditions of the planned development
permit, business signs advertising only the business conducted or the services
provided on the premises shall be the only signs permitted in the C-O Zones.
Such signs shall be attached to the building and shall not project more than
twelve (12") inches therefrom. The total sign area permitted on the front of
the building shall be limited to one square foot of area for each foot of the
width of the front of the building. Such signs may be permitted on each side of
the building which faces a public street. No such sign shall extend above the
height of the building to which it is attached. Such signs may be illuminated
or consist of nonintermittent or nonflashing neon lighting.
   The Community Development Director may permit one single-faced sign on any
portion of a parcel of record to advertise the sale or lease in total of the
subject property, identify a construction project, or announce a building
project. Such sign shall not total more than fifty (50) square feet in sign
area on a parcel of record less than five (5) acres in size, or one hundred
(100) square feet in sign area on a parcel of record of five (5) acres or more
in size. No portion of any sign permitted pursuant to the provisions of this
section shall have a height of more than fifteen (15') feet or have a dimension
of the panel face which exceeds fifteen (15') feet. Such sign shall be removed
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 8138.3, T.O.O.C., as added by § 1, Ord. 85, as amended by § 1, Ord. 222)
Sec. 9-4.1106. Height regulations (C-O).
   The Community Development Director shall not permit any building or
structure, or part thereof, in C-O Zones to exceed a height of two (2) stories
not to exceed twenty-five (25’) feet. A building or structure exceeding such
height may be approved by the Commission if it finds the purposes of this
article have been met.
(§8138.5, T.O.O.C., as added by § 1, Ord. 85)
Sec. 9-4.1107. Area regulations (C-O).
   The following area regulations shall apply to any use permitted in C-
O Zones:
   (a)   Each building shall have a landscaped front and corner side yard of
not less than twenty (20’) feet, exclusive of vehicular parking, turnaround
areas, and drives other than drives providing access from a street to a parking
area located on other portions of the parcel.
   (b)   A side yard shall not be less than five (5’) feet in width. Where the
lot adjoins a residential zone, there shall be a side yard having a width equal
to the maximum required in the adjoining residential zone but in no case
greater than thirty (30’) feet. A side yard viewable from a public street or
walk shall be screened or landscaped.
   (c)   A rear yard of not less than twenty (20’) feet shall be provided for
each building erected or extended and shall be screened or landscaped, if
viewable from a public street or walk.
   (d)   Interior yards between buildings shall have a width equal to the
greater height of the two (2) buildings, but such yards need not exceed forty
(40’) feet.
   (e)   Buildings, including accessory buildings, shall not cover more than
fifty (50%) percent of the planned development permit area. If covered parking
is provided in or under the principal building, or if uncovered but on the roof
of the principal building and not viewable from the public street and walk, the
building coverage may be increased by one hundred eighty (180) square feet for
every covered or rooftop parking space, and the minimum landscaping shall be
increased by one percent for every five (5) covered or rooftop parking spaces
provided. In any event, not more than ninety (90%) percent of the permit area
shall be used for buildings, structures, parking, and vehicular circulation,
and not less than ten (10%) percent of the planned development permit area
shall be devoted to landscaping.
   (f)   A separate lot shall not be required for each separate building or
structure planned and erected in a C-O Zone.
   (g)   Every lot created on or after September 5, 1969, shall have a minimum
street frontage of one hundred (100’) feet and a minimum lot area of twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet; provided, however any lot having frontage on a
limited or controlled access highway shall have a minimum street frontage of
six hundred (600’) feet unless;
   (1)   All access rights to such limited or controlled access highway have
been dedicated to and accepted by, the City subject to such driveways or common
driveways as permitted in such acceptance of access rights dedication; or
   (2)   A special use permit for an automobile service station, including
access thereto, has been approved by the City.
   (h)   Every lot created on or after September 5, 1969, shall have a depth at
least equal to the required street frontage of such lot (except the required
frontage along limited or controlled access highways) and a depth not more than
three (3) times the amount of the actual street frontage of such lot.
(§ 8138.6, T.O.O.C., as added by § 1, Ord. 85, as amended by § 5, Ord. 105-NS,
eff. September 5, 1969)
Sec. 9-4.1108. Off-street parking (C-O).
   Off-street parking in C-O Zones shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of Article 24 of this chapter.
(§ 3138.7, T.O.O.C., as added by § 1, Ord. 85)
Sec. 9-4.1109. Landscaping, lighting, and storage (C-O).
   The following general provisions shall apply in C-O Zones:
   (a)   Landscaping.
   (1)   Three (3%) percent or more of the parking area shall be landscaped,
and such landscaping shall be considered as part of the required ten (10%)
percent. In complying with the three (3%) percent landscaping requirement, the
planting beds shall be distributed through the parking area as evenly as
possible. For example, a plot plan showing the entire three (3%) percent
landscaping in one large planting bed concentrated on only one portion of the
parking area shall not be permitted.
   (2)   Whenever the parking or circulation area abuts a public street along
the property lines adjacent to the streets, except within the approved exit and
entrance ways, the Community Development Director shall require a planting
strip not less than one and one-half (1-1/2’) feet wide but may not require
more than four and one-half (4-1/2’) feet side. The planting shall be
maintained at a minimum height of two and one-half (2-1/2’) feet. Where sign
distance may be impaired, the Community Development Director may permit a
lesser height requirement. Appropriate wheel blocks, posts, or curbs, shall be
installed along the parking area adjacent to the planting strip.
   (3)   Wherever the property abuts an R Zone, there shall be erected along
the property line abutting the R Zone a solid or decorative fence or wall six
(6’) feet in height which substantially bars the view and light, or there shall
be planted and maintained an evergreen hedge at a height of six (6’) feet. Such
improvements shall not exceed two and one-half (2-1/2’) feet in height for a
distance of twenty (20’) feet from the public right-of-way.
   (4)   Trees, approved as to number, placement, spacing, and type by the
Landscape Supervisor, shall be planted in the parkway area between the curbs
and sidewalks.
   (5)   The required landscaping area shall be provided with permanent
irrigation systems and may contain pools and pedestrian walks.
   (b)   Lighting. Lighting may not illuminate or glare onto any adjacent
property or street so as to be objectionable to adjacent residents or hazardous
to motorists. Alternating lights shall be strictly prohibited.
   (c)   Storage of materials and equipment. Storage of materials and equipment
may be permitted only when enclosed and when incidental to the use of an office
or other building located on the front portion of the same lot. Any such
storage plan shall be approved and shown on the plot plan.
   (d)   Temporary storage of trash. Temporary storage of trash shall be
enclosed and not viewable from a public street or walk.
(§ 8138.8, T.O.O.C., as added by § 1, Ord. 85)
Article 12. Neighborhood Shopping Center Zones (C-1)*
*   The title of Article 12, formerly entitled “Neighborhood Commercial Zones,”
amended by Section I, Ordinance No. 173-NS, effective November 5, 1970.
Sec. 9-4.1200. Purpose (C-1).
   The C-1 or Neighborhood Shopping Center Zone is intended for planned
neighborhood shopping centers where the land and compatible retail stores and
associated facilities are designed and developed together as an integrated unit
using modern site planning techniques. The primary tenant will usually be a
supermarket or drugstore, and the center will serve only the convenience needs,
such as food, drugs, hardware, and personal services, of a residential area.
Such centers are required to fit into the residential pattern of development
and not create either architectural or traffic conflicts.
(§ II, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970)
Sec. 9-4.1201. Permitted uses (C-1).
   Only the uses identified in Article 21 of this chapter as being permitted in
the Neighborhood Shopping Center (C-1) Zone shall be established or maintained
on property located therein, subject to the permitting requirements and
limitations set forth in said Article 21.
(§ 8128, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 1, Ord. 55, § 7, Ord. 86, § 13, Ord. 95, §
3, Ord. 126, § 1, Ord. 211, § III, Ord. 173-NS, eff. August 19, 1971, § I, Ord.
563-NS, eff. March 18, 1976, § II, Ord. 661-NS, eff. January 12, 1978, § 2,
Ord. 980-NS, eff. November 3, 1987, § 2, Ord. 1025-NS, eff. May 16, 1989, § 1,
Ord. 1113-NS, eff. August 8, 1991, § 20, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, §
6, Ord. 1187-NS, eff. October 5, 1993, § 3, Ord. 1292-NS, eff. August 28, 1997,
§ 1, Ord. 1304-NS, eff. October 23, 1997, § 1, Ord. 1323-NS, eff. June 25,
1998, § 8, Ord. 1379-NS, eff. August 9, 2001, § 22, Ord. 1392-NS, eff. June 7,
2002, § 2, Ord. 1485-NS, eff. October 11, 2007, and § 20, Ord. 1620-NS, eff.
August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.1202. Reserved.
(§ 8128.1, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 2, Ord. 55, § 8, Ord. 86, § 1, Ord. 119, §
3, Ord. 126, § IV, Ord. 163-NS, eff. August 27, 1970, § IV, Ord. 173-NS, eff.
November 5, 1970, § XVIII, Ord. 220-NS, eff. August 19, 1971, § IX, Ord. 312-
NS, eff. November 2, 1972, § I, Ord. 557-NS, eff. February 19, 1976, § II, Ord.
563-NS, eff. March 18, 1976, § III, Ord. 661-NS, eff. January 12, 1978, § I,
Ord. 871-NS, eff. October 2, 1984, § 7, Ord. 1187-NS, eff. October 5, 1993, §
10, Ord. 1273-NS, eff. January 8, 1997, § 1, Ord. 1393-NS, eff. June 7, 2002, §
11, Ord. 1555-NS, eff. May 13, 2011, and repealed by § 21, Ord. 1620-NS, eff.
August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.1203. Development permits: Conditions and limitations (C-1).
   Unless otherwise stated in the development permit, such permit shall be
subject to all the following conditions and limitations;
   (a)   The open storage of materials and equipment shall be permitted only
when incidental to the permitted use of an office, store, or other building
located on the front portion of the same lot provided, however, such storage
area shall be approved an shown on the plot plan.
   (b)   Buildings and other structures shall not occupy more than twenty-five
(25%) percent of the area for which the development permit is issued. The
remaining area shall be used for automobile parking and circulation and shall
be completely improved, surfaced, and marked for such purpose.
   (c)   Whenever the parking and circulation area abuts property in an R Zone,
there shall be erected along the property line abutting the R Zone a solid
fence or wall six (6’) feet in height, or an evergreen hedge shall be planted
and maintained at a height of six (6’) feet.
   (d)   No structure shall be located less than one hundred (100’) feet from
the center line of any public road, street, or highway or less than within ten
(10’) feet of any boundary line of abutting R property except when the
structure height exceeds twenty-five (25’) feet, it shall be located not less
than twenty (20’) feet from any such boundary line.
   (e)   Structure heights within the C-1 Zone shall be as set forth in Section
9-4.2501 of Article 25 of this chapter.
   (f)   Ingress and egress roads leading onto a limited access highway shall
be located at intervals not less than six hundred (600’) feet apart. Ingress
and egress roads leading onto any other public road, street, or highway shall
be located at intervals not less than three hundred (300’) feet apart, except
when such road, street, or highway is designed as a service road for any
adjacent commercial area, the ingress and egress roads shall be located at
intervals not less than one hundred (100’) feet apart.
   (g)   Frontage or interior service roads shall be provided to serve such C-
1 area.
   (h)   Whenever the parking or circulation area abuts a public street and the
property across such street is zoned for residential uses, there shall be
provided along the C-1 area property lines adjacent to the street except within
the approved exit and entrance ways a planting strip one and one-half (1-1/2’)
feet wide within which plantings shall be maintained at a minimum height of two
and one-half (2-1/2’) feet; provided, however, where sight distance may be
impaired, the Community Development Director may permit a lesser height
requirement. Appropriate wheel blocks shall be installed along the parking area
sides of the planting strip.
   (i)   Trees, approved as to number and type by the Landscape Supervisor,
shall be planted in the parkway area between the curbs and sidewalks.
   (j)   Every lot created on or after September 5, 1969, shall have a minimum
street frontage of one hundred (100’) feet and a minimum lot area of twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet; provided, however, any lot having frontage on a
limited or controlled access highway shall have a minimum street frontage of
six hundred (600’) feet unless:
   (1)   All access rights to such limited or controlled access highway have
been dedicated to, and accepted by, the City subject to such driveways or
common driveways as permitted in such acceptance of access rights dedication;
or
   (2)   A special use permit for an automobile service station, including
access thereto has been approved by the City.
   (k)   Every lot created on or after September 5, 1969, shall have a depth at
least equal to the required street frontage of such lot (except the required
frontage along limited or controlled access highways) and a depth not more than
three (3) times the amount of the actual street frontage of such lot.
   (l)   Each neighborhood commercial shopping center site shall consist of a
minimum of four (4) acres and up to a maximum of ten (10) acres. After a
development permit for the center has been approved by the City, individual
lots may be created so long as they comply with the provisions of subsections
(j) or (k) of this section.
   (m)    The applicant shall submit a construction sequence for the land
covered by the permit showing the order in which particular structures and
facilities will be constructed, and, upon approval of the sequence, the
applicant shall not deviate from such sequence without written approval by the
Community Development Director.
(§ 8128.2, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 3, Ord. 126, § 1, Ord. 105-NS, eff.
September 5, § IV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, and § VI, Ord. 495-NS,
eff. October 10, 1974)
Sec. 9-4.1204. Development permits: Issuance (C-1).
(§ 8128.8, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 3, Ord. 126 § 5, Ord. 142-NS, eff. March
26, 1970, and § VII, Ord. 162-NS, eff. August 27, 1970; repealed by § 21, Ord.
1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993)
Sec. 9-4.1205. Reserved.
(§ 3, Ord. 887-NS, eff. April 9, 1985, and repealed by § 21, Ord. 1620-NS, eff.
August 12, 2016)
Article 13. Highway and Arterial Business Zones (C-2)*
*   The title of Article 13, formerly entitled “General Commercial Zones,”
amended by Section V, Ordinance No. 173-NS, effective November 5, 1970.
Sec. 9-4.1300. Purpose (C-2).
   The C-2 or Highway and Arterial Business Zone is intended for establishments
offering accommodations, supplies, or services, especially to motorists, and
for specialized automotive and related sales and service establishments which
serve persons coming to them from large trading areas. Such uses ordinarily do
not seek sites in shopping centers and therefore must be provided at
independent locations. The Highway and Arterial Business Zone, when
appropriate, will be located along major thoroughfares.
(§ VI, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970)
Sec. 9-4.1301. Permitted uses (C-2).
   Only the uses identified in Article 21 of this chapter as being permitted in
the Highway and Arterial Commercial (C-2) Zone shall be established or
maintained on property located therein, subject to the permitting requirements
and limitations set forth in said Article 21.
(§ 8129, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 3, Ord. 55, § 9, Ord. 86, § 14, Ord. 95, §
4, Ord. 126, § 2, Ord. 211, § XIX, Ord. 220-NS, eff. August 19, 1971, § IV,
Ord. 661-NS, eff. January 12, 1978, § I, Ord. 833-NS, eff. May 24, 1983, § 3,
Ord. 980-NS, eff. November 3, 1987, § 3, Ord. 1025-NS, eff. May 16, 1989, § 22,
Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, §§ 8, 9, Ord. 1187-NS, eff. October 5, 1993,
§ 4, Ord. 1292-NS, eff. August 28, 1997, § 2, Ord. 1304-NS, eff. October 23,
1997, § 2, Ord. 1323-NS, eff. June 25, 1998, § 9, Ord. 1379-NS, eff. August 9,
2001, § 23, Ord. 1392-NS, eff. June 7, 2002, § 3, Ord. 1485- NS, eff. October
11, 2007, and § 22, Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.1302. Reserved.
(§ 8129.1, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 4, Ord. 55, § 10, Ord. 86, § 2, Ord. 119,
§ V, Ord. 163-NS, eff. August 27, 1970, § XX, Ord. 220-NS, eff. August 19,
1971, § X, Ord. 312-NS, eff. November 2, 1972, § II, Ord. 557-NS, eff. February
19, 1976, § I, Ord. 754-NS, eff. July 24, 1980, § II, Ord. 772-NS, eff. March
5, 1981, § 10, Ord. 1187-NS, eff. October 5, 1993, § 11, Ord. 1273-NS, eff.
January 8, 1997, § 26, Ord. 1547-NS, eff. January 12, 2011, § 12, Ord. 1555-NS,
eff. May 13, 2011, § 3, Ord. 1563-NS, eff. October 14, 2011, and repealed by §
23, Ord. 1620- NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.1303. Development permits: Conditions and limitations (C-2).
   Unless otherwise stated in the development permit, such permit shall be
subject to all the following conditions and limitations:
   (a)   All public entrances to stores, shops, and business shall be from the
principal street upon which the property abuts or within one hundred (100’)
feet thereof, except that a side or rear entrance may be provided from the
building to a public parking area.
   (b)   All exterior walls of every building, which walls face a street or
face property classified in any R Zone, shall be designed, treated, and
finished uniformly with, and similar to, other exterior surfaces of such
buildings they face.
   (c)   Every lot created on or after September 5, 1969, shall have a minimum
street frontage of seventy (70’) feet.
   (d)   Every lot created on or after September 5, 1969, shall have a depth of
at least equal to the required frontage of such lot and a depth not more than
three (3) times the actual amount of the street frontage of such lot.
   (e)   Structural heights within the C-2 Zone shall be as set forth in
Section
9-4.2501 of Article 25 of this chapter.
   (f)   Every lot shall have a front yard of not less than twenty (20') feet,
except for the C2/AM zone, where the front yard shall be not less than fourteen
(14') feet, which area shall not be used for parking and shall be landscaped.
The regulations of this subsection for the C2/AM zone shall supersede
conflicting conditions of any entitlement granted prior to the effective date
of the ordinance adopting this sub-section, where said conditions require a
greater setback than provided by this section.
(§ 8129.2, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 2, Ord. 105-NS, eff. September 5, 1969, §
VII, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, § I, Ord. 236-NS, eff. November 4,
1971, § VII, Ord. 495-NS, eff. October 10, 1974, § III, Ord. 636-NS, eff. July
14, 1977 and § 2, Ord. 1551-NS, eff. February 10, 2011)
Sec. 9-4.1304. Development permits: Issuance (C-2).
(§ 8129.3, T.O.O.C., as added by § 5, Ord. 126, as amended by § 6, Ord. 142-NS,
eff. March 26, 1970, and § VIII, Ord. 162-NS, eff. August 27, 1970; repealed by
§ 23, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 22, 1993)
Sec. 9-4.1305. Reserved.
(§ 4, Ord. 887-NS, eff. April 9, 1985, and repealed by § 23, Ord. 1620-NS, eff.
August 12, 2016)
Article 14. Community Shopping Center Zones (C-3)*
*   The title of Article 14, formerly entitled “Community or Regional
Commercial Zones,” amended by Section VIII, Ordinance No. 173-NS, effective
November 5, 1970.
Sec. 9-4.1400. Purpose (C-3).
   The C-3 or Community Shopping Center Zone is intended for planned shopping
centers which serve several neighborhoods and where the land and compatible
retail stores and associated facilities are designed and developed together as
an integrated unit using modern site planning techniques. The primary tenant
will usually be a junior department or variety store, and the center will
provide not only convenience goods, such as food, drugs, and personal services,
but also shopping goods, such as apparel and furniture, as well as professional
services and recreation. Shopping centers of this size will be designed and
located so as to minimize traffic congestion on public highways and streets in
the vicinity and to best fit the general land use pattern of the area to be
served.
(§ X, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970)
Sec. 9-4.1401. Permitted uses (C-3).
   Only the uses identified in Article 21 of this chapter as being permitted in
the Community Shopping Center (C-3) Zone shall be established or maintained on
property located therein, subject to the permitting requirements and
limitations set forth in said Article 21.
(§ 8130.1, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 1, Ord. 72, § 6, Ord. 126, § 3, Ord. 211,
§ 2, Ord. 135-NS, eff. January 27, 1970, § IX, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5,
1970, § XXI, Ord. 220-NS, eff. August 19, 1971, § 3, Ord. 1304-NS, eff. October
23, 1997, § 10, Ord. 1379-NS, eff. August 9, 2001, and § 24, Ord. 1620-NS, eff.
August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.1402. Reserved.
(§ 8130.3, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 6, Ord. 55, § 12, Ord. 86, § 3, Ord. 119,
§ 6, Ord. 126, § 3, Ord. 135-NS, eff. January 27, 1970, § VI, Ord. 163-NS, eff.
August 27, 1970, § XI, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, § XXII, Ord. 220-NS,
eff. August 19, 1971, § XI, Ord. 312-NS, eff. November 2, 1972, § III, Ord.
557-NS, eff. February 19, 1976, § I, Ord. 661-NS, eff. January 12, 1978, § III,
Ord. 772-NS, § I, Ord. 773-NS, eff. March 5, 1981, § 11, Ord. 1187-NS, eff.
October 5, 1993, § 12, Ord. 1273-NS, eff. January 8, 1997, § 1, Ord. 1416-NS,
eff. October 16, 2003, § 5, Ord. 1554-NS, eff. May 13, 2011, § 13, Ord. 1555-
NS, eff. May 13, 2011, and repealed by § 25, Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12,
2016)
Sec. 9-4.1403. Reserved.
(§ 8130.2, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 5, Ord. 55, § ii, Ord. 86, § 15, Ord. 95,
§ 6, Ord. 126 § XII, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, § XXIII, Ord. 220-NS,
eff. August 19, 1971, § IV, Ord. 557-NS, eff. February 19, 1976, § III, Ord.
563-NS, eff. March 18, 1976, § 4, Ord. 980-NS, eff. November 3, 1987, § 4, Ord.
1025-NS, eff. May 16, 1989, § 3, Ord. 1113-NS, eff. August 8, 1991, § 24, Ord.
1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, § 12, Ord. 1187-NS, eff. October 5, 1993, § 5,
Ord. 1292-NS, eff. August 28, 1997, § 3, Ord. 1323-NS, eff. June 25, 1998, §
11, Ord. 1379-NS, eff. August 9, 2001, § 24, Ord. 1392-NS, eff. June 7, 2002, §
2, Ord. 1416-NS, eff. October 16, 2003, § 4, Ord. 1485-NS, eff. October 11,
2007, and repealed by § 25, Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.1404. Development permits: Conditions and limitations (C-3).
   Unless otherwise stated in the development permit, such permit shall be
subject to all the following conditions and limitations:
   (a)   The open storage of materials and equipment shall be permitted only
when incidental to the permitted use of an office, store, or other building
located on the front portion of the same lot; provided, however, such storage
area shall be approved and shown on the plot plan.
   (b)   Buildings and other structures shall not occupy more than twenty-five
(25%) percent of the area for which the development permit is issued. The
remaining area shall be used for automobile
parking and circulation and shall be completely improved, surfaced, and marked
for such purpose.
   (c)   Whenever the parking and circulation area abuts property in an R Zone,
there shall be erected along the property line abutting the R Zone a solid
fence or wall six (6’) feet in height, or an evergreen hedge shall be planted
and maintained at a height of six (6’) feet.
   (d)   No structure shall be located less than one hundred (100’) feet from
the center line of any public road, street, or highway or less than within ten
(10’) feet of any boundary line of abutting R property, except when the
structure height exceeds twenty-five (25’) feet, it shall be located not less
than twenty (20’) feet from any such boundary line.
   (e)   Structure heights within the C-3 Zone shall be as set forth in Section
9-4.2501 of Article 25 of this chapter.
   (f)   Ingress and egress roads leading onto a limited access highway shall
be located at intervals not less than six hundred (600’) feet apart. Ingress
and egress roads leading onto any other public road, street, or highway shall
be located at intervals not less than three hundred (300’) feet apart, except
when such road, street, or highway is designed as a service road for any
adjacent commercial area, the ingress and egress roads shall be located at
intervals not less than one hundred (100’) feet apart.
   (g)   Frontage or interior service roads shall be provided to serve such C-
3 area.
   (h)   Wherever the parking or circulation area abuts a public street and the
property across such street is zoned for residential uses, there shall be
provided along the C-3 area property lines adjacent to the street, except
within the approved exit and entrance ways, a planting strip one and one-half
(1- 1/2’) feet wide within which plantings shall be maintained at a minimum
height of two and one-half (2-1/2’) feet; provided, however, where sight
distance may be impaired, the Community Development Director may permit a
lesser height requirement. Appropriate wheel blocks shall be installed along
the parking area sides of the planting strip.
   (i)   Trees, approved as to number and type by the Landscape Supervisor,
shall be planted in the parkway area between the curbs and sidewalks.
   (j)   Every lot created on or after September 5, 1969, shall have a minimum
street frontage of one hundred (100’) feet and a minimum lot area of twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet; provided, however, any lot having frontage on a
limited or controlled access highway shall have a minimum frontage of six
hundred (600’) feet unless;
   (1)   All access rights to such limited or controlled access highway have
been dedicated to, and accepted by, the City subject to such driveways or
common driveways as permitted in such acceptance of access rights dedication;
or
   (2)   A special use permit for an automobile service station, including
access thereto, has been approved by the City.
   (k)   Every lot created on or after September 5, 1969, shall have a depth at
least equal to the required street frontage of such lot (except the required
frontage along limited or controlled access highways) and a depth not more than
three (3) times the amount of the actual street frontage of such lot.
   (l)   Each community shopping center site shall consist of a minimum of ten
(10) acres and up to a maximum of forty (40) acres. After a development permit
for the center has been approved by the City, individual lots may be created so
long as they comply with the provisions of subsections (j) and (k) of this
section.
   (m)   The applicant shall submit a construction sequence for the land
covered by the permit showing the order in which particular structures and
facilities will be constructed, and, upon approval of the sequence, the
applicant shall not deviate from such sequence without written approval by the
Community Development Director.
(§ 8130.4, T.O.O.C., as amended by §§ 6, 7 and 8, Ord. 126, § 3, Ord. 105-NS,
eff. September 5, 1969, § XIII, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, and § VIII,
Ord. 495-NS, eff. October 10, 1974)
Sec. 9-4.1405. Development permits: Issuance (C-3).
(§ 8130.5, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 6, Ord. 126, § 7, Ord. 142-NS, eff. March
26, 1970, § IX, Ord. 162-NS, eff. August 27, 1970; repealed by § 25, Ord. 1178-
NS, eff. April 27, 1993)
Sec. 9-4.1406. Reserved.
(§ 5, Ord. 887-NS, eff. April 9, 1985, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1401-NS, eff.
February 6, 2003, and repealed by § 25, Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Article 15. Regional Shopping Center Zones (C-4)
Sec. 9-4.1500. Purpose (C-4).
   The C-4 or Regional Shopping Center Zone is intended for planned shopping
centers which serve several communities and where the land and compatible
retail stores and associated facilities are designed and developed together as
an integrated unit using modern site planning techniques. The primary tenants
will usually be one or more major department stores, and the center will offer
convenience goods and a full range of shopping goods and services with wide
selections in many categories. Shopping centers of this size will be designated
and located so as to minimize traffic congestion on public highways and streets
in the vicinity and to best fit the general land use pattern of the area to be
served.
(§ XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970)
Sec. 9-4.1501. Permitted uses (C-4).
   Only the uses identified in Article 21 of this chapter as being permitted in
the Regional Shopping Center (C-4) Zone shall be established or maintained on
property located therein, subject to the permitting requirements and
limitations set forth in said Article 21.
(§ XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, as amended by § XXIV, Ord. 220-NS,
eff. August 19, 1971, § 4, Ord. 1304-NS, eff. October 23, 1997, § 12, Ord.
1379-NS, eff. August 9, 2001, and § 26, Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.1502. Reserved.
(§ XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, as amended by § XXV, Ord. 220-NS,
eff. August 19, 1971, § XII, Ord. 312-NS, eff. November 2, 1972, § IV, Ord.
772-NS, eff. March 5, 1981, § 13, Ord. 1187-NS, eff. October 5, 1993, § 13,
Ord. 1273-NS, eff. January 8, 1997, § 14, Ord. 1555-NS, eff. May 13, 2011, and
repealed by § 27, Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.1503. Reserved.
(§ XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, as amended by § XXVI, Ord. 220-NS,
eff. August 19, 1971, § IV, Ord. 557-NS, eff. February 19, 1976, § 5, Ord. 980-
NS, eff. November 3, 1987, § 5, Ord. 1025-NS, eff. May 16, 1989, § 4, Ord.
1113-NS, eff. August 8, 1991, § 26, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, § 14,
Ord. 1187-NS, eff. October 5, 1993, § 6, Ord. 1292-NS, eff. August 28, 1997, §
1, Ord. 1316-NS, eff. April 23, 1998, § 4, Ord. 1323-NS, eff. June 25, 1998, §
13, Ord. 1379-NS, eff. August 9, 2001, § 25, Ord. 1392-NS, eff. June 7, 2002, §
5, Ord. 1485-NS, eff. October 11, 2007, and repealed by § 27, Ord. 1620-NS,
eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.1504. Development permits: Conditions and limitations (C-4).
   Unless otherwise stated in the development permit, such permit shall be
subject to all the following conditions and limitations:
   (a)   The open storage of materials and equipment shall be permitted only
when incidental to the permitted use of an office, store, or other building
located on the front portion of the same lot; provided, however, such storage
area shall be approved and shown on the plot plan.
   (b)   Buildings and other structures shall not occupy more than twenty-five
(25%) percent of the area for which the development permit is issued. The
remaining area shall be used for automobile parking and circulation and shall
be completely improved, surfaced, and marked for such purpose.
   (c)   Whenever the parking and circulation area abuts property in an R Zone,
there shall be erected along the property line abutting the R Zone a solid
fence or wall six (6’) feet in height, or an evergreen hedge shall be planted
and maintained at a height of six (6’) feet.
   (d)   No structure shall be located less than one hundred (100’) feet from
the center line of any public road, street, or highway or less than within ten
(10’) feet of any boundary line of abutting R property except when the
structure height exceeds twenty-five (25’) feet, it shall be located not less
than twenty (20’) feet from any such boundary line.
   (e)   Structure heights within the C-4 Zone shall be as set forth in Section
9-4.2501 of Article 25 of this chapter.
   (f)   Ingress and egress roads leading onto a limited access highway shall
be located at intervals not less than six hundred (600’) feet apart. Ingress
roads leading onto any other public road, street, or highway shall be located
at intervals not less than three hundred (300’) feet apart, except when such
road, street, or highway is designed as a service road for any adjacent
commercial area, the ingress and egress roads shall be located at intervals not
less than one hundred (100’) feet apart.
   (g)   Frontage or interior service roads shall be provided to serve such C-
4 area.
   (h)   Whenever the parking or circulation area abuts a public street and the
property across such street is zoned for residential uses, there shall be
provided along the C-4 area property lines adjacent to the street, except
within the approved exit and entrance ways, a planting strip one and one-half
(1- 1/2’) feet wide within which plantings shall be maintained at a minimum
height of two and one-half (2-1/2’) feet; provided, however, where sight
distance may be impaired, the Community Development Director may permit a
lesser height requirement. Appropriate wheel blocks shall be installed along
the parking area sides of the planting strip.
   (i)   Trees, approved as to number and type by the Landscape Supervisor,
shall be planted in the parkway area between the curbs and sidewalks.
   (j)   Every lot created on or after October 6, 1970, shall have a minimum
street frontage of one hundred (100’) feet and a minimum lot area of twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet; provided, however, any lot having frontage on a
limited or controlled access highway shall have a minimum frontage of six
hundred (600’) feet unless:
   (1)   All access rights to such limited or controlled access highway have
been dedicated to, and accepted by, the City subject to such driveways or
common driveways as permitted in such acceptance of access rights dedication;
or
   (2)   A special use permit for an automobile service station, including
access thereto, has been approved by the City.
   (k)   Every lot created on or after October 6, 1970, shall have a depth at
least equal to the required street frontage of such lot (except the required
frontage along limited or controlled access highways) and a depth not more than
three (3) times the amount of the actual street frontage of such lot.
   (l)   Each regional commercial shopping center site shall consist of a
minimum of forty (40) acres. After a development permit for the center has been
approved by the City, individual lots may be created so long as they comply
with the provisions of subsections (j) and (k) of this section.
   (m)    The applicant shall submit a construction sequence for the land
covered by the permit showing the order in which particular structures and
facilities will be constructed, and, upon approval of the sequence the
applicant shall not deviate from such sequence without written approval by the
Community Development Director.
(§ XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, as amended by § IX, Ord. 495-NS,
eff. October 10, 1974)
Sec. 9-4.1505. Development permits: Issuance (C-4).
(§ XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970; repealed by § 27, Ord. 1178-NS,
eff. April 27, 1993)
Article 16. Industrial Park Zones (M-1)
Sec. 9-4.1601. Purpose (M-1).
   The M-1 Zones are established to provide areas for the development of
planned manufacturing, technology, and life science uses. Therefore, a detailed
investigation and review shall be necessary to assure that the purposes of this
article are met.
(§ 8131, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 9, Ord. 126, as renumbered by § XIV, Ord.
173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1664-NS, eff. October
25, 2019)
Sec. 9-4.1602. Permitted uses (M-1).
   Only the uses identified in Article 21 of this chapter as being permitted in
the Industrial Park (M-1) Zone shall be established or maintained on property
located therein, subject to the permitting requirements and limitations set
forth in said Article 21.
(§ 8131.1, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 2, Ord. 72, § 9, Ord. 126, as renumbered
by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, as amended by § 14, Ord. 1379-NS,
eff. August 9, 2001, and § 28, Ord. 1620- NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.1603. Reserved.
(§ 8131.4, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 11, Ord. 55, § 16, Ord. 86, § 5, Ord. 119,
§ 9, Ord. 126, § I, Ord. 172-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, as renumbered by § XIV,
Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, as amended by § XIII, Ord. 312-NS, eff.
November 2, 1972, § 1, Ord. 594-NS, eff. October 28, 1976, Ord. 627-NS, eff.
May 5, 1977, § I, Ord. 652-NS, eff. November 17, 1977, § I, Ord. 750-NS, eff.
June 12, 1980, § 7, Ord. 980-NS, eff. November 3, 1987, Ord. 1054-NS, eff.
December 12, 1989, Ord. 1082-NS, eff. July 31, 1990, § 15, Ord. 1187-NS, eff.
October 5, 1993, § 14, Ord. 1273-NS, eff. January 8, 1997, § 2, Ord. 1380-NS,
eff. August 23, 2001, and § 26, Ord 1392-NS, eff. June 7, 2002, as amended by §
1, Ord. 1431-NS, eff. January 13, 2005, and § 27, Ord. 1547-NS, eff. January
12, 2011, § 15, Ord. 1555-NS, eff. May 13, 2011, and repealed by § 29, Ord.
1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.1604. Reserved.
(§ 8131.2, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 10, Ord. 55, § 15, Ord. 86, § 17, Ord. 95,
§ 9, Ord. 126. as renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 174-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, as
amended by § XXVII, Ord. 220-NS, eff. August 19, 1971, § I, Ord. 750-NS, eff.
June 12, 1980, § 6, Ord. 980-NS, eff. November 3, 1987, § 9, Ord. 1292-NS, eff.
August 28, 1997, and repealed by § 29, Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.1605. Development permits; Conditions and limitations (M-1).
   Unless otherwise stated in the development permit, such permit shall be
subject to all the following conditions and limitations:
   (a)   Buildings and other structures shall not occupy more than fifty (50%)
percent of the area for which the development permit is issued. The remaining
area shall be used for open area, automobile parking, and circulation. The
portion used for automobile parking and circulation shall be completely
improved, surfaced, and marked for such purpose.
   (b)   Whenever the parking and circulation area abuts property in an R zone,
there shall be erected along the property line abutting the R Zone a solid
fence or wall six (6’) feet in height, or an evergreen hedge shall be planted
and maintained at a height of six (6’) feet.
   (c)   Structure heights within the M-1 zone shall be as set forth in Section
9-4.2501 of Article 25 of this chapter.
   (d)   No structure shall be located less than one hundred (100’) feet from
the center line of any public road, street, or highway or less than within ten
(10’) feet of any boundary line of abutting R Zone property, except when the
structure height exceeds twenty-five (25’) feet, it shall be located not less
than twenty (20’) feet from any such boundary line.
   (e)   Ingress and egress roads leading onto a limited access highway shall
be located at intervals not less than six hundred (600’) feet apart. Ingress
and egress roads leading onto any other public road, street, or highway shall
be located at intervals not less than three hundred (300’) feet apart, except
when such road, street, or highway is designed as a service road for any
adjacent industrial area, the ingress and egress roads shall be located at
intervals not less than one hundred (100’) feet apart.
   (f)   Frontage or interior service roads shall be provided to serve such M-
1 area.
   (g)   The open storage of materials and equipment shall be permitted only
when incidental to the permitted use provided such storage area shall be
approved and shown on the plot plan.
   (h)   A concrete block wall two and one-half (2-1/2’) feet high shall be
constructed or a planting strip one and one-half (1-1/2’) feet wide shall be
provided along the property lines adjacent to streets whenever the property
across such streets is zoned for either residential or commercial use, except
within the approved exit and entrance ways. Within the planting strip such
planting shall be maintained at a height not to exceed two and one-half (2-1/
2’) feet.
   (i)   Trees, as approved by the Landscape Supervisor, shall be planted in
the parkway area between the curbs and sidewalks.
   (j)   Water supply shall be as required by Resolution No. 3333, approved by
the County Planning Commission on August 14, 1961, as “Water Supply
Requirements for Subdivisions, Planned Developments, and Trailer Parks,” which
resolution is on file with the County Department of Public Works.
   (k)   Every lot created on or after September 5, 1969, shall have a minimum
street frontage of one hundred (100’) feet and a minimum lot area of twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet; provided, however, any lot having frontage on a
limited or controlled access highway shall have a minimum street frontage of
six hundred (600’) feet, unless:
   (1)   All access rights to such limited or controlled access highway have
been dedicated to, and accepted by, the City subject to such drive ways or
common driveways as permitted in such acceptance of access rights dedication;
or
   (2)   A special use permit for an automobile service station, including
access thereto, has been approved by the City.
   (l)   Every lot created on or after September 5, 1969, shall have a depth at
least equal to the required street frontage of such lot (except the required
frontage along limited or controlled access highways) and a depth not more than
three (3) times the amount of the actual street frontage of such lot.
(§ 8131.5, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 9, Ord. 126, and § 4, Ord. 105-NS, eff.
September 5, 1969, as renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970,
as amended by § I, Ord. 527-NS, eff. May 8, 1975)
Sec. 9-4.1606. Development permits: Issuance (M-1).
(§ 8131.3, T.O.O.C, as amended by § 9, Ord. 126, § 8, Ord. 142-NS, eff. March
26, 1970, and § X, Ord. 162-NS, eff. August 27, 1970, renumbered by § XIV, Ord.
173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970; repealed by § 27, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27,
1993)
Article 17. Light Manufacturing Zones (M-2)
Sec. 9-4.1701. Permitted uses (M-2).
   Only the uses identified in Article 21 of this chapter as being permitted in
the Light Manufacturing (M-2) Zone shall be established or maintained on
property located therein, subject to the permitting requirements and
limitations set forth in said Article 21.
(§ 8132, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 7, Ord. 55, § 13, Ord. 86, § 16, Ord. 95, §
11, Ord. 126, as renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, as
amended by § XXVII, Ord. 220-NS, eff. August 19, 1971, § II, Ord. 750-NS, eff.
June 12, 1980, § 8, Ord. 980-NS, eff. November 3, 1987, § 10, Ord. 1292-NS,
eff. August 28, 1997, § 15, Ord. 1379-NS, eff. August 9, 2001, § 4, Ord. 1401-
NS, eff. February 6, 2003, and § 30, Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.1702. Reserved.
(§ 8132.1, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 8, Ord. 55, § 14, Ord. 86, § 4, Ord. 119,
§ 11, Ord. 126, § VII, Ord. 163-NS, eff. August 27, 1970, § II, Ord. 172-NS,
eff. November 5, 1970, § XIV, Ord. 312-NS, eff. November 2, 1972, as renumbered
by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, as amended by § II, Ord. 750-NS,
eff. June 12, 1980, § 9, Ord. 980-NS, eff. November 3, 1987, § 3, Ord. 1168-NS,
eff. January 5, 1993, § 16, Ord. 1187-NS, eff. October 5, 1993, § 15, Ord.
1273-NS, eff. January 8, 1997, § 28, Ord. 1547-NS, eff. January 12, 2011, § 16,
Ord. 1555-NS, eff. May 13, 2011, and repealed by § 31, Ord. 1620-NS, eff.
August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.1703. Development permits: Issuance (M-2).
(§ 8132.2, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 11, Ord. 126, § 9, Ord. 142-NS, eff. March
26, 1970, and § XI, Ord. 162-NS, eff. August 27, 1970, as renumbered by § XIV,
Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970; repealed by § 27, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April
27, 1993)
Sec. 9-4.1704. Development permits: Conditions and limitations (M-2).
   Unless otherwise stated in the development permit, such permit shall be
subject to all the following conditions and limitations:
   (a)   Buildings and other structures shall not occupy more than fifty (50%)
percent of the area for which the development permit is issued. The remaining
area shall be used for open area, automobile parking, and circulation. The
portion used for automobile parking and circulation shall be completely
improved, surfaced, and marked for such purpose.
   (b)   Whenever the parking and circulation area abuts property in an R Zone,
there shall be erected along the property line abutting the R Zone a solid
decorative wall six (6') feet in height, or an evergreen hedge shall be planted
and maintained at a height of six (6’) feet.
   (c)   Structure heights within the M-2 Zone shall be as set forth in Section
9-4.2501 of Article 25 of this chapter.
   (d)   The open storage of materials and equipment shall be permitted only
when incidental to the permitted use provided such storage area shall be
approved and shown on the plot plan.
   (e)   A planting strip ten (10’) feet wide shall be provided along the
property lines adjacent to street wherever the property across such streets is
zoned for either residential or commercial use, except within the approved exit
and entrance ways. Within the planting strip such planting shall be maintained
at a height not to exceed two and one-half (2-1/2’) feet, with the exception of
trees.
   (f)   Trees, as approved by the Landscape Supervisor, shall be planted in
the parkway area between the curbs and sidewalks.
   (g)   Every lot created on or after May 8, 1975, shall have a minimum street
frontage of one hundred (100’) feet and a minimum lot area of twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet; provided, however, any lot having frontage on a limited
or controlled access highway shall have a minimum street frontage of six
hundred (600’) feet unless:
   (1)   All access rights to such limited or controlled access highway have
been dedicated to, and accepted by, the City subject to such driveways or
common driveways as permitted in such acceptance of access rights dedication;
or
   (2)   A special use permit for an automobile service station, including
access thereto, has been approved by the City.
   (h)   Every lot created on or after May 8, 1975, shall have a depth at least
equal to the required street frontage of such lot (except the required frontage
along limited or controlled access highways) and a depth not more than three
(3) times the amount of the actual street frontage of such lot.
(§ II, Ord. 527-NS, eff. May 8, 1975)
Article 18. Design Review: Requirements and Procedure*
*   Article 18 entitled “Precise Plans of Design: Requirements and Procedures,”
consisting of §§ 9-4.1801–9-4.1808 codified from Ordinance No. 107-NS, as
renumbered by Ordinance No. 173-NS and amended by Ordinance Nos. 142-NS, 385-NS
and 713-NS, was amended in its entirety by Section 1, Ordinance No. 1177-NS,
eff. April 27, 1993.
Sec. 9-4.1800. Purpose.
   It is hereby found and declared that the City and the larger community of
the Conejo Valley is situated in a unique natural setting of rolling hills,
mountains, open space and natural scenic beauty; that the retention of this
natural setting must be fostered while recognizing that this unique historic
and scenic environment will be a catalyst for attracting a variety of new
developments and encouraging upgrading of existing projects; that the design of
these new projects needs to take into consideration this natural setting, the
relationship to nearby development and a desired semi-rural environment,
particularly along freeway corridors and major highways; that new or modified
buildings or parking structures should be visually and functionally compatible
yet distinctive within a nearby development area and, in the development of
single-family residential homes, to achieve compatibility and to preserve the
character and permanency of desirable nearby residential development area
without physical and visual over intensification on established lots; that
developing and maintaining an appropriate appearance of all sections within the
City is necessary to uphold and enhance its economic position within the region
in order to stabilize, protect and maintain property values, retain
environmentally sensitive and natural open space areas, promote trade and
commerce, and to ensure a continued managed growth in accordance with the
adopted General Plan and to retain the well-being of its economy and its
people.
   While encouraging quality and creative architectural and landscaping designs
and without depriving a property owner of any authorized uses of property, the
development and architectural design of buildings and structures in the City
shall comply with the architectural design guidelines adopted by resolution of
the City Council. The intent of the guidelines is to encourage architectural
creativity and to be used as standards for design, construction and development
to ensure that the aesthetic environment of the City will become culturally
matured and will have a material or substantially beneficial effect upon the
historic, economic, social and cultural well-being and development of the
community or the peace, health, safety, and general economic welfare of its
inhabitants.
(§ 1, Ord. 1177-NS, eff. April 27, 1993)
Sec. 9-4.1801. Architectural design review required.
   (a)   No person shall erect any structure, and no permit or zone clearance
shall be issued for any new structure or for any exterior modification of a
structure unless and until an architectural design review is first conducted in
accordance with this article and approval of the design is obtained. It shall
be unlawful for any person to proceed with the construction or exterior
modification of any structure without first obtaining such approval and
complying with all of the terms and conditions thereof.
   (b)   Architectural design review and approval is required in connection
with any application for, or modification of, a development permit, residential
planned development permit, trailer park development permit, planned
development permit, special use permit, hillside planned development permit, or
any similar entitlement required by this chapter, and which would authorize the
construction or modification of a structure, except for single-family
subdivisions and individual townhome and condominium units where architectural
design review shall be conducted in conjunction with the submittal of a minor
modification or precise plan of design application.
   (c)   If the property is located within a subdivision governed by CC&R's
which require approval of modifications to the property by a Property Owners
Association or other private entity, the property owner(s) are advised to
obtain appropriate approvals prior to submitting an application to the City.
Project approvals by the City do not constitute compliance with any applicable
CC&R.
(§ 1, Ord. 1177-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, as amended by § 4, Ord. 1481-NS, eff.
July 12, 2007)
Sec. 9-4.1802. Precise plan of design required.
   When none of the discretionary approvals set forth in Sections
9-4.904(h) and
9-4.1801(b) are required, a precise plan of design approval shall be required
prior to the issuance of a residential building permit, for each of the
following:
   (a)   New single-family detached residential dwelling unit(s);
   (b)   Any second-story room addition, a balcony, a second-story deck, or an
exterior stairway to the second story, except that no precise plan of design
permit shall be required where the addition is confined within the existing
volume of the house with no change to the exterior dimensions of the house at
the second story, and the addition does not add windows on the second story
that could affect privacy of adjacent residential property;
   (c)   First floor room addition to the footprint of the principal structure
to an existing single-family detached dwelling unit where the added floor area
is more than 1,000 square feet;
   (d)   Addition of a carport (detached or attached);
   (e)   Garage conversion in conjunction with the construction of a new garage
and/or a carport, if applicable;
   (f)   Addition of an attached or detached wooden deck over sloping terrain;
   (g)   Addition or expansion of a detached accessory structure;
   (h)   Addition or alteration of any residential sports facility;
   (i)   Installation or alteration of light pole(s) and lighting fixtures for
residential sports facilities.
   (j)   In addition to any of the other applicable types of improvements set
forth in this Section, the following types of improvements at an existing
individual townhouse or multi-family condominium unit:
   (1)   Expansion of the building footprint or living area.
   (2)   Enclosure or expansion of an existing balcony.
   (3)   Change to the existing building height or roofline.
   (4)   Redesign of the building that would result in a change to the approved
architectural theme of the development in which it is located.
(§ 3, Ord. 1210-NS, eff. May 24, 1994, as amended by § 13, Ord. 1412-NS, eff.
August 14, 2003, § 5, Ord. 1481-NS, eff. July 12, 2007, § 4, Ord. 1486-NS, eff.
October 11, 2007, § 32, Ord. 1620- NS, eff. August 12, 2016, and Part 4, Ord.
1678-NS, eff. February 28, 2020)
Sec. 9-4.1803. Single-family detached residential and individual townhouse and
condominium exceptions.
   (a)   Notwithstanding Section
9-4.1802, no precise plan of design application shall be required for the
following types of construction to single family detached dwellings or
individual townhouses or condominium units:
   (1)   Reroofing without change of roof elevation;
   (2)   Adding or altering patio covers;
   (3)   Replacing exterior windows and doors, including garage doors;
   (4)   Adding or altering freestanding walls;
   (5)   Adding or altering pools, spas and related equipment;
   (6)   Adding or altering any attached/detached wooden decks over
substantially level ground;
   (7)   First floor room addition to an existing single family detached
dwelling unit of less than the applicable threshold defined by Section
9-4.1802(c) of this article;
   (8)   Adding or altering fireplace chimneys;
   (9)   Addition of skylights;
   (10)   Addition of prefabricated tool and storage sheds not exceeding one
hundred twenty (120) square feet in floor area individually and not exceeding
three hundred (300) square feet cumulatively on a lot, and provided that the
shed is architecturally compatible with the residence if visible to the public;
   (11)   Addition of architectural features such as, but not limited to,
eaves, cornices, belt courses and sills;
   (12)   Addition of a bay window and/or a greenhouse window;
   (13)   Addition of certain accessory structures that are architecturally
compatible with the residence, limited to gazebos, detached patio covers, pool
cabanas, storage buildings, and similar structures not to exceed four hundred
(400) square feet in area;
   (14)   Addition of a playhouse;
   (15)   Addition of a front porch;
   (16)   Addition of a breezeway;
   (17)   Addition of patio enclosure(s);
   (18)   Adding or altering pilasters.
   (b)   Notwithstanding Section
9-4.1802, no precise plan of design application shall be required for the
following types of construction to individual townhouse and condominium units:
   (1)   Reroofing without change of roof elevation;
   (2)   Replacing exterior windows and doors, including garage doors;
   (3)   Altering existing freestanding fences and walls;
   (4)   Adding or altering pools, spas and related equipment;
   (5)   Adding or altering any attached/detached wooden decks over
substantially level ground;
   (6)   Repair or alteration of existing fireplace chimneys;
   (7)   Addition of skylights;
   (8)   Addition of architectural features such as, but not limited to, eaves,
cornices, belt courses and sills;
   (9)   Addition of a bay window and/or a greenhouse window;
   (10)   Addition of a front porch;
   (11)   Adding or altering pilasters.
(§ 1, Ord. 1177-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, as renumbered by § 2 and amended by §
4, Ord. 1210-NS, eff. May 24, 1994, § 1, Ord. 1249-NS, eff. January 9, 1996, §
14, Ord. 1412-NS, eff. August 14, 2003, § 6, Ord. 1481-NS, eff. July 12, 2007,
§ 33, Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016, and Part 5, Ord. 1678-NS, eff.
February 28, 2020)
Sec. 9-4.1804. Multi-family residential and non-residential exceptions.
   Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this Code, the Community
Development Director or designee may approve the following modifications to
existing multi-family residential and non-residential projects through a Design
Review application or zone clearance without hearing or notice and without the
need for modification to any underlying permit:
   (a)   Repainting of structure(s) using the same color(s), or colors allowed
within the Architectural Design Guidelines Resolution;
   (b)   Replacement of windows and doors with those of the same general type
and design, or the addition of new windows and doors in compliance with the
Architectural Design Guidelines Resolution;
   (c)   Reroofing without a change in roof elevation;
   (d)   Reroofing or minor roof changes with roof materials consistent with
the project entitlement conditions, or as allowed by the Architectural Design
Guidelines Resolution;
   (e)   Addition, modification or repair of trash enclosures, freestanding
walls, lighting standards, flag poles and/or other miscellaneous improvements
on the site;
   (f)   Modifications to parking areas within the scope authorized by Section
9-4.2404(f)(2) of this chapter;
   (g)   Any other minor exterior building and site improvements consistent
with the overall building and site design and the provisions of the City's
Architectural Design Guidelines Resolution.
(§ 1, Ord. 1177-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, as renumbered by § 2 and amended by §
5, Ord. 1210-NS, eff. May 24, 1994, and § 34, Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12,
2016)
Sec. 9-4.1805. Precise plan of design applications.
   Whenever a precise plan of design application is required for a project
which requires none of the discretionary approvals set forth in Section
9-4.1801(b), an application shall be submitted to the Community Development
Department as an independent precise plan of design (PPD) application on a form
provided by said department along with supporting information as required by
said department and the required fee for said application, which shall be set
by resolution of the City Council.
(§ 1, Ord. 1177-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 1210-NS,
eff. May 24, 1994)
Sec. 9-4.1806. Architectural design review guidelines.
   To implement the intent and purposes of this article, the City Council
shall, by resolution, adopt architectural design review guidelines and
standards for considering and approving a precise plan of design entitlement
and in the review of discretionary land use approvals as set forth in Section
9-4.1801(b). Said architectural design review guidelines and standards, or any
amendment thereto, shall be adopted by the City Council after recommendation
from the Planning Commission and after a noticed public hearing as required for
zoning amendments, as set forth in Article 29 of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1177-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 1210-NS,
eff. May 24, 1994)
Sec. 9-4.1807. Design review criteria.
   In applying the adopted architectural design guidelines to discretionary
land use approvals and to the review of applications for precise plan of design
approval, the Community Development Department, the Planning Commission and
City Council, on appeal, shall review and consider the following site and
neighboring development area issues and impacts:
   (a)   The site’s dimensions with relation to the proposed structures and
permitted uses;
   (b)   The adequacy, compatibility and harmony of the exterior building
design, colors, materials and architectural features with the existing
environment and the adopted guidelines;
   (c)   The location of the property in relation to surrounding property zoned
for a less dense use, such as a residential use;
   (d)   The relationship of topography and grade to finished floor elevations
of the site being improved;
   (e)   The proper orientation of the main elevation with respect to nearby
streets and improvements;
   (f)   Any other matters relevant to implement the purpose set forth in
Section
9-4.1800 of this article.
(§ 1, Ord. 1177-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 1210-NS,
eff. May 24, 1994)
Sec. 9-4.1808. Design review procedure.
   (a)   Architectural design review in conjunction with another entitlement.
When the architectural design of buildings or structures, or modifications
thereto, is reviewed and considered as part of another permit or entitlement
application pursuant to Section
9-4.1801(b) of this article, the hearing body or officer reviewing the
underlying application shall include architectural design review in the review
and decision on said application. In rendering a decision, said hearing body or
officer shall consider:
   (1)   The Architectural Design Review Guidelines and standards adopted
pursuant to Section
9-4.1806 of this article; and
   (2)   The design review criteria set forth in Section
9-4.1807 of this article.
   Hearing, notice, and appeal requirements for said underlying permit or
entitlement application shall be as set forth in Article 28 of this chapter and
Chapter 12 of this title.
   (b)   Precise plan of design permit review. When a precise plan of design
application is submitted pursuant to Section
9-4.1802, it shall be processed administratively as set forth in Section
9-4.2804 of this chapter, unless any of the following conditions apply, in
which case the precise plan of design application shall be referred directly to
the Planning Commission:
   (1)   For existing single family detached homes located in developments that
are exclusively single-story per the original tract entitlements:
   (i)   Two-story additions;
   (ii)   Demolition and rebuilding of a single family detached home exceeding
one hundred fifty (150%) percent of the original building footprint.
   (2)   For existing single family detached homes located in developments that
are a mix of single-story and two or more story homes per the original
entitlements:
   (i)   Two-story additions or second floor additions, where the added floor
area exceeds fifty (50%) percent of the original building footprint;
   (ii)   Demolition and rebuilding of a single family detached home where
either the total floor area exceeds one hundred fifty (150%) percent of the
original building floor area, or where the second story floor area exceeds
seventy-five (75%) percent of the original building footprint.
   (c)   Precedent-setting issues. If, in the opinion of the Community
Development Director or the Director’s designee, the precise plan of design
application presents potentially precedent-setting issues, the Director shall
schedule the application for a public hearing before the Planning Commission.
Hearing and appeal requirements shall be as provided in Article 28 of this
chapter, and notice shall be given as required by Chapter 12 of this title.
   (d)   Planning Commission hearings required. Whenever a precise plan of
design is reviewed as part of the application for another permit requires a
public hearing to be held prior to approval, or is otherwise reviewed by the
Planning Commission, whether on original jurisdiction or appeal, a public
hearing shall be held to review the precise plan of design application. Hearing
and appeal requirements shall be as provided in Article 28 of this chapter, and
notice of said hearing shall be given in the manner required by Chapter 12 of
this title.
   (e)   Conduct of hearings and findings. The decision-making officer or body
shall review the precise plan of design to ensure that the functional
arrangement and the general appearance of the structure(s) conform to the
intent and requirements of this article. The decision-maker may approve,
conditionally approve, or deny the precise plan. A precise plan of design shall
be denied if any one of the following findings are made:
   (1)   The design would be substantially and materially incompatible or out
of scale with the natural environment and surrounding properties; or
   (2)   The design would deter an orderly and attractive development of the
community in general and surrounding property in particular; or
   (3)   The design would otherwise adversely affect the public peace, safety,
or general economic welfare; or
   (4)   The design would not materially comply with the adopted architectural
design guidelines and standards.
   (5)   The design would not be compatible with neighboring properties to
ensure a minimal loss of privacy and visual impact on adjacent properties where
reasonable designs have not been explored to allow for solar access to adjacent
gardens, patios, pools or rooms and where privacy of neighboring properties has
been substantially compromised without careful positioning and/or limitation of
the size, mass and height of the new construction.
(§ 1, Ord. 1177-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, as renumbered by § 2 and amended by §§
6, 7, Ord. 1210-NS, eff. May 24, 1994, and §§ 5, 6, Ord. 1414-NS, eff. October
2, 2003, and § 1, Ord. 1469-NS, eff. October 13, 2006, as amended by § 7, Ord.
1481-NS, eff. July 12, 2007, and § 35, Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.1809. Appeals.
   (a)   Decisions by the Community Development Director or designee.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, any decision by the Community
Development Director, or the Director’s designee, to approve, conditionally
approve or deny a precise plan of design application may only be appealed to
the Planning Commission as follows:
   (1)   If the decision is made to approve an application pursuant to Section
9-4.1808(b), the decision may be appealed by any aggrieved person or City
official.
   (2)   Any decision to deny the application may only be appealed by the
applicant.
   (3)   The City Council may, on it own motion, elect to submit a decision of
approval to the Planning Commission for consideration and decision.
   All appeals of decisions by the Community Development Director, or
Director’s designee, as well as City Council decisions to require review of an
administrative decision by the Planning Commission, shall be made in accordance
with the procedural requirements of Section
9-4.2807.
   (b)   Decisions by the Planning Commission. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this Code, any decision by the Planning Commission to approve,
conditionally approve or deny a precise plan of design application may only be
appealed to the City Council as follows:
   (1)   If the decision is made to approve any matter originally reviewed by
the Planning Commission, or any of the items set forth in Section
9-4.1808(b) and considered on appeal by the Planning Commission, the decision
may be appealed by any aggrieved person or City official.
   (2)   Any decision to deny the application may only be appealed by the
applicant.
   (3)   Notwithstanding the above, the City Council may, on its own motion,
elect to review and consider any decision of the Planning Commission.
   All appeals of decisions by the Planning Commission, as well as City Council
decisions to require its own review of a decision made by the Planning
Commission, shall be made in accordance with the procedural requirements of
Section
9-4.2808.
(§ 1, Ord. 1177-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, as renumbered by § 2 and amended by §
8, Ord. 1210-NS, eff. May 24, 1994, as amended by Part 6, Ord. 1446-NS, eff.
October 25, 2005)
Sec. 9-4.1810. Inapplicability of article to repainting of residences.
   Nothing in this article is intended to require either a building permit or
architectural design review prior to repainting a residential structure, unless
otherwise stated in the conditions imposed upon a discretionary permit under
which the structure was constructed.
(§ 1, Ord. 1177-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 1210-NS,
eff. May 24, 1994)
Sec. 9-4.1811. Exceptions for redevelopment projects.
   The development guidelines and standards set forth in this article may be
waived or modified for refurbishing existing nonresidential buildings or
structures located in an approved redevelopment project area pursuant to
Section
9-4.2702.5.
(§ 1, Ord. 1177-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 1210-NS,
eff. May 24, 1994)
Article 19. Condominium Conversions, Mobile Home Park Subdivisions and Mobile
Home Park Changes of Use*
*   Article 19 entitled “Motion Picture and Television Studio Zones (MS),”
consisting of Sections 9-4.1901 through 9-4.1919, recodified from Sections
8139.1 through 8139.20, T.O.O.C., as added by Ordinance No. 93, as renumbered
by Section XIV, Ordinance No. 173-NS, effective November 5, 1970, repealed by
Section 2, Ordinance No. 669-NS, effective March 23, 1978.
    Article 19, entitled “Condominium Conversions,” consisting of Sections 9-
4.1901 through 9-4.1907, as codified by §1, Ord. 669-NS, effective March 23,
1978, as amended by Ord. 703-NS, effective February 8, 1979; repealed by §1,
Ord. 839-NS, effective September 6, 1983.
   Article 19, entitled “Condominium Conversions,” consisting of Sections 9-
4.1901 through 9-4.1911, as codified by § 2, Ord. 839-NS, effective September
6, 1983; repealed by § 4, Ord. 1459-NS, effective March 21, 2006.
Sec. 9-4.1901. Purpose and intent.
   The conversion of rental apartments or mobile home parks to ownership status
and the change of use of mobile home parks impacts the supply and availability
of rental housing, and may cause displacement of residents, particularly
seniors and families with children who may be required to move from the
community due to lack of replacement housing. A reduction in the supply of
rental housing creates pressure for higher rents in the remaining rental
housing. However, conversions may sometimes provide unique opportunities for
lower income households to purchase their own homes.
   The City seeks to avoid the problems that beset condominium conversion
projects, and to assure a reasonable balance of rental and ownership housing
and a variety of individual choices of tenure, type, price, and location of
housing and to maintain a supply of rental housing for low and moderate income
persons and families.
   The City finds that the unique problems and opportunities presented by the
conversions of existing residential rental housing units and rental mobile home
parks to ownership status and the change of use of rental mobile home parks to
other uses require special considerations pursuant to this article.
   This article is intended to comply with California law, which is subject to
amendment from time to time. The requirements of state law, as amended, shall
supersede any specific provision of this article in conflict with state law.
(§4, Ord. 1459-NS, eff. April 21, 2006)
Sec. 9-4.1902. Definitions.
   For the purpose of this article, unless otherwise apparent from the context,
the following definitions are provided:
   (a)   “Community apartment project” shall mean a project in which an
undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy
of any apartment located thereon.
   (b)   “Condominium” shall mean an estate in real property consisting of a
separate interest in a dwelling unit together with an undivided interest in the
balance of the property (land and improvements) which is owned in common by the
owners of the individual dwelling units.
   (c)   “Condominium conversion” shall mean the conversion or division of a
single-ownership parcel with a building or buildings containing two or more
existing dwellings (such as an apartment building) into a condominium,
community apartment project, or stock cooperative project form of ownership
involving separate ownership or permanent right of exclusive use of individual
dwelling units. Condominium conversion does not include conversion of a rental
mobile home park into a mobile home park subdivision.
   (d)   “Condominium conversion project” shall mean the entire parcel of real
property subject to condominium conversion including all structures thereon or
appurtenant thereto.
   (e)   “Mobile home” shall mean a structure, as defined under California
Civil Code Section 798.3, designed for human habitation as a dwelling and
transport over streets and highways under permit in accordance with the
California Vehicle Code. This term shall include “manufactured homes” as
defined in the Health and Safety Code Section 18007. A recreational vehicle
shall not be considered to be a mobile home unless it has been manufactured
with plumbing, heating and electrical systems for human habitation and it
occupies a mobile home site in a mobile home park where that recreational
vehicle is permitted to be used as a permanent residence in accordance with
Civil Code Section 798.3(b). The term mobile home shall not include a
commercial coach as defined by Health and Safety Code Section 18010 or factory-
built housing as defined by Health and Safety Code Section 19971.
   (f)   “Mobile home park” or “park” shall mean an area of land where two or
more mobile home sites are rented, or held out for rent, to accommodate mobile
homes used for human habitation. This term shall include “trailer park.”
   (g)   “Mobile home park change of use” shall mean closure, cessation or
change of use of a mobile home park to another use either as to an entire
mobile home park or more than ten (10) percent of the mobile home spaces
therein. However, the Community Development Director may find that a mobile
home park change of use has not occurred if he or she determines that park
management is making a good faith effort to lease the spaces that are
unoccupied by mobile homes to mobile home owners. A mobile home park change of
use does not include closure due to physical destruction by fire, flood or
other disaster, conversion of a mobile home park to a mobile home park
subdivision, closure of a mobile home park as a result of an adjudication of
bankruptcy, nor the adoption, amendment, or repeal of a park rule or
regulation.
   (h)   “Mobile home park subdivision” shall mean a division of land for the
purpose of converting a rental mobile home park to ownership status. Mobile
home park subdivisions include developments in which each mobile home owner
receives title to the individual space where his or her mobile home is located,
together with an undivided interest in the common areas of the park. The term
mobile home park subdivision also includes stock cooperative projects where
each mobile home owner receives an exclusive right to occupy, but not title to,
his or her individual mobile home space, together with an undivided interest in
the common areas of the park.
   (i)   “Stock cooperative project” shall mean a project wherein a corporation
is formed or availed primarily for the purpose of holding title to an apartment
project or mobile home park, if all, or substantially all, of the shareholders
of such corporation receive a right of exclusive occupancy in a dwelling unit
or mobile home space in the project, title to which is held by the corporation,
which right of occupancy is transferable only concurrently with the transfer of
shares of stock in the corporation held by the person having such right of
occupancy.
(§4, Ord. 1459-NS, eff. April 21, 2006)
Sec. 9-4.1903. Procedure.
   (a)   Preapplication review. Prior to filing any entitlement application for
a condominium conversion, mobile home park subdivision or mobile home park
change of use, the prospective applicant shall file a preapplication request.
Its basic purpose is to provide an opportunity for the applicant to understand
the requirements, procedures and steps that must be taken before a condominium
conversion, mobile home park subdivision or mobile home park change of use may
be approved. City staff shall conduct a preapplication work session with the
applicant to discuss the City’s requirements and the project’s ultimate impact
on the residential housing stock of the City prior to the preparation of plans
and/or tentative tract maps in order to avoid the possible expenditure of
substantial energy and expense in a manner not consistent with the guidelines
for such projects, and also to allow the applicant to make changes, at an early
stage, prior to the preparation and filing of entitlement applications.
   (b)   Application requirements in general. After completion of the required
preapplication review, an applicant for a condominium conversion, mobile home
park subdivision or mobile home park change of use may file the necessary
entitlement application(s) for the specific action sought. Said entitlement
requests may include a tentative tract map, residential planned development
permit (or major modification thereto), trailer park development permit (or
major modification thereto) and such other entitlements as may be necessary.
Filing of all entitlement applications shall be subject to the provisions of
Section
9-4.2802 of this chapter and additional requirements imposed by this article.
   (c)   Public hearings. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing
on an application for a condominium conversion, mobile home park subdivision or
mobile home park change of use, subject to appeal to the City Council. Notice
of public hearing shall be given in the manner required by Chapter 12 of this
title and the additional special notice requirements set forth in this article.
(§4, Ord. 1459-NS, eff. April 21, 2006)
Sec. 9-4.1904. Condominium conversions.
   (a)   All condominium conversion projects shall be subject to the
residential planned development (R-P-D) standards, permits and requirements set
forth in Sections
9-4.901 through
9-4.905 of Article 9 of this chapter. Additionally, all condominium conversion
projects shall be subject to all provisions of this Code, the State Subdivision
Map Act, the applicable building regulations of Title 8 of this Code, and the
subdivision provisions set forth in Chapter 3 of this title.
   (b)   Application requirements. No application for any entitlement necessary
for a condominium conversion project shall be accepted as complete unless the
application includes all of the items set forth below in addition to such
information as the applicable entitlement application may otherwise require:
   (1)   An application for a tentative map or parcel map in accordance with
Section 66426 of the Subdivision Map Act and this Code.
   (2)   An application for a residential planned development (R-P-D) permit or
major modification thereto, with all of the plans and information shown on the
precise plan of design plot plan checklist required for submittal of R-P-
D permits. Said plans shall also contain at least the following specific
detailed information:
   (i)   The location, height, gross floor area, and proposed uses for each
existing structure to remain and for each proposed new structure;
   (ii)   The location, use, and type of surfacing of all open storage areas;
   (iii)   The location and type of surfacing for all driveways, pedestrian
ways, vehicle parking areas, and curb outs;
   (iv)   The location, height, and type of materials for walls or fences;
   (v)   The location of all landscaped areas, the type of landscaping, the
method of irrigation, and a statement specifying the manner by which the
landscaping areas shall be maintained and how it will be funded;
   (vi)   The location and description of all recreational facilities and a
statement specifying the method of the maintenance thereof;
   (vii)   The location, size, and number of parking spaces to be used in
conjunction with each condominium unit as well as an indication of whether the
space is uncovered, covered, or enclosed;
   (viii)   The location, type, and size of all drainage pipes and structures;
   (ix)   The location, type, and size of all on-site and adjacent overhead
utility lines;
   (x)   The location, type, and size of all utilities within the complex and a
complete breakdown of how those utilities are presently furnished, metered, and
serviced to the individual units as well as the common areas;
   (xi)   The location of all existing on-site fire protection equipment,
including but not limited to, fire hydrants, stand pipes, fire sprinkler
systems and fire extinguishers;
   (xii)   Existing elevation contours, building pad elevations and percent
slope of all driveways and parking areas;
   (xiii)   Fully dimensioned elevation plans of the typical permanent
structures, showing the architectural features and the types and materials of
construction;
   (3)   A structural pest report prepared by a licensed structural pest
control operator pursuant to the California Business and Professions Code on
the absence or presence of wood destroying pests or organisms for all existing
permanent buildings on the property;
   (4)   An acoustical report for all existing and proposed permanent
residential buildings on the property, which indicates the type of construction
of existing walls and ceilings and noise attenuation characteristics of such
construction. The test data shall include a sampling of at least ten (10%)
percent of the dwelling units involved, but in no case fewer than two (2)
dwelling units. The report shall contain recommended methods of compliance with
the noise insulation standards of the California Administrative Code, Title 25,
Chapter 1, Subchapter 1, Article 4, Section 28, and shall be prepared by an
acoustical engineer;
   (5)   A building elements report prepared by a state licensed civil
engineer, architect or other qualified person approved by the building official
describing in detail the condition and useful life of the roof, foundations,
and mechanical, electrical, plumbing and structural elements of all existing
buildings and structures, and further describing, in detail, the condition and
useful life of the following appliances and equipment if installed in the
buildings: Garbage disposals, dishwashers, water heaters, ranges, ovens and air
conditioners;
   (6)   Three (3) draft copies of the covenants, conditions, and restrictions
which will apply to the proposed development which include the following
provisions:
   (i)   Provisions satisfactory to the City for the maintenance of the common
areas and exteriors of all structures and walls of any such projects by the
City in the event of default in the maintenance of such areas, including
provisions for repair and for reimbursement to the City for any cost incurred
thereby;
   (ii)   Provisions establishing each individual unit owner's exclusive right
to the use of not less than two (2) specifically designated parking spaces for
each unit in carports or garages;
   (iii)   Provisions prohibiting the outside storage of recreational vehicles,
and any other materials unless enclosed within separate storage areas;
   (iv)   Provisions establishing adequate storage space shall be provided for
each unit;
   (v)   Provisions establishing the precise nature of what constitutes a
common area and what constitutes part of the ownership unit, including but not
limited to an indication of whether the individual owner or the association
will have the duty to maintain and/or replace wastewater laterals, utility
meters, and vegetation within or around individual ownership areas;
   (vi)   Provisions authorizing the City to review and approve amendments to
the covenants, conditions, and restrictions for the development.
   (7)   Tenant/rent/sales price information:
   (i)   A certified list of the names and addresses of all tenants residing in
the proposed project that is complete as of the time the application is filed.
The names and addresses shall also be provided in a digital file to facilitate
mailing of public hearing notices;
   (ii)   Current rents for each unit;
   (iii)   Approximate proposed price for which each unit would be sold.
   (8)   The pro forma budget proposed to be submitted to the State Department
of Real Estate or a similar estimate of projected annual operating expenses for
the project after conversion and proposed level of maintenance fees or
assessments to be borne by individual unit owners.
   (9)   The applicant shall certify that at least 60 days prior to filing of
the tentative map for a condominium conversion, that all prospective tenants
and tenants residing in the building(s) proposed for conversion have been
notified in writing of the applicant's intent to file a tentative map for
condominium conversion. Said notification is required under Sections 66452.8
and 66452.9 of the Subdivision Map Act. Certification shall consist of a letter
signed by the applicant certifying that the required notice has been given, the
date the notice was given, and a copy of the written notice.
   (10)   A report demonstrating how the project will satisfy the required
conditions of approval specified in Subsection (e) of this section.
   (11)   Additional information as determined necessary by the Community
Development Director.
   (c)   Special notice requirements.
   (1)   In addition to other public hearing notice requirements, the City
shall mail written notice of a public hearing on applications related to a
condominium conversion project to each tenant residing in the project as
required by Section 66451.3 of the Subdivision Map Act. Such notice will
specify the following:
   (i)   The date, time, place and purpose of the hearing; and
   (ii)   That each tenant has the right to appear and be heard.
   (2)   The City shall provide a copy of the staff report(s) to the subdivider
and each tenant at least 3 days prior to the hearing on the tentative map or
other permit for a condominium conversion as required by Section 66452.3 of the
Subdivision Map Act.
   (d)   Required findings of fact. In addition to the other findings required
by this Code, the decision-making body shall make the following affirmative
findings prior to the approval of a condominium conversion project:
   (1)   That the proposed project would not adversely affect the supply and
availability of rental housing within the City. This finding must be based on a
determination that the current vacancy rate for rental units within the City is
not less than five (5%) percent, as determined by the most recent Community
Development Department survey or other reliable vacancy rate data acceptable to
the City; or that mitigating circumstances exist which justify approval of the
condominium conversion when the vacancy rate is lower than five (5%) percent.
In addition to other mitigating circumstances that may be found, this
determination must also be based on at least one of the following two findings:
   (i)   That new rental units are to be constructed which will replace those
to be converted. The number of replacement units will equal or exceed the
number of units proposed to be converted. Replacement units will be completed
and occupancy permits issued prior to recordation of the final map for the
conversion; or
   (ii)   That the conversion will help meet other City housing goals by
providing a substantial percentage of its units at affordable prices and the
provision of such housing opportunities outweighs any loss of rental units.
   (2)   That the project, as conditioned, would provide reasonable relocation
assistance to households displaced by the condominium conversion; and
   (3)   That the proposed condominium conversion complies with the
requirements of the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code.
   (e)   Conditions of approval. Condominium conversions shall be subject to
all of the following conditions, which shall be in addition to such other
conditions deemed necessary to carry out the purposes and requirements of this
article:
   (1)   The consumption of gas, electricity, and water within each dwelling
unit shall be separately metered so that the unit owner can be separately
billed for each utility. A separate wastewater lateral shall be provided for
each unit. A shut-off valve for each utility will be provided for each unit.
The requirements of this subsection may be waived where the Building Official
or Public Works Department finds that such would not be practicable.
   (2)   All permanent mechanical equipment, including domestic appliances,
which is determined by the Building Official to be a potential source of
vibration or noise, shall be shock-mounted, isolated from the floor and
ceiling, or otherwise installed in a manner approved by the Building Official
to lessen the transmission of vibration and noise.
   (3)   The electrical, plumbing, mechanical, fire, and life safety systems of
the structures either are, or shall be placed in a condition of good repair and
maintenance, including such alterations or repairs as are required by the
Building Official and Fire Department.
   (4)   Separate laundry facilities of sufficient size to allow for the
installation of a clothes washer and dryer shall be provided for each
condominium unit; if provided for in the garage, they shall not encroach into
the required parking area.
   (5)   Each condominium unit shall be provided with a separate two (2) car
(double) garage or carport or with two (2) adjoining single-car garages or
carports, and one parking space per unit shall be provided for guest parking.
Provisions shall be made for the restriction of parking in no parking zones.
   (6)   Each dwelling unit shall have a separate hot water heater, unless
there is one central circulating water heating system serving all dwelling
units on the property, and such system shall provide sufficient capacity to
serve all dwelling units.
   (7)   All on-site and adjacent overhead utility service lines and poles
shall be converted to an underground system.
   (8)   At least fifty (50) square feet of developed common recreation space
shall be provided per unit, but in no event less than one thousand (1,000)
square feet for the total condominium conversion project.
   (9)   All garbage disposals, dishwashers, water heaters, ranges, ovens, and
air-conditioners determined by the Building Official to have less than two (2)
years' useful remaining life shall be replaced.
   (10)   All dwelling units shall comply with the current requirements for
energy conservation, sound transmission control, and fire detection systems.
   (11)   The applicant shall provide relocation assistance equal to one and
one-half times the monthly rent to any tenant household living in any unit at
any time prior to final map approval, provided such tenant is not otherwise in
default of the rental agreement. If the tenant elects to purchase the unit,
such relocation assistance shall be applied as a credit to the cost of the
unit.
   (12)   The applicant shall offer a lifetime lease to households in which the
head of household or spouse is sixty-two (62) years of age or older at the time
of the final map approval. Reasonable annual rent increases shall be allowed,
but shall not exceed sixty (60%) percent of the increase in the Los Angeles-
Long Beach Area Consumer Price Index or any successor index designed to
determine general increases in housing costs for the preceding twelve (12)
month period or any applicable local ordinance governing the rents in such
units, whichever is lower. Provisions setting forth this limitation on rent
increases shall be incorporated into the lease.
   (13)   The applicant shall provide at no additional cost to the tenant,
suitable alternate housing to tenant households whose unit undergoes
substantial remodeling or rehabilitation during conversion, and the unit being
remodeled or rehabilitated is not habitable. The Building Official of the City
shall make the final determination of habitability and suitability.
   (14)   Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions for the condominium conversion
shall be prepared and submitted to the Community Development Director and City
Attorney for approval, and shall be recorded prior to or concurrently with the
final map.
   (15)   Within ten (10) days of conditional approval of entitlements
necessary for the project, the property owner shall mail written notice to all
tenants residing in the building(s) to be converted. The notice shall include a
copy of the conditions of approval and state that the tenant will receive a
ninety (90) day written notice to vacate or purchase his or her unit and that
the tenant will have the exclusive right to purchase the unit on at least as
favorable terms and conditions as such units are offered to the general public.
   (16)   No final map for a condominium conversion shall be approved unless
the City Council finds that the conditions of approval and the requirements of
Section 66427.1 of the Subdivision Map Act have been satisfied.
(§ 4, Ord. 1459-NS, eff. April 21, 2006)
Sec. 9-4.1905. Mobile home park subdivisions.
   (a)   Mobile home park subdivisions shall be subject to all provisions of
this Code, the State Subdivision Map Act, the applicable building regulations
of Title 8 of this Code, and the subdivision provisions set forth in Chapter 3
of this title. Additionally, a mobile home park subdivision proposing an
increase in the number mobile home spaces shall be subject to the standards,
permits and requirements set forth in Sections
9-4.2001 through
9-4.2004 of Article 20 of this chapter.
   (b)   The scope of any hearing on whether to approve, conditionally approve
or disapprove a tentative map for a mobile home park subdivision not involving
an increase in the number of mobile home spaces shall be limited to the issue
of the subdivision's compliance with Section 66427.5 of the Subdivision Map
Act.
   (c)   Application Requirements. No application for a mobile home park
subdivision shall be accepted as complete unless the application includes all
of the information set forth below, in addition to such other information as
the applicable entitlement application may otherwise require:
   (1)   An application for a tentative map or an application for map waiver
where the tenants of the mobile home park propose to purchase the park pursuant
to Section 66428.1 of the Subdivision Map Act;
   (2)   With respect to any proposal to increase the number of mobile home
spaces, an application for a T-P-D permit, with all of the plans and
information shown on the precise plan of design plot plan checklist required
for submittal of R-P-D permits.
   (3)   Tenant/rent/sales price information:
   (i)   A certified list of the names and addresses of all tenants residing in
the mobile home park and where applicable, non-resident mobile home owners,
complete as of the time the application is filed. The names and addresses shall
also be provided in a digital file to facilitate mailing of public hearing
notices;
   (ii)   Current rents for each mobile home space;
   (iii)   Approximate proposed price for which each mobile home space will be
sold;
   (4)   The pro forma budget proposed to be submitted to the State Department
of Real Estate or a similar estimate of projected annual operating expenses for
the project after conversion and proposed level of maintenance fees or
assessments to be borne by individual unit owners;
   (5)   Certification that the subdivider has offered each existing tenant the
option to purchase his or her unit to be created by subdivision or continue as
a tenant in accordance with Section 66427.5 (a) of the Subdivision Map Act.
Certification shall consist of a letter signed by the subdivider certifying
that the offer has been made and when the offer was made together with a copy
of the written offer;
   (6)   The subdivider's report on the impact of the conversion to resident
ownership status on the residents of the mobile home park prepared in
accordance with Section 66427.5 (b) of the Subdivision Map Act;
   (7)   A report describing the results of the survey of support for the
proposed conversion to resident ownership status among the residents of the
mobile home park as required by Section 66427.5 (d) of the Subdivision Map Act;
   (8)   Three (3) copies of the proposed covenants, conditions, and
restrictions which will apply to the development which include the following
provisions:
   (i)   Provisions satisfactory to the City for the maintenance of the common
areas and exteriors of all structures and walls of any such projects by the
City in the event of default in the maintenance of such areas, including
provisions for repair and for reimbursement to the City for any cost incurred
thereby;
   (ii)   Provisions establishing the parking requirements for each mobile home
and for guest parking. If the mobile home subdivision involves an increase in
the number of mobile home spaces, the application shall include provisions
establishing each individual unit owners exclusive right to the use of not less
than two (2) specifically designated parking spaces for each unit;
   (iii)   Provisions prohibiting the outside storage of recreational vehicles,
[and any other materials unless enclosed within separate storage areas]*;
   (iv)   Provisions establishing the precise nature of what constitutes a
common area and what constitutes part of the ownership unit, including but not
limited to an indication of whether the individual owner or the association
will have the duty to maintain and/or replace wastewater laterals, utility
meters, and vegetation within or around individual ownership areas;
   (v)   Provisions authorizing the City to review and approve amendments to
the covenants, conditions, and restrictions for the development.
   (9)   Additional information as determined necessary by the Community
Development Director.
   (d)   Special notice requirements.
   (1)   The subdivider shall make a copy of the report on the impact of the
conversion to a mobile home subdivision on the residents of the mobile home
park as described in Section
9-4.1905 (c) (6) available to each resident at least thirty (30) days prior to
the hearing on the tentative map for the mobile home park subdivision in
accordance with Section 66427.5 (c) of the Subdivision Map Act.
   (2)   In addition to other public hearing notice requirements, the City
shall mail written public hearing notices on applications related to a mobile
home park subdivision to all tenants residing within the affected mobile home
park and all nonresident owners of mobile homes with the affected mobile home
park.
   (e)   Required findings of fact. Prior to approving a mobile home park
subdivision, the decision-making body shall find based on substantial evidence
in the record that the proposed mobile home subdivision complies with
California Government Code Section 66427.5, as more fully set forth herein. The
findings required for a T-P-D permit or major modification thereto by this Code
shall also be required if an increase in the number of mobile home spaces is
proposed.
   (f)   Conditions of approval. Mobile home park subdivisions shall be subject
to all of the following conditions, which shall be in addition to such other
conditions as deemed necessary:
   (1)   As specified under Section 66427.5 of the Subdivision Map Act, the
subdivider has offered each existing tenant the option of either buying or
renting the proposed space where his or her mobile home is situated.
   (2)   With respect to the nonpurchasing residents who are not lower income
households, as defined in Section 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code, the
monthly rent, including any applicable fees or charges for use of any
preconversion (i.e. prior to subdivision) amenities, may increase from the
preconversion rent to market levels, as defined in an appraisal conducted in
accordance with nationally recognized professional appraisal standards, in
equal annual increases over a four (4)-year period.
   (3)   With respect to nonpurchasing residents who are lower income
households, as defined in Section 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code, the
monthly rent, including any applicable fees or charges for use of any
preconversion amenities, may increase from the preconversion rent by an amount
equal to the average monthly increase in rent in the four (4) years immediately
preceding the conversion, except that in no event shall the monthly rent be
increased by an amount greater than the average monthly percentage increase in
the Consumer Price Index for the most recently reported period.
   [(4)   The subdivider shall provide a reasonable degree of on-site fire
protection, as determined by the Ventura County Fire District. Such protection
shall include, but not be limited to, water supply, fire hydrant location, and
standpipes.]*
   (5)   Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions for the mobile home park
subdivision shall be prepared and submitted to the Community Development
Director and City Attorney for approval and shall be recorded prior to or
concurrently with the final map.
   (6)   A survey of resident support has been conducted and the results filed
with the Community Development Director in accordance with the requirements of
Government Code Section 66427.5 and this chapter.
   (7)   A tenant impact report has been completed and filed with the
Department in accordance with the requirements of Government Code Section
66427.5 and this chapter;
   (8)   The conversion to resident ownership is consistent with the General
Plan and any applicable Specific or Area Plan;
   [(9)   The conversion is a bona fide resident conversion;]*
   (10)   Appropriate provision has been made for the establishment and funding
of an association or corporation adequate to ensure proper long-term management
and maintenance of all common facilities and infrastructure; and
   (11)   There are no conditions existing in the mobile home park that are
detrimental to public health or safety, provided, however, that if any such
conditions exist, the application for conversion may be approved if: (1) all of
the findings are required under Subsections (a) through (e) are made and (2)
the subdivider has instituted corrective measures adequate to ensure prompt and
continuing protection of the health and safety of park residents and the
general public.
   [(12)   For purposes of determining whether a proposed conversion is a bona
fide resident conversion, the following criteria shall be used:
   (i)   In compliance with Government Code Section 66427.5 and with this
chapter, the survey shows that more than fifty (50%) percent of owner occupied
resident households support the conversion to resident ownership, the
conversion shall be presumed to be a bona fide resident conversion.
   (ii)   Where the survey of resident support conducted in accordance with
Government Code Section 66427.5 and with this chapter shows that at least
twenty (20%) percent but not more than fifty (50%) percent of the owner
occupied resident households support the conversion to resident ownership, the
subdivider shall have the burden of demonstrating that the proposed conversion
is a bona fide resident conversion. In such cases, the subdivider shall
demonstrate, at a minimum, that a viable plan, with a reasonable likelihood of
success as determined by the decision-maker, is in place to convey the majority
of the lots to current residents of the park within a reasonable period of
time.
   (iii)   Where the survey of support conducted in accordance with Government
Code Section 66427.5 and with this chapter shows that less than twenty (20%)
percent of residents support the conversion to resident ownership, the
conversion shall be presumed not to be a bona fide resident conversion.
   (13)   The City's Rent Stabilization Board shall, in the first instance
subject to appeal to the City Council, be charged with evaluating for
certification certify that all of the foregoing conditions have been met, and
that if more than twenty (20%) percent of the owner occupied residential
households in the park support the conversion determining whether such
conversion is a bona fide resident conversion.]*
(§ 4, Ord. 1459-NS, eff. April 21, 2006, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1503-NS, eff.
August 14, 2008)
Editor's Note:
   *In Vallecito Mobile Estates, Ltd v. City of Thousand Oaks, Ventura County
Superior Court Case No. 56-2008-00328552 (7-13-2009), a ruling was issued which
invalidated the bracketed language found in the foregoing § 9-4.1905.
Sec. 9-4.1906. Mobile home park change of use.
   (a)   No mobile home park shall be closed and cease to operate and no
application or permit necessary for a mobile home park change of use shall be
approved, without first obtaining approval of an Impact Report as described in
this section and in Section 65863.7 of the Government Code.
   (b)   Within ninety (90) days before a mobile home park change of use
occurs, as defined in Section
9-4.1902 (g), park management shall provide written notification to the
Community Development Director and shall either file an Impact Report as
described in Section
9-4.1906 (c)(3) or shall petition the Community Development Director to make a
finding that a change of use is not occurring because park management is making
a good faith effort to lease the spaces that are unoccupied by mobile homes to
mobile home owners.
   (c)   Application Requirements. The application necessary for a mobile home
park change of use shall include the following:
   (1)   Certification that residents and mobile home owners have been notified
of the proposed change of use in accordance with Civil Code Section 798.56 (g)
(1). Certification shall consist of a letter signed by the applicant certifying
that the required notice has been given and when the notice was given, with a
copy of the written notice attached.
   (2)   A certified list of the names and addresses of all tenants residing in
the mobile home park and where applicable, nonresident mobile home owners,
complete as of the time the application is filed. The names and addresses shall
also be provided in a digital file to facilitate mailing of public hearing
notices.
   (3)    An Impact Report as required under Section 65863.7 of the California
Government Code, which shall include the following:
   (i)   The names and addresses of all resident mobile home owners, absentee
mobile home owners and residents who are not mobile home owners; the length of
time each space has been occupied by the current mobile home, mobile home owner
and resident; the age, size and type of each mobile home; and the current
monthly rent charged for each mobile home space.
   (ii)   An evaluation of the availability of adequate replacement housing in
mobile home parks within twenty (20) miles of the proposed change of use. The
evaluation shall include the name of each park surveyed and whether or not
there are spaces available for relocation. If there are spaces available in a
particular park, then the evaluation shall include, but not be limited to, a
location map of the mobile home parks and a comparison between those parks and
the park proposed for a change of use. At a minimum, the evaluation shall
address the following factors: distance from the park proposed for a change of
use, park amenities, space availability, rent and rent control requirements,
park restrictions with respect to mobile home size, age, condition or other
factors, security deposit requirements, utility connection charges, resident
restrictions and any other factors that affect the feasibility of relocation.
   (iii)   Itemized estimates of the costs of relocating each mobile home and
mobile home resident to a mobile home park within twenty (20) miles, including
relocation of the mobile home and associated accessories and relocation of the
residents and their possessions. Relocation costs include at a minimum the
costs of disassembly, removal, transportation and reinstallation at the new
site, including replacement or reconstruction of blocks, skirting, siding,
porches, decks, awnings or earthquake bracing, if necessitated by the
relocation. Relocation costs also include payment of insurance for potential
damage to personal property caused by the relocation, reasonable living
expenses of displaced mobile home park residents from the date of actual
displacement until occupancy at the new park, any security deposit required at
the new park, utility connection changes and the difference between the rent
paid at the existing park and any higher rent at the new park during the first
twenty-four (24) months of tenancy at the new park.
   (iv)   A list of the mobile homes proposed for relocation to a mobile home
park within twenty (20) miles of the change of use and the mobile homes that
are not proposed for relocation together with an explanation why each home is
or is not proposed for relocation.
   [(v)   An estimate of the in-place market value of each mobile home not
proposed for relocation or later found to be not eligible for relocation, in
its current location, assuming the continued operation of the mobile home park
in a safe, sanitary and well-maintained condition and an explanation of the
basis used for estimating the in-place market value of each mobile home.]**
   (vi)   A "Relocation Assistance and Mitigation Plan" which shall include a
timetable for physically relocating each mobile home and a proposal for payment
of relocation assistance and measures to mitigate the impacts of the change of
use pursuant to Section
9-4.1906 (d).
   (4)   The nomination of a Relocation Counselor to be approved and contracted
by the City of Thousand Oaks, paid for by Applicant, with expertise in
assisting individuals and families in matters of forced relocation.
   (d)   In approving an Impact Report, the decision-making body shall impose
measures as conditions of approval to mitigate the adverse impacts of the
change of use on mobile home owners and residents in the mobile home park. The
specific conditions of approval of a particular application shall be determined
on an application-by-application basis with regard to the facts and
circumstances of the park subject to the change of use and all of the
information contained in the application, and as suggested by the Relocation
Counselor, but shall not exceed the reasonable cost of relocation. The
"reasonable cost of relocation" shall be defined as not less than as set forth
below in (d)(1), following; or, in the event no mobile home park within twenty
(20) miles of the current mobile home site of the tenant proposed to be
displaced is willing to accept the tenant's mobile home, or the mobile home is
not capable of being moved and replaced functionally intact, a combined total
of the consideration set forth below in (d)(2), (3), (4) and (5):
   (1)    Payment of the cost of relocating each mobile home to another mobile
home park within twenty (20) miles of the change of use, including any
combination of the costs of relocation described in Section
9-4.1906(c)(3)(iii);
   [(2)   Payment of a lump sum equal to the in-place market value of each
mobile home in its current location, based upon the assumption that the mobile
home park will continue operation in a safe, sanitary and well-maintained
condition regardless of actual plans;]**
   (3)   Payment of a lump sum equal to the costs of moving displaced mobile
home park residents to alternative housing;
   (4)   Payment of a lump sum equal to the first and last month rent and any
security deposit in alternative rental housing for displaced mobile home park
residents.
   [(5)   In no case shall any "cost of relocation" be less than that which
would be required under the California Relocation Assistance Law, California
Government Code § 7260, et seq., as if the project were deemed to be caused by
State action.]**
   (6)   Should there be any disagreement regarding the value to be paid under
any of the provisions of this measure, the parties shall forthwith arbitrate
said matter before the City's Rent Stabilization Board, which decision shall be
final, subject only to reversal by a trial de novo in the Superior Court.
Should the party demanding a trial de novo not receive a more favorable
determination from the Superior Court than that provided by the Rent
Stabilization Board, then that party shall pay the other party his/her/its
costs, including reasonable attorney fees.
   (7)   Once the reasonable cost of relocation has been paid, Tenant shall be
relieved of any cost related to the removal of Tenant's mobile home from
Applicant's property. No tenant shall be required to vacate any mobile home
park until all payments required hereunder have been paid.
   (e)   The applicant and any mobile home owner or resident in the mobile home
park may agree to a mutually satisfactory relocation assistance and mitigation
program. To be valid, such agreement shall be in writing in the form and
content required by applicable state law and shall include the following:
   (1)   A provision stating that the tenant is aware of the provisions of this
Section
9-4.1906;
   (2)   A copy of this Section
9-4.1906 as an attachment; and
   (3)   A provision in at least twelve (12) -point type that clearly informs
the tenant of the right to seek the advice of an attorney prior to signing the
agreement.
   (f)   Relocation Assistance Adjustment.
   (1)   Any person who files an application for a mobile home park change of
use may simultaneously request an adjustment to the relocation assistance
obligations that could otherwise be required as mitigation for the impacts on
displaced mobile home owners and residents in accordance with Section
9-4.1906(d).
   (2)   If an adjustment to the relocation assistance obligations is
requested, the Impact Report described in Section
9-4.1906(c)(3) shall also include all of the following:
   (i)   A statement that the applicant is requesting an adjustment to the
relocation assistance obligations that could otherwise be required in
accordance Section
9-4.1906(d);
   (ii)   An estimate of the total cost of the relocation assistance
obligations that could be required in accordance Section
9-4.1906(d);
   (iii)   A report prepared by an expert such as a real estate financing and
development consultant substantiating why the relocation assistance obligations
would result in a take of property in violation of the United States or
California Constitutions and, if so, the minimum extent that such obligations
would have to be adjusted to prevent a taking of property;
   (iv) Such other information that the applicant believes to be pertinent, or
which may be required by the Community Development Director.
   (3)   The decision-making body may consider an application for a Relocation
Assistance Adjustment only for one (1) or both of the following reasons:
   (i)   That the requirement for relocation assistance would eliminate
substantially all reasonable use or economic value of the property. Such
justification may only be established if it is demonstrated that the imposition
of the relocation requirements would prevent the reasonable use or economic
value of the property for other, alternate uses and that the continued use of
the property as a mobile home park is not a reasonable economic use of the
property.
   (ii)   That a court of competent jurisdiction has determined that the mobile
home park closure or cessation of use of the property as a mobile home park is
necessary, and that such court has taken further action that would prohibit or
preclude the payment of relocation assistance benefits. Notwithstanding this
provision, the Land Use designations and zoning would remain in place, subject
to a vote of the citizens of Thousand Oaks.
   (g)   Special notice requirements.
   (1)   At least thirty (30) days prior to a hearing or any other action on
any entitlement application for a mobile home park change of use, or any
hearing on an Impact Report, the City shall inform the applicant in writing of
the provisions of Section 798.56 of the Civil Code and all applicable local
requirements which impose a duty on the applicant to notify residents and
mobile home owners of the proposed change of use and shall specify the manner
in which the applicant shall verify that residents and mobile home owners have
been notified of the proposed change of use. No hearing or other action shall
be taken on any entitlement application for a mobile home park change of use or
Impact Report until the applicant has verified to the satisfaction of the City
that the residents and mobile home owners have been adequately notified.
   (2)   At least thirty (30) days prior to the Planning Commission hearing on
an Impact Report, the applicant shall provide written notice to the residents
of the park that the applicant will be appearing before the Planning Commission
to request permission or permits for a change of use and provide a copy of the
Impact Report described in Section
9-4.1906(c)(3) to the residents of the mobile home park with notice of the
hearing date.
   (3)   In addition to other public hearing notice requirements, the City
shall mail written notices of a public hearing on any applications related to a
mobile home park change of use to all tenants residing within the affected
mobile home park and all non-resident owners of mobile homes within the
affected mobile home park.
   (h)   Required findings of fact. The decision- making body shall make the
following affirmative findings prior to approving or recommending approval of
an Impact Report:
   (1)   That the Impact Report, as approved, is adequate and contains
reasonable measures for mitigating the impact of the change of use on displaced
mobile home owners and residents.
   (2)   That the Impact Report, as approved, complies with the requirements of
the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code.
   (i)   Conditions of approval.
   (1)   All of the mitigation measures imposed herein shall be performed prior
to actual change of use of the mobile home park.
   (2)   No mobile home or mobile home resident shall be required to vacate a
mobile home park until all of the mitigation measures applicable to that mobile
home and resident set forth in the approved Impact Report have been completed.
   [(3)   After approval of a mobile home park change of use Impact Report,
management of the park shall provide each mobile home owner twenty-four (24)
months or more written notice of termination of tenancy and a copy of the
approved Impact Report.]*
   (4)   No grading permit or building permit shall be issued unless the
mitigation measures as described in the approved Impact Report have been
completed for every mobile home in the park.
   (5)   As a condition of approval of an Impact Report for a mobile home park
change of use, the owners of the mobile home park shall enter into a written
agreement with the City to ensure compliance with this Section
9-4.1906 and the mitigation measures contained in the approved Impact Report.
(§ 4, Ord. 1459-NS, eff. April 21, 2006, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1503-NS, eff.
August 14, 2008)
Editor's Note:
   *In Vallecito Mobile Estates, Ltd v. City of Thousand Oaks, Ventura County
Superior Court Case No. 56-2008-00328552 (7-13-2009), a ruling was issued which
invalidated the bracketed language found in the foregoing § 9-4.1906.
   **In City of Thousand Oaks v. 1200 Newbury LLC, Ventura County Superior
Court Case No. 56-2009-00354680 (1-28-2010), a ruling was issued which
invalidated the bracketed language found in the foregoing § 9-4.1906.
Sec. 9-4.1907. Denial for coercive acts.
   The decision-making body may deny any proposed condominium conversion,
mobile home park subdivision or mobile home park change of use where there is
evidence that tenants have been coerced to publicly support or approve such
proposal, or to refrain from publicly opposing it, or to forego any assistance
to which they may be entitled.
   It is against the public policy to attempt to avert the provisions of this
article by coercing the waiver of any rights or privileges created or protected
herein. Any provision of a lease or rental agreement which purports to waive a
tenant's rights under this article or which require prior consent to the
condominium conversion, mobile home park subdivision or mobile home park change
of use shall be null, void and unenforceable.
(§4, Ord. 1459-NS, eff. April 21, 2006)
Article 20. Mobile Home Park Development Zones
Sec. 9-4.2001. Purpose (T-P-D).
   Because of their unusual characteristics, the large area required for
operation, the congestion of persons and property customarily found in such
activities, the traffic problems created thereby, and other conditions caused
by their presence which might adversely affect the public safety, health,
morals, and welfare unless adequate safeguards are imposed, trailer parks,
trailer courts, mobile home parks, and public trailer camps shall require
special consideration as to their proper location and character in relation to
adjacent uses and to the development of the City and as to the conditions under
which each such use may be permitted. Therefore, such uses shall be permitted
only if a planned development permit is obtained in the manner set forth in
Article 28 of this chapter and such use conforms to every term and condition of
the permit. The Commission shall not grant a permit for any use when it finds
that the use will be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety, or
welfare or to the property in the vicinity or zone in which the use will be
situated, and, secondly, that the imposition of conditions upon the requested
use will not prevent such effects.
(§ 8135, T.O.O.C., renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970)
Sec. 9-4.2002. Permitted uses (T-P-D).
   Only the uses identified in Article 21 of this chapter as being permitted in
the Trailer Park Development (T-P-D) Zone shall be established or maintained on
property located therein, subject to the permitting requirements and
limitations set forth in said Article 21.
(§ 8135.1, T.O.O.C., renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970,
amended by § XXIX, Ord. 220-NS, eff. August 19, 1971, and § 36, Ord. 1620-NS,
eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.2003. Senior mobile home park overlay zone (SMHP).
   The purposes of this zone are:
   (a)   To recognize senior mobile home parks as walkable communities where
seniors may live actively and independently among peers, the preservation of
those qualities being central to residents' continued health, welfare, and
financial stability.
   (b)   To recognize that senior mobile home parks provide one of the few
housing options within Thousand Oaks available to seniors that are unsubsidized
and allow for independent living in a detached dwelling.
   (c)   To preserve a significant source of unsubsidized, senior housing by
ensuring that senior mobile home parks within the City's jurisdiction remain
predominantly available to seniors and are not converted to allow occupancy by
persons of all ages.
   (d)   To recognize mobile home parks as communities in which residents are
substantially invested and to provide for the security of tenancy comparable to
that of other residential communities less vulnerable to redevelopment.
   (e)   To meet the purpose of the federal Housing for Older Persons Act of
1995 (42 U.S.C. § 3607).
   (f)   To prevent senior mobile home parks from converting or becoming all-
ages mobile home parks.
   (g)   To ensure a sufficient supply of land for this type of use remains in
the City for seniors.
(§ 8135.5, T.O.O.C., renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970,
amended by § XXX, Ord. 220-NS, eff. August 19, 1971, § XV, Ord. 312-NS, eff.
November 2, 1972, § 17, Ord. 1555-NS, eff. May 13, 2011, and repealed by § 37,
Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016, amended by Part 3, Ord. 1718-NS, eff.
September 12, 2023)
Sec. 9-4.2004. Development permits: General conditions and limitations (T-P-D).
   Unless otherwise stated in the development permit, such permit shall be
subject to the following conditions and limitations:
   (a)   Permanent structures shall not exceed two (2) stories or thirty-two
(32’) feet in height.
   (b)   A trailer park shall have a minimum gross site area of ten (10) acres.
There shall be a minimum of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of
net lot area for each individual or combined trailer unit and an average of
three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet of net lot area for all trailer
units, exclusive of roadways, recreational areas, or any other common
facilities.
   (c)   If a trailer park site fronts or sides on a public street or highway,
a setback area of at least twenty (20’) feet in depth, unencumbered by
buildings, fences, or walls, shall be provided and permanently maintained in
landscaping.
   (d)   All distances between trailers and related accessory buildings shall
be required pursuant to State rules and regulations governing the construction
of trailer parks; provided, however, no occupied portion of a trailer shall be
closer than five (5’) feet to any of its boundary or lot lines.
   (e)   Each trailer unit shall be provided with two (2) on-site parking
spaces meeting the requirements of Section
9-4.2404 of Article 24 of this chapter; provided, however, the two (2) spaces
may be located in tandem. In addition, one space for each five (5) trailer
units shall be provided in guest parking areas located throughout the park.
   (f)   The roadways within the trailer park shall be private roadways having
a paved width of not less than twenty-eight (28’) feet. No parking shall be
permitted upon such roadways. Whenever visitor parking is to be provided along
such roadways, the paved width shall be increased to not less than thirty-three
(33’) feet. The layout or design of such roadways shall provide an area for
reversing the movement of trailers and automobiles, either by the roadways
being connected with an intersecting roadway having an inside radius of not
less than twenty (20’) feet or by providing a “tee” or short crossroad near the
end farthest from the public road entrance. Such “tee” shall have a paved
roadway not less than twenty-eight (28') feet in width and shall extend not
less than sixty (60’) feet each way from the centerline of the roadway to which
it is connected.
   (g)   Roadways shall be graded and constructed to provide adequate drainage
facilities and lighting as required by the City Engineer.
   (h)   Each trailer park shall be entirely enclosed by a solid decorative
masonry wall six (6’) feet in height, except for vehicular or pedestrian
entrances and the required street yards. All storage yards and trash storage
areas shall be separated from mobile home spaces by a six (6’) foot high
masonry wall.
   (i)   Not less than three (3%) percent of the gross area of a trailer park
shall be devoted to recreational areas.
   (j)   Advertising signs, structures, or devices of any character placed or
maintained on any land used as a trailer park shall be used only for the
purpose of identifying or advertising the trailer park and the accommodations
offered. Before being erected, the size, character, location, and number of all
such advertising signs, structures, or devices shall be approved by the
Commission. Any proposed freestanding sign shall not exceed twenty (20’) feet
in height or fifty (50) square feet in area, and any proposed wall sign shall
not extend above the top of the wall nor exceed one hundred (100) square feet
in area. A freestanding sign may be softly illuminated from the interior, but
any wall sign shall be only indirectly lighted. Small directional or traffic
control signs, lighted or unlighted, may be erected and maintained within the
limits of the trailer park or on adjoining property when approved by the
Community Development Director as to location and character. No other
advertising sign, structure, or device shall be permitted in the T-P-D Zone,
except one unlighted sign not exceeding one hundred (100) square feet in area
pertaining to the sale or lease of the lot upon which it is displayed.
   (k)   Minor modifications of conditions imposed in permits may be made by
the Community Development Director whenever such modifications will not alter
the character of the uses permitted.
   (l)   The provisions of Article 26 of this chapter relating to the
dedication of land, payment of fees, or both for park and recreational purposes
shall be applicable to land for which T-P-D permits are required.
(§ 8135.2, as amended by Ord. 221, as renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff.
November 5, 1970, as amended by § VI, Ord. 376-NS, eff. May 31, 1973)
Sec. 9-4.2005. Occupancy limitations & rentals.
   At least 80 percent of the occupied units in a Senior Mobile Home Park must
be occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older. Senior Mobile Home
Park occupancy satisfies the requirements of this section even if:
   (a)   There are unoccupied mobile homes, provided that at least 80 percent
of the occupied mobile homes are occupied by at least one person 55 years of
age or older.
   (b)   To the extent permitted by applicable law, for a period of no more
than two consecutive years fewer than 80 percent of the occupied units are
occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older, provided the Senior
Mobile Home Park has reserved all unoccupied mobile homes for occupancy by at
least one person 55 years of age or older.
(§ 11, Ord. 757-NS, eff. September 4, 1980, as amended by § 4, Ord. 867-NS,
eff. September 4, 1984 and repealed by § 35, Ord. 1555-NS, eff. May 13, 2011,
reinstated by Part 5, Ord. 1718-NS, eff. September 12, 23)
Sec. 9-4.2006. Age verification & compliance procedures.
   (a)   The City shall determine, and maintain summary documentation
establishing, that at least 80 percent of the mobile homes in a Senior Mobile
Home Park are occupied by at least one resident who is 55 years of age or
older. The occupancy verification documentation shall be made available by park
owners for inspection by the City upon reasonable notice and request.
   (b)   At least once every two years owners and operators of Senior Mobile
Home Parks shall submit documentation confirming that at least 80 percent of
all occupied mobile homes are occupied by at least one resident 55 years of age
or older to the Planning Division of the City.
   (c)   Upon the operative date of this Section
9-4.2006, and no later than 30 days after the request for age verification by a
mobile home park owner, operator, or employee of the owner or operator, all
owners and residents of all mobile homes units located, or proposed to be
located, within the Senior Mobile Home Park Overlay Zone shall provide to the
park owner or operator, and the Planning Division of the City's Community
Development Department the requested age verification documents or information.
   (d)   The City shall consider government-issued identification to be
reliable documentation of the age of the residents of the mobile home park,
provided that it contains specific information about current age or date of
birth (e.g., driver's license).
   (e)   Reliable documentation shall also include a certification in a lease,
application, affidavit, or other document signed by any member of the household
age 18 or older asserting that at least one person in the unit is 55 years of
age or older.
   (f)   If the occupant(s) of a particular mobile home refuses or is unable to
comply with these age verification procedures, the City may, if it has
sufficient evidence, consider the unit to be occupied by at least one person 55
years of age or older. Such evidence may include:
      (1)   Government records or documents;
      (2)   Prior forms or applications; or
      (3)   A statement from an individual who has personal knowledge of the
age of the occupants. The individual's statement must set forth the basis for
such knowledge and be signed under penalty of perjury.
   (g)   Failure to submit the verification required by this chapter or failure
of the verification to confirm.a mobile home park with the Senior Mobile Home
Park Overlay Zone (SMHP) meets the definition in Section
9-4.202 shall constitute a violation of the zoning ordinance, subject to
enforcement in the manner provided in Municipal Code Section
1-2.01.
(Part 5, Ord. 1718-NS, eff. September 12, 2023)
Sec. 9-4.2007. Duty of mobile home park residents to comply with age
verification request.
   Upon the operative date of this Section
9-4.2007, and no later than 30 days after the request for age verification by a
mobile home park owner or operator or an employee or agent of the City, all
owners and residents of all mobile homes located, or proposed to be located,
within the Senior Mobile Home Park Overlay Zone shall provide to the mobile
home park operator and the Planning Division of the City the requested age
verification documents.
(Part 5, Ord. 1718-NS, eff. September 12, 2023)
Sec. 9-4.2008. Duty of mobile home park owners/operators to comply with age
reporting requirement and certification.
   (a)   Within 90 days of the passage of this Section
9-4.2008, and then every two years thereafter, the owner or operator of each
Senior Mobile Home Park shall report to the Planning Director of the City
confirmation that at least 80 percent of all occupied mobile homes are occupied
by at least one resident 55 years of age or older. The owners or operators of
each senior mobile home park shall maintain procedures for verifying the age of
park residents.
   (b)   The senior mobile home park owner or operator shall provide to the
City a certification substantially in the following form:
   "I [name] hereby certify that there is a least one occupant 55 years of age
or older living in _ [number of such mobile homes] mobile homes out of a total
number of _ [total number] mobile homes located in this mobile home park. This
certification is based on my personal knowledge of the residents, evidence
provided to me in the form of official government documents containing specific
information about the current age of the residents, resident affidavits, or age
certifications made by residents."
(Part 5, Ord. 1718-NS, eff. September 12, 2023)
Article 21. Uses Allowed by Zone
Editor’s note: Former Article 21. Airport Planned Development was repealed by
Ord. 1555-NS, eff. May 13, 2011
Sec. 9-4.2101. Purpose.
   This article lists in matrix form the various land uses permitted within the
City, the specific zones in which they are permitted, the entitlement permit
type and approval authority required, and any specific limitations on
individual permitted uses not specified elsewhere in this chapter. All permit
applications associated with the listed uses shall be processed in accordance
with Article 28 of this chapter and with the provisions of the applicable
article within this chapter for the zone in which the use is located.
(§ 38, Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.2102. Permitted uses in specific plan areas.
   (a)   General. For property located within an adopted specific plan area,
the specific plan will govern permitted uses. In its regulation of permitted
uses, a specific plan may regulate permitted land uses as follows:
   (1)   Specific Plan as Zoning. Where the City's zoning maps established
pursuant to Sec.
9-4.304 of this chapter only show the applicable specific plan label and do not
show the property as being within one or more zoning districts established by
this chapter, or where the land is zoned R-P-D with the SP (Specific Plan)
subzone, then the specific plan shall define the permitted uses within that
specific plan area. This listing may also reference the permitted uses within
one or more zoning districts established pursuant to this chapter as the
permitted use regulations within the specific plan or a portion thereof.
   (2)   Specific Plan Overlaying Zoning Districts. Where the land within the
specific plan is also designated on the City's zoning maps established pursuant
to Sec.
9-4.304 of this chapter as being within one or more underlying zoning districts
(e.g., M-1 or C-3), then the permitted use regulations of the applicable zoning
district set forth in this article shall apply unless provided otherwise by the
specific plan.
   (3)   Specific Plan No. 15. Appendix A of this Title sets forth regulations
for Specific Plan 15, including permitted uses in addition to those shown in
this article for the applicable City zoning district.
(§ 38, Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.2103. Matrix key.
   The following designations within the cells of the matrices presented in
Sections
9-4.2104 and
9-4.2105 denote whether a listed use is permitted in a given zone and if so,
what type of entitlement application is required and the level of authority
that is required in order to render a decision on the application.
Symbol Type of Entitlement Required Discretionary authority
Symbol     Type of Entitlement Required      Discretionary authority
           N/A - use is permitted without a
P          discretionary entitlement,        N/A
           subject to applicable Municipal
           Code provisions
DP         Development Permit                Planning Commission, or CD
                                             Director per Sec. 9- 4.2804(a)(1)
EFR        Eligible Facilities Request       CD Director or City Engineer
           Permit
FAP        Farm Animal Permit                CD Director1
HOP        Home Occupation Permit            CD Director1
HPD        Hillside Planned Development      Planning Commission
           Permit
PPD        Precise Plan of Design Permit     CD Director1
RPD        Residential Planned Development   Planning Commission, or CD
           Permit                            Director1 per Sec. 9- 4.2804(a)(2)
SUP        Special Use Permit (Planning      Planning Commission
           Commission)
SUPA       Special Use Permit                CD Director1
           (Administrative)
SWF        Small Wireless Facility Permit    CD Director or City Engineer
TPD        Trailer Park Development Permit   Planning Commission
Blank cell Use is not permitted in that zone N/A
 
1   “CD Director” = Community Development Director or designee.
(§ 38, Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016, as amended by § 5, Ord. 1661-NS,
eff. March 5, 2019)
Sec. 9-4.2104. Permitted use matrix - Residential zones.
Land Use Category Residential Zoning Classifications
                  R-A R-E R-O R-1 R-2 R-3 RPD RPD - SFD HPD HPD - SFD TPD
Land Use       Residential Zoning Classifications
Category       R-A  R-E  R-O  R-1  R-2  R-3  RPD  RPD - HPD  HPD - SFD TPD
                                                  SFD
Agricultural and Extractive Uses
Agriculture -
crop           P    P    P    P                     P    P          
production
Apiculture and
honey
extraction,
per            P                                               
limitations in
Sec.
9-4.2106(a)
Commercial
farms with up
to 500         P    SUP                                         
chickens and
rabbits
Commercial
farms with 500
or more        SUP  SUP                                         
chickens and
rabbits
Commercial
farms with up
to 12 small    P    SUP                                         
animals other
than rabbits
Commercial
farms with up
to 24 fowl
other than     P    SUP                                         
chickens
(turkeys, pea
fowl or guinea
fowl)
Commercial
farms for
turkey, pea    SUP  SUP                                         
fowl or guinea
fowl
Commercial
farms for
horses,        P    SUP                                         
bovines, sheep
or goats
Horticulture
and            P    P                                           
floriculture
                                                             
Animal Care Uses
Commercial
stables and    SUP  SUP                  SUP  SUP   SUP  SUP        
riding
academies
Dog kennels    P                                               
Horse stables,
per
limitations in P    P                    RPD  RPD   HPD  HPD        
Sec. 9-4.2106
(b)
Veterinary
hospitals and
clinics, small
animals
(includes      SUP                                             
boarding),
subject to
limitations of
Sec. 9-4.2106
(o)
                                                             
Commercial Uses
Limited
commercial
uses of
existing                           SUP                         
buildings, per
limitations in
Sec. 9-4.2106
(c)
Commercial
uses pursuant
to approved                            SUP                     
specific plan
in RPD- SP
sub-zone only
                                                             
Community Care Uses
Day nurseries
(child care    SUPA SUPA SUPA SUPA SUPA SUPA SUPA SUPA               SUPA
centers)
Assisted       Not permitted in residential zones. See Non-Residential Zoning
living         Classifications matrix in Sec.
facilities     9-4.2105.
Residential
Care
Facilities
(Large) per        SUP                           SUP  SUP        
limitations in
Sec. 9-4.2106
(d)
Residential
Care           P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P     P    P         P
Facilities
(Small)
Substance
abuse
treatment
facilities per     SUP                           SUP  SUP        
limitations in
Sec. 9-4.2106
(e)
Continuing
care
communities
(includes both
independent    Not permitted in residential zones. See Non-Residential Zoning
and assisted   Classifications matrix in Sec.
living         9-4.2105.
facilities and
may also
include
convalescent
hospitals)
Supportive
Housing
developments                   P    P    P                       
with 50 units
or less
Supportive
Housing
developments                   SUP  SUP  SUP                     
with more than
50 units
 
Institutional and Civic Uses
Places of
worship        SUP  SUP      SUP  SUP  SUP  SUP  SUP   SUP  SUP        
(religious
facilities)
Columbaria     SUP  SUP      SUP  SUP  SUP  SUP  SUP   SUP  SUP        
Fraternal
lodges and                         SUP  SUP                     
clubs
Park and
recreational                                    HPD  HPD        
facilities
                                                             
Protected Ridgeline Overlay (PR) Zone Standards
Waiver or
modification
of PR overlay
zone           SUP  SUP  SUP  SUP  SUP  SUP  SUP  SUP   SUP  SUP        
standards, per
limitations of
Sec. 9-4.2106
(f)
                                                             
Residential Uses
Farm cottages,
per
limitations of PPD  PPD                                         
Sec.
9-4.2106(g)
Farmworker
dwelling (6 or P    P                                           
fewer)
Farmworker
Housing
Complex (up to SUP  SUP                                         
12 units and
36 beds)
Mobile homes                                                 TPD
One-family
dwelling per   PPD  PPD  PPD  PPD  PPD  PPD  RPD1 RPD1  HPD  HPD        
Sec.
9-4.2106(h)
Two-family
dwellings per                  PPD  RPD  RPD       HPD            
Sec.
9-4.2106(h)
Multiple
family
dwellings
(apartments
including
single room                        RPD  RPD       HPD            
occupancy
units, condos,
townhouses)
per Sec.
9-4.2106(h)
Fraternity and
sorority                           RPD  SUP                     
houses
               1   Per Sec.
Processing     9-4.2804(a)(2), applications for residential planned development
Note           permits for the approval of four (4) or fewer single family
               detached dwellings within the RPD zone are processed
               administratively.
                                                             
Residential Zone Accessory Uses
Accessory
dwelling       P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P     P    P          
units, per
Article 45
Dish antennas
over 18 inches SUPA SUPA SUPA SUPA SUPA SUPA SUPA SUPA  SUPA SUPA       
in diameter
Food
cooperatives,  SUPA SUPA SUPA SUPA SUPA SUPA SUPA SUPA                
per Sec.
9-4.2520
Guest houses,
per
limitations of PPD  PPD                                         
Sec.
9-4.2106(i)
Ham radio      SUPA SUPA SUPA SUPA SUPA SUPA SUPA SUPA  SUPA SUPA       
towers
Home
occupations,   HOP  HOP  HOP  HOP  HOP  HOP  HOP  HOP   HOP  HOP       HOP
per Sec.
9-4.2518
Incidental and
accessory uses
and
structures,    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P     P    P         P
per
limitations of
Sec.
9-4.2106(j)
Keeping of
bovines, sheep
and/or goats
etc. per       P    P        P                                   
limitations of
Sec.
9-4.2106(k)
Keeping of
horses per
limitations of P    P    P    P            P    P     P    P          
Sec.
9-4.2106(k)
Keeping of
racing homing
pigeons, not
to exceed 48       P        P                                   
birds per lot
or parcel at
one time
Keeping of
small animals
for family use
per            P    P    P    FAP                                 
limitations of
Sec. 9-4.2106
(l)
Large family   SUPA SUPA SUPA SUPA SUPA SUPA SUPA SUPA  SUPA SUPA       
day care
Residential
sports
facilities,    PPD  PPD  PPD  PPD  PPD  PPD  PPD  PPD   PPD  PPD        
per Sec. 9-
4.2524
Small and
large family   P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P     P    P          
day care
Stands for
sale of
agricultural
products grown P                                               
on premises,
per Sec. 9-
4.2106(m)
Temporary
model home and
real estate
sales          P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P     P    P          
complexes, per
limitations of
Sec. 9-4.2106
(n)
Water supply,
per
limitations of P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P     P    P         P
Sec. 9-4.2106
(o)
Utility & Communication Uses
Wireless
communications SUP  SUP  SUP  SUP  SUP  SUP  SUP  SUP   SUP  SUP       SUP
facilities2
Small wireless SWF  SWF  SWF  SWF  SWF  SWF  SWF  SWF   SWF  SWF       SWF
facilities
Eligible
facilities     EFR  EFR  EFR  EFR  EFR  EFR  EFR  EFR   EFR  EFR       EFR
requests (6409
(a))
               2 Wireless communications facilities that do not meet the
Footnote       definition of small wireless facilities or eligible facilities
               requests.
 
(§ 38, Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016, as amended by § 7, Ord. 1631-NS,
eff. July 14, 2017, § 6, Ord. 1661-NS, eff. March 5, 2019, Part 6, Ord. 1678-
NS, eff. February 28, 2020, and Part 2, Ord. 1710-NS, eff. March 17, 2023; § 2,
Ord. 1729-NS, eff. May 24, 2024; § 6, Ord. 1732-NS, eff. November 22, 2024; §
2, Ord. 1733-NS, eff. January 3, 2025; Part 2, Ord. 1735-NS, eff. April 25,
2025)
Sec. 9-4.2104.5 Permitted use matrix - Mixed-Use zones and Mixed-Use Overlay
zones.
Land Use Category Zoning Classification
                  MU/MUOZ
Land Use Category                                         Zoning Classification
                                                          MU/MUOZ
Animal Care Uses
Veterinary offices in enclosed building with no boarding  DP
Veterinary hospitals and clinics, small animals (includes SUPA
boarding), subject to limitations of Sec. 9-4.2106(p)
Community Care Uses
Assisted living facilities                                SUPA
Day nurseries (child care centers)                        DP
Emergency shelters, subject to limitations of Sec.        P
9-4.2106(r)
Residential care facilities (large) per limitations in
Sec.                                                      SUPA
9-4.2106(d)
Supportive housing developments with 50 units or less     P
Supportive housing developments with more than 50 units
subject to limitations of Sec.                            SUP
9-4.2527
Eating and Drinking Establishments
Restaurants, cafes, coffee shops, and other specialized
food and beverage service establishments (e.g.,           DP/SUP1
beverages, pastry, desserts, fast food) without alcoholic
beverage consumption (up to 0.5% alcohol by volume)
Restaurants, cafes, and other specialized food service
establishments with alcoholic beverage consumption        SUPA/SUP2
(greater than 0.5% alcohol by volume)
Restaurants, cafes, and other specialized food service    SUP
establishments, with dancing or live entertainment
Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, any
business otherwise permitted in the zone that is wholly   SUPA/SUP2
or incidentally engaged in the on-premises sale and
consumption of alcoholic beverages
Educational Uses
College and university extension classrooms and offices   SUPA
Martial arts studios                                       
   Less than 10,000 sq. ft.                            DP
   10,000 sq. ft. or more                              DP
Music schools                                             DP
Trade and training schools, per limitations of Sec.       DP
9-4.2106(t) if in C-4 zone
Industrial Uses
Alcoholic beverage production and storage - with          DP/SUPA3
incidental tasting, food service and retail sales
Institutional and Civic Uses
Clubs and lodges, private                                 SUPA
Libraries, branch, operated by a public agency            SUPA
Places of worship (religious facilities)                  DP/SUP
Medical and dental offices, including urgent care         DP
Medical and dental laboratories                           DP
Miscellaneous Uses
Any other use determined by Planning Commission to be     SUP
within general purpose and intent of the applicable zone
Caretaker or proprietor living quarters                   P
Outdoor barbeques in conjunction with a permitted and
related commercial operation (e.g. restaurants, meat      DP
markets)
Resource collection receptacles (recyclables)             DP
Other Uses (Non-Medical)
Administrative, business and professional offices         DP
Banks and similar financial services                      DP
Newspaper offices and plants                              DP
Personal and General Services
Appliance and electronic repair                           DP
Copying and reproduction services, including print shops  DP
Health clubs, fitness studios, gymnasiums:                 
   Less than 10,000 sq. ft. gross floor area (GFA)     SUPA
   10,000 sq. ft. GFA or more                          SUP
Household maintenance and repair services (e.g., shoe     DP
repair, tailor shop, locksmith, framing, watch repair)
Laundry (including laundromats) and dry cleaning          DP
establishments
Postal box and mailing services                           DP
Wedding chapels                                           SUPA
Protected Ridgeline Overlay (PR) Zone Standards
Waiver or modification of PR Overlay Zone standards, per  SUP
limitations of Sec. 9-4.2106(f)
Recreational and Open Space Uses
Arcades                                                   SUPA
Billiard and pool halls                                   DP
Bowling alleys                                            SUPA
Live entertainment venues                                 SUPA
Parks and playgrounds                                     DP
Skating rinks, indoor                                     SUPA
Theaters, indoor                                          DP
Residential
Mixed-use                                                 DP
Multi-family residential                                  DP
Retail Commercial Uses
Antique stores                                            DP
Apparel stores                                            DP
Art and crafts studios and galleries                      DP
Bakeries                                                  DP
Bookstores                                                DP
Confectionary stores                                      DP
Consumer electronics and appliances sales and services    DP
Department stores                                         DP
Dress-making shops                                        DP
Drugstores, pharmacies                                    DP
Food markets (e.g., grocery store, supermarket, meat      DP
markets and other specialty types)
Florist shops                                             DP
Furniture stores                                          DP
Garden centers                                            DP
Hardware stores                                           DP
Home decor shops and studios                              DP
Jewelry stores                                            DP
Junior department stores                                  DP
Liquor stores                                             SUP
Newsstands                                                DP
Pet shops, including grooming services                    DP
Retail stores with large showrooms for display of bulk
goods (e.g.,furniture, carpet, major appliance, and       DP
similar products)
Retail stores not otherwise listed, per limitations of    DP
Sec. 9- 4.2106(v)
Transient Lodging Uses
Hotels and motels                                         DP
Utility and Communication Uses
Wireless communications facilities4                       SUPA
Small wireless facilities                                 SWF
Eligible facilities requests (6409(a))                    EFR
Vehicle Related Uses
Transportation facilities                                 SUPA
Footnote
1SUP required for drive-through facilities.
2SUPA if no live entertainment is to be conducted on the premises; if live
entertainment is to be conducted, the SUP requires Planning Commission review
(SUP).
3SUPA required for up to a maximum 20,000 square feet in size with alcohol
tasting.
4Wireless communications facilities that do not meet the definition of small
wireless facilities or eligible facilities requests.
 
(§ 4, Ord. 1726-NS, eff. April 26, 2024, § 3, Ord. 1733-NS, eff. January 3,
2025)
 
Sec. 9-4.2105. Permitted use matrix - Non- residential zones.
                  Non-Residential Zoning Classifications
                                             M-1 M-2
Land Use Category C-O C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-2/AM For meaning of DP/SUP1 see P-L O-S
                                             footnote at end of matrix
                Non-Residential Zoning Classifications
                                                      M-1      M-2
Land Use                                              For meaning of
Category        C-O   C-1   C-2   C-3   C-4    C-2/AM DP/SUP1 see    P-L    O-S
                                                      footnote at
                                                      end of matrix
Agricultural and Extractive Uses
Agriculture -
crop production                P     P            P                    
only; no
animals
Farmworker
Dwelling (6 or                 P     P            P                    
fewer)
Farmworker
Housing Complex                SUP   SUP          SUP                  
(up to 12 units
and 36 beds)
Horticulture
and                  DP    DP    P     P      DP     P        SUP          
floriculture of
all types
Horticulture
and                            DP    DP           DP/                  
floriculture                                          SUP1
structures
                                                                   
Animal Care Uses
Dog kennels                                     SUP      SUP          
Horse stables
and riding                                      SUP                  
academies
Veterinary
offices in
enclosed             DP    DP    DP    DP                               
building with
no boarding
Veterinary
hospitals and
clinics, small
animals
(includes                 SUP   SUP   SUP          DP/      DP/          
boarding),                                            SUP1     SUP1
subject to
limitations of
Sec.
9-4.2106(p)
Veterinary
hospitals and
clinics, large
animals
(includes                                       SUP      SUP          
boarding)
subject to
limitations of
Sec.
9-4.2106(q)
Blacksmith                                      DP/      DP/          
shops                                                 SUP1     SUP1
                                                                   
Community Care Uses
Assisted living SUP                                           SUP     
facilities
Continuing care
communities
(includes both
independent and
assisted living                                              SUP     
facilities and
may also
include
convalescent
hospitals)
Day nurseries
(child care     SUPA  SUPA  SUPA  SUPA  SUPA         SUPA     SUPA  SUPA    
centers)
Emergency
shelters,
subject to                SUP                    SUP      SUP   SUP     
limitations of
Sec.
9-4.2106(r)
Residential
Care Facilities
(Large) per     SUP                                           SUP     
limitations in
Sec.
9-4.2106(d)
Substance Abuse
Treatment
Facilities per  SUP                                           SUP     
limitations in
Sec.
9-4.2106(e)
                                                                   
Eating & Drinking Establishments1
Coffee shops
accessory to an
office
building, per   SUPA                                                 
limitation of
Sec.
9-4.2106(s)
Nightclubs           SUP   SUP   SUP   SUP          SUP      SUP          
Restaurants,
cafes, coffee
shops, and
other
specialized
food and
beverage
service
establishments
(e.g.,               DP    DP    DP    DP     DP     SUP      SUP          
beverages,
pastry,
desserts, fast
food) without
alcoholic
beverage
consumption (up
to 0.5% alcohol
by volume)
Restaurants,
cafes, and
other
specialized
food service
establishments       SUPA  SUPA  SUPA  SUPA   SUPA   SUP      SUP          
with alcoholic        /SUP2 /SUP2 /SUP2 /SUP2  /SUP2
beverage
consumption
(greater than
0.5% alcohol by
volume)
Restaurants,
cafes, and
other
specialized
food service         SUP   SUP   SUP   SUP    SUP    SUP      SUP          
establishments,
with dancing or
live
entertainment
Notwithstanding
any other
provision to
the contrary,
any business
otherwise
permitted in
the zone that        SUPA  SUPA  SUPA  SUPA /       SUPA     SUPA  SUPA /  
is wholly or          /SUP2 /SUP2 /SUP2 SUP2          /SUP2    /SUP2 SUP2
incidentally
engaged in the
on- premises
sale and
consumption of
alcoholic
beverages
                2   SUPA if no live entertainment is to be conducted on the
Footnote        premises; if live entertainment is to be conducted, then the
                SUP requires Planning Commission review (SUP).
                                                                   
Educational Uses
College and
university
extension
classrooms and  DP         DP    DP    DP                               
offices, per
limitations of
Sec. 9-4.2106
(t)
College and                                                  SUP     
universities
Dancing schools
and studios                                       
                                                 
Less than                                                           
10,000 sq. ft.        DP    DP    DP    DP     DP     SUPA
                                                 
10,000 sq. ft.        DP    DP    DP    DP     DP     SUP
or more
Martial arts
studios                                           
(karate, judo,                                    
self defense)                                    
                    DP    DP    DP    DP     DP     SUPA                 
Less than                                        
10,000 sq. ft.                                   
                     DP    DP    DP    DP     DP     SUP
10,000 sq. ft.
or more
Music schools        DP    DP    DP    DP     DP                         
Public and
private schools                                              SUP     
serving grades
K-12
Trade and
training
schools, per                                          DP/      DP/
limitations of       SUPA  DP    DP    DP     DP     SUPA1    SUPA1        
Sec. 9-4.2106
(t) if in C-
4 zone
                                                                   
Industrial Uses
Alcoholic
beverage
production and                                  DP/                  
storage - no                                          SUP1
tasting or
retail sales
Alcoholic
beverage
production and
storage - with                                  SUPA/                
incidental                                            SUP3
tasting, food
service and
retail sales
Bakery plants                                   DP/      DP/          
                                                      SUP1     SUP1
Bottling plants                                 DP/      DP/          
                                                      SUP1     SUP1
Boatbuilding,                                   DP/      DP/          
except ships                                          SUP1     SUP1
Cabinet and                                     DP/      DP/          
carpenter shops                                       SUP1     SUP1
                                                      DP
                                                      Subject
                                                      to
Cannabis                                              permit
testing                                         pursuant             
laboratory                                            to Title
                                                      5,
                                                      Chapter
                                                      29
Carpet cleaning                                 DP/      DP/          
                                                      SUP1     SUP1
Concrete mix
and transport                                   SUP                  
plants
Concrete
products                                        SUP                  
manufacturing
Creameries,
dairy product                                         DP/      DP/
manufacturing                                   SUP1     SUP1         
and
distribution
Dry cleaning                                          DP/      DP/
and laundry                                     SUP1     SUP1         
plants
Electric and                                          DP/      DP/
neon sign                                       SUP1     SUP1         
manufacturing
Flour mills                                     SUP                  
Garment                                         DP/      DP/          
manufacture                                           SUP1     SUP1
Industrial uses                                                DP/
not otherwise                                           SUP1         
listed
Laboratories,                                   DP/      DP/          
experimental                                          SUP1     SUP1
Manufacturing
not otherwise
listed, which
is not
offensive or
obnoxious by                                    DP/      DP/          
reason of the                                         SUP1     SUP1
emission of
odor, dust,
smoke, gas,
noise, or other
causes
Machine shops                                   DP/      DP/          
                                                      SUP1     SUP1
Motion picture                                  DP/      DP/          
studios                                               SUP1     SUP1
Newspaper and                                         DP/      DP/
publishing                                      SUP1     SUP1         
plants
Paint mixing
plants, but not
including the
manufacture of                                  DP/      DP/          
paint                                                 SUP1     SUP1
ingredients or
the use of any
boiling process
Paper and paper
products
manufacturing,                                  DP/      DP/          
but not                                               SUP1     SUP1
including pulp
manufacturing
Planing mills                                   DP/      DP/          
                                                      SUP1     SUP1
Plastic                                         SUP                  
manufacturing
Research and
development
(design,                                        DP/      DP/          
development and                                       SUP1     SUP1
testing of
products)
Resource
collection                                      SUP      SUP          
centers
(recycling)
Sheet metal                                     DP/      DP/          
shops                                                 SUP1     SUP1
Shoe                                            DP/      DP/          
manufacturing                                         SUP1     SUP1
Technology and                                  DP                   
life sciences
Textile                                         DP/      DP/          
manufacturing                                         SUP1     SUP1
Tire
rebuilding,                                     DP/      DP/          
recapping and                                         SUP1     SUP1
retreading
                3   The entry SUPA/SUP means that if the use is located more
                than four hundred (400') feet from any existing residentially
Footnote        zoned property, then the use requires an administrative special
                use permit. Otherwise, a special use permit with Planning
                Commission review is required.
                                                                   
Institutional and Civic Uses
Cemeteries,
mausoleums, and                                         SUP          
columbariums
Civic centers                                                DP      
Clubs and            DP    DP    DP    DP     DP                         
lodges, private
Convents,       SUP                                                  
monasteries
Crematoriums              SUP   SUP   SUP          SUP      SUP          
Historical
landmarks,
sites,                                                       DP     DP
memorials, and
monuments
Libraries,
branch,         DP    DP    DP    DP    DP     DP                         
operated by a
public agency
Libraries, main                                              DP      
Mortuaries      SUP        DP               DP                         
Places of
worship         SUP   DP    DP    DP    DP     DP     SUPA                 
(religious
facilities)
Police and fire
stations and                                                 DP      
training
facilities
Public
administration                                               DP      
buildings
                                                                   
Medical Care Uses
Ambulance                 DP               DP                         
services
                                                      DP
                                                      Subject
                                                      to
Cannabis                                              permit
retailer                                        pursuant             
                                                      to Title
                                                      5,
                                                      Chapter
                                                      29
Hospitals,
convalescent
hospitals
(skilled
nursing                                                      SUP     
facilities),
mental hygiene
facilities and
other medical
facilities
Medical and
dental offices, DP    DP    DP    DP    DP     DP     SUP      SUP          
including
urgent care
Medical and                                           DP/      DP/
dental          DP    DP    DP    DP    DP     DP     SUP1     SUP1         
laboratories
                                                                   
Miscellaneous Uses
Any other use
determined by
Planning
Commission to
be within       SUP                                           SUP    SUP
general purpose
and intent of
the applicable
zone
                                                                   
                Accessory uses are those activities clearly secondary to the
                main use of the land. They are directly related to and support
Non-Residential the main use. These uses typically involve only a small portion
Accessory Uses  of the site or floor area of structures, and do not impose any
                additional impacts or materially affect site planning or
                building design.
Alcoholic
beverages -
limited
incidental
tasting in           SUPA  SUPA  SUPA  SUPA   SUPA                       
conjunction
with retail
sales for off-
premises
consumption
Barber shops
and beauty
shops in an
office          DP3                                                  
building, per
limitations of
Sec. 9-4.2106
(u)
Caretaker or                                                   DP/
proprietor      DP    DP    DP    P     P      DP     P        SUP1         
living quarters
Coffee shops in
office
buildings, per  SUPA3                                                
limitations of
Sec. 9-4.2106
(s)
Dwellings for
agricultural                   P     P            P                    
workers on a
farm
Fire roads,
helipads and
other
facilities
necessary to                                                       SUP
provide
emergency
access to open
space
Incidental and
accessory uses
and structures,      DP    DP    DP    DP     DP     DP/      DP/   DP     DP
per limitations                                       SUP1     SUP1
of Sec. 9-
4.2106(j)
Manufacturing,
processing, or
treating of
products sold
on the premises
of a retail
commercial use,      DP    DP    DP    DP     DP                         
and clearly
incidental to
the retail
sales use, per
limitations in
Sec. 9-4.2106
(v)
Newsstands in
an office
building, per   DP3                                                  
limitations of
Sec. 9-4.2106
(w)
Outdoor
barbeques in
conjunction
with a
permitted and        DP    DP    DP    DP     DP                         
related
commercial
operation (e.g.
restaurants,
meat markets)
Pharmacy in
office
building, per   DP                                                   
limitation of
Sec. 9-4.2106
(x)
Resource
collection           DP    DP    DP    DP     DP     DP/      DP/   DP      
receptacles                                           SUP1     SUP1
(recyclables)
Vehicle repair
and
reconditioning
accessory to a
vehicle sales             DP               DP                         
and/or leasing
establishment,
per limitations
of Sec. 9-
4.2106(y)
Water supply -
development of
wells for on-        DP    DP    P     P      DP     P                    
site use of
water only
                3   These uses are allowed within office buildings in the C-
                O zone as accessory uses, per the limitations cited. They are
Footnote        also allowed in other zones as primary or accessory uses. See
                applicable land use category for other zones in which the uses
                are permitted.
                                                                   
Other Uses (Non-Medical)
Administrative,
business and    DP    DP    DP    DP    DP     DP     SUP      SUP          
professional
offices
Banks and
similar         DP    DP    DP    DP    DP     DP     SUP                  
financial
services
Telephone
exchanges            DP    DP               DP                         
without outdoor
storage
Newspaper
offices and               DP    DP          DP                         
plants
                                                                   
Personal and General Services
Appliance and
electronic           DP    DP    DP    DP     DP                         
repair
Baths, Turkish
and similar               DP    DP    DP     DP                         
types
                                                      DP
                                                      Subject
                                                      to
Cannabis                                              permit
retailer                                        pursuant             
                                                      to Title
                                                      5,
                                                      Chapter
                                                      29
Copying and
reproduction                                          DP/      DP/
services,                 DP    DP    DP     DP     SUP1     SUP1         
including print
shops
Health clubs,
fitness
studios,                                           
gymnasiums                                         
                                                  
Less than            SUPA  DP    DP    DP           SUPA                 
10,000 sq. ft.                                     
gross floor                                        
area (GFA)            SUP   SUP   DP    DP            SUP
 
10,000 sq. ft.
GFA or more
Household
maintenance and
repair services
(e.g., shoe
repair, tailor       DP    DP    DP    DP     DP                         
shop,
locksmith,
framing, watch
repair)
Laundry
(including
laundromats)
and dry
cleaning             DP    DP    DP    DP     DP                         
establishments,
per limitation
of Sec. 9-
4.2106(z)
Personal care
establishments
(e.g.,
barbershops,
beauty shops,
nail salons,    DP4   DP    DP    DP    DP     DP                         
tanning salons,
day spa), per
limitation of
Sec. 9-4.2106
(u)
Postal box and
mailing              DP    DP    DP    DP     DP                         
services
Taxidermists              DP    DP    DP     DP                         
Wedding chapels           DP    DP    DP     DP                         
                4   In the C-O zone, only barbershops and beauty shops are
Footnote        allowed and then as accessory uses, per limitation of Sec.
                9-4.2106(u).
                                                                   
Protected Ridgeline Overlay (PR) Zone Standards
Waiver or
modification of
PR overlay zone
standards, per  SUP   SUP   SUP   SUP   SUP          SUP      SUP          
limitations of
Sec. 9-4.2106
(f)
                                                                   
Recreational and Open Space Uses
Arcades                   SUP   SUPA  SUPA                             
Auditoriums,
excluding tents           DP    DP    DP     DP                         
and temporary
structures
Billiard and              DP    DP    DP     DP                         
pool halls
Bowling alleys            SUP   DP    DP                               
Dancing              SUP   SUP   SUP   SUP          SUP      SUP          
establishments
Golf courses                                                 SUP     
Live
entertainment        SUP   SUP   SUP   SUP          SUP      SUP          
venues
Natural open
space, with
only limited
compatible                                                         DP
improvements,
per limitations
of Sec. 9-
4.2106(aa)
Nature
preserves and                                                      DP
wildlife
refuges
Parks and                                                    DP      
playgrounds
Recreation
areas and                                                    DP      
facilities
Recreational
facilities,
commercial, per      SUP   SUP   SUP                                   
limitations in
Sec. 9-4.2106
(bb)
Skating rinks,            SUP   SUP   SUP          SUP      SUP          
indoor
Theaters,                 DP    DP    DP     DP                         
indoor
                                                                   
Retail Commercial Uses
Antique stores       DP    DP    DP    DP     DP                         
Apparel stores       DP    DP    DP    DP     DP                         
Art and crafts
studios and          DP    DP    DP    DP     DP                         
galleries
Auction
businesses
conducted                                             DP/      DP/
within a                  DP    DP    DP     DP     SUP1     SUP1         
building,
excluding
livestock sales
Bakeries, per
limitation of        DP    DP    DP    DP     DP                         
Sec. 9-4.2106
(z)
Bookstores           DP    DP    DP    DP     DP                         
Building
materials                                       DP/      DP/          
storage and                                           SUP1     SUP1
sales yards
Confectionary        DP    DP    DP    DP     DP                         
stores
Consumer
electronics and
appliances           DP    DP    DP    DP     DP                         
sales and
services
Department                          DP                               
stores
Dress-making
shops, per
limitation of        DP    DP    DP    DP     DP                         
Sec. 9-4.2106
(z)
Drugstores,     DP    DP    DP    DP    DP     DP                         
pharmacies
Food markets
(e.g., grocery
store,
supermarket,         DP    DP    DP    DP     DP                         
meat markets
and other
specialty
types)
Florist shops        DP    DP    DP    DP     DP                         
Furniture            DP    DP    DP    DP     DP                         
stores
Garden centers       DP    DP    DP    DP     DP                         
Hardware stores      DP    DP    DP    DP     DP                         
Home decor
shops and            DP    DP    DP    DP     DP                         
studios
Home
improvement                    SUP                                   
centers
Jewelry stores       DP    DP    DP    DP     DP                         
Junior
department           SUP        DP    DP                               
stores
Liquor stores        DP    DP    DP    DP     DP                         
Newsstands, per
limitation of   DP    DP    DP    DP    DP     DP                         
Sec. 9-4.2106
(w)
Pet shops,
including            DP    DP    DP    DP     DP                         
grooming
services
Plumbing supply           DP    DP    DP     DP     DP/      DP/          
stores                                                SUP1     SUP1
Retail stores
with large
showrooms for
display of bulk
goods (e.g.,         DP    DP    DP    DP     DP     DP/                  
furniture,                                            SUP1
carpet, major
appliance and
similar
products)
Retail stores
not otherwise
listed, per          DP    DP    DP    DP     DP                         
limitations of
Sec. 9-4.2106
(v)
Stationery           DP    DP    DP    DP     DP                         
stores
Variety stores       DP    DP    DP    DP     DP                         
                                                                   
Transient Lodging Uses
Hotels and                DP    DP    DP     DP                         
motels
                                                                   
Utility & Communication Uses
Flood control                                                DP     SUP
facilities
Public utility
facilities
(e.g., electric
power
substations,
water
reservoirs,
sewage                                                       DP     SUP
treatment
plants,
easements for
electric
transmission
lines in excess
of 16kv)
Radio or
television                                              SUP          
transmitters or
stations
Steam-electric                                        DP/
generation                                      SUP1                 
stations
Wireless                                              DP/      DP/
communications  DP    DP    DP    DP    DP     DP     SUP1     SUP1  SUP    SUP
facilities 5
Small wireless  SWF   SWF   SWF   SWF   SWF    SWF    SWF      SWF   SWF    SWF
facilities
Eligible
facilities      EFR   EFR   EFR   EFR   EFR    EFR    EFR      EFR   EFR    EFR
requests (6409
(a))
                5 Wireless communications facilities that do not meet the
Footnote        definition of small wireless facilities or eligible facilities
                requests.
Vehicle Related Uses
Automobile
washing                   SUP   SUP               SUP      SUP          
facilities
Automobile
service              SUP   SUP   SUP   SUP          SUP                  
stations (gas &
other fuels)
Vehicle repair
and
maintenance,              DP               DP                         
excluding auto
body repair and
painting
Vehicle sales
and leasing,
new and used,
including
automobile,
light truck,              DP               DP     SUP                  
boat, trailer
sales, per
limitations of
Sec. 9-4.2106
(y)
Vehicle body
repair and
painting not
associated with
an auto                                   SUP            SUP          
dealership, per
limitations of
Sec. 9-4.2106
(cc)
Transportation                                               SUP     
facilities
Drayage,
freight and                                     DP/      DP/          
trucking                                              SUP1     SUP1
terminals
                                                                   
Warehousing, storage and distribution
Contractor                                      DP/      DP/          
storage yards                                         SUP1     SUP1
Equipment
rental, repair
and storage                                           DP/      DP/
businesses, per           SUP                    SUP1     SUP1         
limitation in
Sec.
9-4.2106(dd)
Ice and cold                                            DP/          
storage plants                                                 SUP1
Public
maintenance and                                              SUP     
storage yards
Self-storage
(mini-storage)                                        DP/      DP/
warehouses, per                                 SUP2     SUP2         
limitation of
Sec. 9-4.2528
Storage garages                                 DP/      DP/          
                                                      SUP1     SUP1
Storage yards
for transit and                                 DP/      DP/          
transportation                                        SUP1     SUP1
equipment
Warehouses                SUP                    DP/      DP/          
                                                      SUP1     SUP1
Wholesale
businesses,                                    DP/    DP/
storage                                   SUP1   SUP1                 
buildings and
warehouses
                                                                   
 
General Note:
1   In the M-1 and M-2 zones, the entry " DP/SUP1" means that a development
permit is required if the use is located more than four hundred (400') feet
from any existing residentially zoned property. Otherwise, a special use permit
with Planning Commission review is required. The entry SUPA/SUP1 means that if
the use is located more than four hundred (400') feet from any existing
residentially zoned property, then the use requires an administrative special
use permit. Otherwise, a special use permit with Planning Commission review is
required.
2.   A Development Permit is required for the structure. A Special Use Permit
is required for the self-storage facility use.
(§ 38, Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016; § 4, Ord. 1636-NS, eff. December 29,
2017, § 7, Ord. 1661-NS, eff. March 5, 2019, § 3, Ord. 1664-NS, eff. October
25, 2019, § 17, Ord. 1703-NS, eff. August 5, 2022, § 3, Ord. 1706-NS, eff.
December 2, 2022, § 4, Ord. 1733-NS, eff. January 3, 2025)
Sec. 9-4.2106. Limitations on specific uses.
   Where indicated in the matrix, a specific use is limited in size, scope or
nature pursuant to the following provisions:
   (a)   Apiculture and honey extraction. Apiaries are subject to the following
limitations:
   (1)   No occupied hive shall be located or maintained within one hundred
fifty (150') feet of any public road, street or highway.
   (2)   No occupied hive shall be located or maintained within four hundred
(400') feet of any dwelling, unless the owner of said dwelling(s) has
consented.
   (3)   No occupied hive shall be located or maintained within fifty (50')
feet of any property line common to other property, except when such other
property also contains an apiary.
   (4)   Adequate water supply shall be available and maintained on the
property to serve the bees.
   (b)   Boarding and care of horses. Boarding and care of horses is allowed
subject to the following:
   (1)   A minimum lot size of ten (10) acres is required.
   (2)   Accommodations for grooms and caretakers are permitted within the same
building.
   (3)   In the R-P-D and R-P-D-SFD zones, no more than four (4) horses per
acre may be stabled within such a boarding facility, unless otherwise waived by
the Planning Commission.
   (c)   Commercial uses in R-3 zone. Commercial uses are allowed only as
follows:
   (1)   The property is located along a major roadway and within two hundred
(200') feet of existing commercially zoned property.
   (2)   The property is already improved with a non-conforming building, and
no expansion of the building shall be permitted.
   (3)   A special use permit may be approved by the Community Development
Director upon a finding that residents within three hundred (300') feet of the
subject property do not object. Otherwise, the Planning Commission shall be the
decision-making body.
   (4)   Permits shall be granted for a maximum of three (3) years.
   (d)   Residential care facilities, large.
   (1)   In the R-E zone, a minimum subzone of 5 acres is required, or a
minimum parcel size of 5 acres is required.
   (2)   In the H-P-D zone, a minimum parcel size of 5 acres is required.
   (3)   No large residential care facility shall be located within five
hundred (500') feet of another existing or entitled large residential care
facility based on the rebuttable presumption that the location of such a
facility within five hundred (500') feet of another residential care facility
will result in an overconcentration of residential care facilities in the
neighborhood.
   (e)   Substance abuse treatment facilities.
   (1)   In the R-E zone, a minimum subzone of 5 acres is required, or a
minimum lot size of 5 acres is required.
   (2)   In the H-P-D zone, a minimum parcel size of 5 acres is required.
   (3)   No substance abuse treatment facility shall be located within five
hundred (500') feet of another existing or entitled substance abuse treatment
facility based on the rebuttable presumption that the location of such a
facility within five hundred (500') feet of another residential care facility
will result in an overconcentration of substance abuse treatment facilities in
the neighborhood.
   (f)   Protected Ridgeline Overlay (PR) zone standards. For any property
within the PR Overlay zone, a request to waive or modify one or more
development standards set forth in Sections
9-4.3502(a) and (b) of this chapter requires filing and consideration of a
special use permit application by the Planning Commission. The criteria and
findings for approving said special use permit are as set forth in Sections
9-4.3502(c) and (d) of this chapter.
   (g)   Farm cottages. Where permitted, farm cottages are limited as follows:
   (1)   They shall be single-family one-story dwellings, leased to and
occupied only be persons employed and working exclusively on the farm premises
or premises under the same ownership, and their dependents.
   (2)   The parcel of land on which the farm cottage is located is at least
ten (10) acres in size.
   (3)   There shall be not more than one farm cottage per ten (10) acres of
land of said parcel.
   (4)   There shall be no more than two (2) farm cottages on any parcel of
land.
   (5)   A farm cottage may not be located closer than fifty (50') feet to a
public street, nor less than twenty-five (25') feet from another farm cottage,
main dwelling or guest house.
   (6)   No additional parking space is required for a farm cottage.
   (h)   Residential development limitations. Residential development is
limited as follows:
   (1)   In the R-A, R-E, R-O, and R-1 zones, one single-family dwelling is
permitted per lot.
   (2)   In the R-2 zone, either two single-family dwellings or a duplex is
permitted per lot.
   (3)   In the R-3 zone, any housing type is permitted, and the density of
development on a lot is limited to a maximum of thirty (30) dwelling units per
net acre.
   (4)   In the R-P-D Zone, any housing type is permitted and the maximum
density is as designated by the density subzone (e.g., RPD-7U is limited to
seven (7) dwellings per net acre).
   (5)   In the R-P-D-SFD Zone, only single-family dwellings are permitted.
   (6)   Pursuant to Sec.
9-4.2527, transitional and supportive housing, as defined in Sec.
9-4.202, are permitted in the respective zones as residential uses based on
their type and density of dwelling units.
   (i)   Guest houses. Where permitted, guest houses are limited as follows:
   (1)   A guest house shall be a one-story single-family structure for the
exclusive use of bona fide guests.
   (2)   A guest house is limited to a maximum of 600 square feet floor area.
   (3)   The parcel of land on which a guest house is located shall be at least
one (1) acre in size and contain a main residence.
   (4)   There shall not be more than one (1) guest house per acre of parcel
size.
   (5)   There shall be no more than two (2) guest houses on any parcel of
land.
   (6)   A guest house may not be located closer than fifty (50') feet to a
public street, nor less than twenty-five (25') feet from another guest house,
main dwelling or farm cottage.
   (7)   No additional parking space is required for a guest house.
   (j)   Incidental uses and structures. Uses clearly incidental or accessory
to the main permitted use and compatible with the area; construction of
structures may require a discretionary permit per Article 18 of this chapter.
   (k)    Keeping of Horses, Bovines, Goats, and/or Sheep. Horses, bovines,
goats, and sheep may be maintained as an accessory use to a single family
dwelling where permitted in a zone subject to the following limitations:
   (1)   The lot size must be at least 20,000 square feet.
   (2)   Two horses, bovines, goats, or sheep, or a combination of animals
equaling two (2) total animals may be kept.
   (3)   For each additional 20,000 square feet of lot size above the 20,000
square foot minimum, an additional one animal may be kept. In the R-O zone, a
maximum of three (3) animals may be permitted, no matter how large the lot is.
   (4)   No horse may be housed, kept, pastured, stabled, or confined within
forty (40') feet of any habitable dwelling, religious facility, school, or
other place of human habitation, except the dwelling of the owner thereof.
   (l)   Small animals for family use. Permitted as follows:
   (1)   No more than twenty-four (24) birds and twelve (12) rabbits if the lot
area is more than 10,000 square feet. No more than twelve (12) birds and six
(6) rabbits where the lot area is 7,000 to 10,000 square feet and the property
is located in the R-1 zone.
   (2)   In the R-E and R-1 zones, one calf, pig, sheep or goat raised as a 4-
H or school project, provided that the lot area is not less than 10,000 square
feet.
   (3)   In the R-O zone, up to two (2) calves, pigs, sheep, or goats, or
combination thereof, raised as a 4-H or school project when the lot area is not
less than 10,000 square feet, plus an additional calf, pig, sheep, or goat for
each additional 10,000 square feet of lot size.
   (4)   In the R-1 zone, a Farm Animal Permit is required per Sec.
9-4.703.
   (m)   Stands for sale of products. Stands for the sale of agricultural
products grown or produced on the premises as permitted by this chapter are
allowed, subject to the following limitations:
   (1)   The floor area of such stands may not exceed four hundred (400')
square feet.
   (2)   Such stands shall not be located or maintained within twenty (20')
feet of any public road, street, or highway.
   (n)   Temporary model home and real estate sales complexes. Allowed for the
limited purpose of conducting sales only of lots in the subdivision as follows:
   (1)   May be permitted in advance of the filing of the final map after road
plans have been submitted to the Public Works Department for approval.
   (2)   May be maintained for a period of eighteen (18) months or until all
the lots in the subdivision have been sold, whichever is earlier.
   (o)   Water supply. Water wells are permitted only for purposes of providing
water to the lot or parcel upon which the well is located.
   (p)   Veterinary hospitals and clinics, small animals. Treatment rooms,
cages, pens, and kennels shall be maintained within a completely enclosed
soundproof building. The hospital or clinic shall be operated in such a way as
to produce no objectionable odors outside the building.
   (q)   Veterinary hospitals and clinics, large animals. No treatment rooms,
open kennels, or pens shall be maintained nearer than two hundred (200') feet
from any other property.
   (r)   Emergency shelters. Subject to the special standards in Sec.
9-4.2525 of this chapter. Except for such special standards, emergency shelters
shall be subject to the same development and management standards that apply to
commercial development in the underlying zone where permitted.
   (s)   Coffee shops in C-O zone. There shall be no entrance directly from the
street to such businesses, no signs or other evidence indicating the existence
of such business visible from the outside of the building, and the office
building shall be of sufficient size and character so that the patronage of
such businesses may be expected to be furnished substantially or wholly by the
occupants of the building.
   (t)   Trade and training schools and college and university extension
classrooms and associated offices in the C-4 zone. Said uses are permitted only
as an accessory use within an existing office or commercial building.
   (u)   Personal care uses in C-O zone. In the C-O zone, only barber shops and
beauty shops are permitted, provided they are located within an office building
and have no entrances directly from the street. There shall be no signs or
other evidence indicating the existence of such businesses visible from the
outside of the building, and the office building shall be of sufficient size
and character such that the patronage of such businesses may be expected to be
furnished substantially or wholly by the occupants of the building.
   (v)   Incidental manufacturing and processing accessory to retail use.
Limited manufacture, treatment, and treatment of products integral to a retail
business and conducted on the same premises is permitted subject to the
following limitations:
   (1)   Not more than five (5) persons shall be employed in the permitted
manufacturing, processing, or treating of products; and,
   (2)   The operations and products shall not unreasonably emit noise, odor,
dust, smoke, vibration, or other objectionable effects.
   (w)   Newsstands in C-O zone. In the C-O zone, newsstands are permitted,
provided they are located within an office building and have no entrances
directly from the street. There shall be no signs or other evidence indicating
the existence of such businesses visible from the outside of the building, and
the office building shall be of sufficient size and character such that the
patronage of such businesses may be expected to be furnished substantially or
wholly by the occupants of the building.
   (x)   Pharmacies in C-O zone. In the C-O zone, pharmacies are permitted
provided they are located within an office building and have no entrances
directly from the street. There shall be no signs or other evidence indicating
the existence of such businesses visible from the outside of the building, and
the office building shall be of sufficient size and character such that the
patronage of such businesses may be expected to be furnished substantially or
wholly by the occupants of the building. Provided further that they are limited
to the preparation, dispensing, and retailing of drugs and the dispensing and
retailing of orthopedic and medical appliances clearly incidental to, and as an
accessory use to, the permitted uses of this article, and specifically
excluding the retailing or dispensing of non-related pharmaceutical
commodities, products, or articles.
   (y)   Vehicle sales and leasing. Vehicles sales and leasing businesses where
permitted shall be subject to the following limitations:
   (1)   No repair or reconditioning of automobiles, trailers, or boats shall
be permitted unless such work is done entirely within an enclosed building;
and,
   (2)   The entire area of the premises is improved with paved surfaces,
landscaping and structures.
   (z)   Limitations on manufacturing, processing, and treating of products for
certain uses in C-1 zone. No more than (5) persons shall be employed in the
manufacturing, processing and treating of products involved with the retail
use, if located in the C-1 zone.
   (aa)   Natural Open Space in OS zone. In the OS zone, improvements
associated with natural open space are limited to (1) pathways for recreational
travel (trails); (2) parking facilities at ingress and egress points for
pathways for recreational travel; (3) natural minimally landscaped park areas;
(4) minimal regulatory and directional signs along pathways for recreational
travel and at ingress and egress sites to open space; (5) structures and
fencing which prevent access to open space, sensitive habitats, or endangered
archaeological sites; (6) drinking stations or permanent impoundments for
wildlife habitat enhancement purposes; and (7) limited recreational structures,
such as bridges, campsites, fire pits, hitching racks, information kiosks, and
structures designed for the education of the public.
   (bb)   Limitations on commercial recreation facilities in C-1 zone.
Commercial recreation facilities allowable within the C-1 zone are limited to
tennis and handball/racquetball courts.
   (cc)   Independent auto body repair in C-2/AM zone. Any special use permit
issued for an independent auto body repair use in the C-2/AM zone shall be
reviewed administratively through a minor modification one year from the first
day of occupancy to ensure that the operation does not create any adverse
effects to surrounding properties.
   (dd)   Equipment rental in C-2 zone. In the C-2 zone, the following
limitations regarding the rental and storage of equipment apply:
   (1)   Concrete mixers limited to one-half (½) sack size;
   (2)   Small tractors limited to the operation of a five-eighths (5/8) cubic
yard skip loader of a five (5') foot blade attachment;
   (3)   Rototillers;
   (4)   Home improvement or maintenance equipment;
   (5)   Trailers limited to one ton capacity;
   (6)   Hand tools and garden equipment;
   (7)   Trucks not exceeding one and one half (1-1/2) tons capacity;
   (8)   Any outdoor storage area shall have an improved surface (e.g.,
concrete or asphalt).
   (ee)   Columbarium structures in residential zones. Where religious
facilities are permitted, columbarium structures are subject to the following
conditions and limitations:
   (1)   Columbarium structures shall be accessory to a permitted religious
facility and shall be located behind the main religious facility building(s),
and no closer to the rear and side property lines than the distance prescribed
by the underlying zone district.
   (2)   The maximum cumulative size of columbarium structure(s) shall not
exceed six hundred (600) square feet.
   (3)   No columbarium structure shall exceed fifteen (15’) feet in height.
   (4)   In the event the religious facility ceases its operations at its
permitted location, the remains within the columbarium structure(s) are
required to be transferred to another off-site facility.
(§38, Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016, §4, Ord. 1706-NS, eff. December 2,
2022, Part 3, Ord. 1710-NS, eff. March 17, 2023)
Sec. 9-4.2107. Findings for approval of entitlements for permitted uses.
   It is presumed that a use allowable by development permit, hillside planned
development permit, residential planned development permit, or trailer park
development permit is appropriate at any location within a zone in which it is
permitted, subject to the limitations of the applicable sub-zone (e.g., density
subzone in the RPD zone) and overlay zone (e.g. Protected Ridgeline), and if
the applicable findings set forth in Section
9-4.2803(c) of this chapter are made.
   Such a presumption is not applicable to special use permits. It is
recognized that uses listed as special uses may not be appropriate at every
location within a given zone because of the nature of the use. A special use
permit may only be approved if the decision-making body makes all of the
applicable findings in Section
9-4.2803(c) of this chapter.
(§ 38, Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Article 22. Objective Design Standards for Residential Development
   Editor’s note: Former Article 22. Civic Districts was repealed by Ord. 1556-
NS, eff. July 1, 2011
Sec. 9-4.2201. Intent and purpose.
   The Objective Design Standards provide mandatory development standards for
specified residential development. Under State Law, Objective Design Standards
involve no personal or subjective judgement by a public official and are
uniformly verifiable by reference to an external and uniform benchmark. The
Objective Design Standards are requirements for residential development, as
well as mixed use development that includes residential uses. For any
qualifying project that does not comply with these standards, these standards
may be modified through the applicable discretionary application process or as
allowed under State Density Bonus Law.
(§ 2, Ord. 1698-NS, eff. April 29, 2022)
Sec. 9-4.2202. Applicability.
   (a)   The Objective Design Standards (Objective Standards) apply to all
residential and mixed-use development, which include the new construction of
two (2) or more residential units. The Objective Standards were created in
response to legislative provisions such as the Housing Accountability Act, that
limit local jurisdictions' ability to deny or reduce density of housing
projects that are consistent with "objective standards" and multi-family
residential projects meeting affordability and other criteria can only be
subject to "objective" planning standards to be approved through a ministerial
process. These standards also apply to redevelopment that creates two (2) or
more new residential units, including but not limited to adaptive reuse of
existing buildings. In addition, these standards apply to groups of two (2) or
more attached townhomes (row houses), regardless of whether multiple townhomes
occupy the same lot, or each townhome is located on a separate lot. The
Objective Standards do not apply to residential development approved pursuant
to Article 37 (Urban Lot Splits and Two-Unit Housing Developments) and Article
45 (Accessory Dwelling Units).
   (b)   If a conflict occurs between these Objective Standards and other
provisions of the City of Thousand Oaks Municipal Code Title 9, Chapter 4,
these Objective Design Standards will supersede the standards provided in other
Articles of this Chapter. Terms defined within this Article govern the
application of these standards and the underlying zoning requirements for
qualifying projects. The Objective Standards apply to all residential projects
that have not been accepted as complete for processing prior to the effective
date of this Article. Terms used in this Article have the same meaning as those
terms which are used in Title 9, Chapter 4, except for those terms specifically
defined within this Article.
   (c)   Unless otherwise allowed as a ministerial approval by State law,
projects subject to these Objective Standards require application and approval
of a Residential Planned Development Permit along with a fee prescribed by City
Council and may not be entitled through a modification process. The Community
Development Director shall have approval authority for Residential Planned
Development permits for projects that comply with these Objective Standards
that do not include a Tentative Tract Map. When considering a Residential
Planned Development permit, the Community Development Director may approve,
with conditions, based on the following findings:
      (1)   The project is consistent with the Thousand Oaks General Plan and
any applicable specific plan;
      (2)   The project complies with all applicable laws, regulations and
policies, including the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code; and
      (3)   The project has been reviewed in conformance with the provisions of
the California Environmental Quality Act.
   (d)   If a project does not comply with these Objective Standards, unless
otherwise waived under current State density bonus law, the Community
Development Director may approve up to three (3) modifications for Building
Massing and Articulation, Accessory Structures, or Site and Building Elements.
If the applicant requests more than three (3) modifications to these standards,
the request and accompanying entitlements will be referred to the Planning
Commission. Requests of one or more modifications to the remaining standards in
this Article will be referred to the Planning Commission.
   (e)   Approval of modifications to these standards by the Community
Development Director and the Planning Commission must be based on making the
following findings:
      (1)   The modification, while not consistent with a specific provision of
this Code, is justified by its intent or by design hardship and allows
reasonable and conforming use that is consistent with the General Plan goals
and policies and underlying zoning district.
      (2)   The modification would result in development consistent with the
scale and character of existing and allowable development in the vicinity under
the same zoning.
      (3)   The modification would result in development that is not
detrimental to or that would not adversely impact adjacent properties.
(§ 2, Ord. 1698-NS, eff. April 29, 2022, § 4, Ord. 1704-NS, eff. November 25,
2022; § 5, Ord. 1732-NS, eff. November 22, 2024)
Sec. 9-4.2203. Definition of terms.
   The following definitions apply to terms used in this Article.
   (a)   Open space and related terms.
      (1)   “Usable, open space” means outdoor or unenclosed area on the
ground, or on a roof, balcony, deck, porch or terrace designed and accessible
for outdoor living and recreation, but excluding parking facilities, driveways,
sidewalks, pedestrian paths, utility or service areas, required front or street
side yards, any landscaped area not usable for outdoor living or recreation, or
areas with slopes greater than five percent (5%). The area and dimensional
requirements of the underlying building type and zoning district must be met.
      (2)   “Open space, private” means a usable open space adjoining and
directly accessible to a dwelling unit, reserved for the exclusive use of
residents of the dwelling unit and their guests.
      (3)   “Open space, common/shared” means a usable open space within a
residential development reserved for the exclusive use of all residents of the
development and their guests.
      (4)   “Zaguan” means a pathway through a building not open to the sky
that connects to a courtyard or paseo.
(§ 2, Ord. 1698-NS, eff. April 29, 2022)
Sec. 9-4.2204. Relationship to other ordinances.
   Projects subject to this Article must comply with all other applicable
Objective Standards within the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code and applicable
Specific Plan as may be amended. including but not limited to:
   (a)   Specific Plans;
   (b)   Residential Zones;
   (c)   Off-Street Parking;
   (d)   Height, Yard, Area, and Building Conditions; and
   (e)   Protected Tree Preservation and Protection.
(§ 2, Ord. 1698-NS, eff. April 29, 2022)
Sec. 9-4.2205. Objective design standards.
   Residential development that is subject to this Article must be consistent
with the following standards:
   (a)   Street and pedestrian connectivity and vehicular access streets are
defined as a public or private thoroughfare consisting of vehicular travel
lanes with street parking, bike lanes as needed, parkways and sidewalks, which
affords principal access to abutting property. Alleys are defined as the
secondary means to access the property parking and services. Driveways serve as
direct access points to on-site covered or structured parking facilities that
do not exceed forty feet (40') from the street right of way.
      (1)   Internal connectivity. New public streets must form a connected
vehicular and pedestrian network within the development.
      (2)   External connectivity. Public streets, alleys, and pedestrian
pathways within a proposed subdivision or development site must be connected
with existing and planned streets in adjacent neighborhoods to create a
continuous street pattern.
      (3)   Cul-de-sacs and dead-end streets. Creation of new cul-de-sacs and
dead-end streets are prohibited, unless topographical constraints or existing
development prohibit development of through streets. Any public cul-de-sac or
other dead-end street longer than three hundred feet (300') must be connected
to internal or external streets by a pedestrian or bicycle path.
      (4)   Gates/barriers prohibited. Gates or barriers are prohibited on
public or private streets. Driveway and pedestrian path access points into the
building site may be gated or otherwise restrict public access.
      (5)   Streets and driveways. All proposed private streets and driveways
must be configured to meet City of Thousand Oaks standards for public streets,
including sidewalks and parkways for street trees. Proposed development sites
over two acres in size must have parking accessed from new internal streets and
alleys or driveways. Alleys may only be dead-end if they allow for non-
vehicular connection to adjacent streets, alleys, public pedestrian paths or
open space.
         (i)   Driveways that provide direct access to subterranean parking
garages are exempt from these requirements when other means of pedestrian
access is provided.
      (6)   Flag lots. Creation of flag lots is prohibited in new subdivisions.
      (7)   Access to parking. Curb cuts and driveways providing access to
parking facilities must be from an alley or secondary street when present,
rather than the principal street along the front property line.
   (b)   Site development standards.
      (1)   Developments on parcels or parcel assemblages between thirty
thousand (30,000) square feet and fifty thousand (50,000) square-feet of gross
site area must be composed of at least two (2) separate buildings or
substantially appear to be two (2) separate buildings. Buildings may be of the
same or different building types as allowed in Section 9-4.2205 (e)(11),
Building Type Zone Compatibility Matrix.
      (2)   Developments on parcels or parcel assemblages exceeding fifty
thousand (50,000) square feet must be composed of at least three (3) separate
buildings which may be of the same or different building types as allowed in
Section 9-4.2205(e)(11), Building Type Zone Compatibility Matrix.
   (c)   Building orientation and unit entries.
      (1)   Main entry, unit access configuration, entry area and cover:
         (i)   A primary residential or mixed-use building entry must face the
street or be oriented to within forty-five (45) degrees of parallel to the
street. Direct pedestrian access must be provided between the public sidewalk
and such primary building entry. Where a site is located on two (2) or more
public streets, the primary building entry must be oriented toward the street
with the shorter of the two (2) street frontages. If a site fronts two (2)
public streets of equal length, the project applicant may determine on which
frontage to meet the standard.
         (ii)   In courtyard-style developments in which residential buildings
are located in the interior of a block, entries must face interior courtyards,
walkways, paseos or a pedestrian corridor. Those buildings, or portions of
buildings, adjacent to the public street must include a primary entry facing
the street, with direct pedestrian access between the entry and the public
sidewalk.
         (iii)   Dwelling units abutting common open space areas require a
minimum of one window, in addition to a porch (ground floor) or balcony (upper
levels) access from each dwelling that overlook or access common area.
      (2)   Balconies. A minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) of residential
units facing a street, alley or common interior courtyard must include a
balcony overlooking a public space with a minimum size of six feet (6') by four
feet (4').
      (3)   Entry area and cover. Exterior entrances serving multiple units
must have a roofed projection, recess, or combination thereof with a minimum
depth of five feet (5') (e.g. two-foot (2') recess and three-foot (3')
projection) and a minimum horizontal width of twelve feet (12'). Exterior
entrances serving a single unit must have a roofed projection or recess with a
minimum depth of at least five feet (5') and a minimum horizontal width of six
feet (6').
   (d)   Parking location and configuration.
      (1)   Off-street parking serving residential development must be located
in accordance with the following standards:
         (i)   Parking facilities must not be located between the residential
building and the street.
         (ii)   Required guest parking may be configured as on-street parallel
parking when private streets are incorporated into the project design. Such
parking spaces must not be angled or perpendicular.
         (iii)   Surface parking lots, garages, or carports must be located to
the side or rear of residential buildings in relation to adjacent streets. If a
site fronts on two (2) or more streets, the standard must apply on the primary
street frontage. If a site fronts on two (2) public streets of equal
classification, the project applicant may determine on which frontage to meet
the standard.
         (iv)   If subterranean parking is not integrated into the building
design, parking spaces and structures must be setback a minimum of twenty feet
(20') behind the principal building frontage.
         (v)   Freestanding parking structures are allowed for public parking
or shared parking between multiple mixed-use, residential and/or nonresidential
projects and must have ground floor liner commercial space not exceeding twenty
five feet (25') deep interior space along the street frontage. The purpose of
the liner spaces is to integrate the parking structure into the adjacent street
frontage.
         (vi)   Pedestrian exits from all parking structures must include
direct access to a street frontage.
         (vii)   Parking structures that are freestanding or incorporated into
the building types must have the exterior façades that are treated as provided
in Section
9-4.2205(h)(1).
         (viii)   Subterranean parking must not extend beyond the building
footprint along the frontage and may extend to a height of three feet (3')
maximum above finished grade along the street frontage, provided that the
garage perimeter wall is incorporated into the design of the frontage type.
      (2)   Maximum parking frontage. The total width of parking areas visible
from the street, including open parking, carports, and garages, but excluding
underground parking and parking located behind buildings, may not exceed thirty
percent (30%) of any street frontage. This limitation does not include
frontages along alleys.
         (i)   Projects that include row houses on a pre-existing lot not
exceeding one hundred twenty feet (120') in depth must have individual garage
doors that face the street and do not occupy more than fifty percent (50%) of
the width of any street-facing building façade. Where this option is used,
garages must be set back at least ten feet (10') behind the front façade of the
dwelling, not including the front of a covered porch.
   (e)   Building types and design.
      (1)   Front yard house. A building designed as a detached single-family
dwelling unit. The following text provides standards for front yard houses.
         (i)   Entrances to each dwelling must be accessed directly from, and
face, the street.
         (ii)   Street facing carports or garages must be setback a minimum of
ten feet (10') behind the principal building façade facing the street not
including any porch or other entry feature allowed to project into the front
setback.
         (iii)   Street facing garages must not accommodate more than two (2)
vehicles side by side and may consist of either one (1) or two (2) garage
doors.
         (iv)   The primary open space must be located behind the house with
minimum width and depth dimension of twenty feet (20') and minimum area of
fifteen percent (15%) of the lot area.
      (2)   Duplex, triplex, quadplexes. A building containing two (2), three
(3), or four (4) dwelling units that must be individually accessed directly
from the street. The following text provides standards for duplex, triplex, and
quadplexes.
         (i)   Entrances to each dwelling must be accessed directly from, and
face, the street. Access to second floor dwellings must be by a staircase,
which may be open, covered or enclosed.
         (ii)   Each dwelling unit with habitable space on the first floor must
have, at grade outdoor space enclosed by landscaping, fence or a wall with a
minimum area of one hundred sixty (160) square feet and an unobstructed, flat
interior dimension of at least eight feet (8').
         (iii)   Each dwelling unit with habitable space above the first floor
must have at least one outdoor space such as a balcony or loggia with a minimum
area of one hundred forty (140) square feet and an unobstructed, flat interior
dimension of at least seven feet (7').
         (iv)   Building elevations abutting side yards must be designed to
provide at least one horizontal plane break of at least three feet (3'), and
one vertical break on building walls exceeding forty feet (40') in length.
         (v)   Street facing parking, carports or garages must be setback a
minimum of five feet (5') behind the principal building façade facing the
street, not including any porch or other entry feature allowed to project into
the front setback.
      (3)   Villa. A building containing four (4) to eight (8) dwelling units.
Each dwelling unit must be individually accessed from a central lobby, which in
turn is accessed directly from the street or front yard. The following text
provides standards for villas.
         (i)   Access to the building must occur directly from and face the
street. Said access must be a single point leading to a central lobby which
provides access to the individual dwellings without use of a corridor. Second
floor dwellings must be accessed by a stair located in the lobby without use of
a corridor.
         (ii)   Rear yards must contain a usable, outdoor space of no less than
fifteen percent (15%) of the area of each lot and of a regular geometry (e.g.,
rectangular) intended for common use by all dwelling occupants.
         (iii)   Dwelling units with habitable space above the first floor must
provide usable, outdoor space in balconies or loggias consisting of one hundred
fifty (150) square feet minimum and an unobstructed, flat interior dimension of
at least seven feet (7').
         (iv)   Dwelling units with habitable space on the first floor must
provide usable at-grade outdoor space enclosed by landscaping or a wall, with
one hundred fifty (150) square feet minimum and an unobstructed, flat interior
dimension of at least seven feet (7') in addition to the common yard area
required above.
         (v)   Parking must be located in the rear half of the property.
      (4)   Bungalow court. Four (4) or more detached houses arranged around a
shared courtyard, with pedestrian access to the building entrances from the
courtyard or street. The following text provides standards for bungalow courts.
         (i)   Entrances to dwellings must be directly from the front yard or
from the courtyard.
         (ii)   Dwelling entrances must face a courtyard that comprises at
least fifteen percent (15%) of the lot area and of a regular geometry (e.g.,
rectangular).
         (iii)   The overall usable area including hardscape and landscaping
must not be less than sixty percent (60%) of the total open space area.
         (iv)   Each dwelling must have a private usable, outdoor space of at
least one hundred fifty (150) square feet with a minimum dimension of seven
feet (7'). This space must be in addition to the courtyard and may be located
in a side yard or the rear yard. When adjacent to the common area, this space
must be delineated by a fence, dense landscaping or other permanent physical
feature with a height of three and a half (3-1/2) to five feet (5').
         (v)   Parking must be located at least five feet (5') behind the
principal building frontage, not including any frontage type extending beyond
the principal building frontage, and not including any porch or other entry
feature allowed to project into the setback.
      (5)   Rowhouse. Two (2) or more attached two (2)- or three (3)-story
dwellings with a width range of twenty-five (25) to forty feet (40') per unit.
The following text provides standards for rowhouses.
         (i)   The main entrance to each dwelling must be accessed directly
from and face the street.
         (ii)   Parking, trash/utility services must be accessed from an alley
and may be located in a centralized or subterranean garage when developed in
conjunction with other building types. Rowhouses are only allowed on a lots
with alley access or in a development with a mix of building types that creates
street frontages and alley access, except as provided for in Section
9-4.2205(d)(2)(i).
         (iii)   Usable, outdoor space must be provided behind each rowhouse
unit with fifteen percent (15%) minimum of the lot area and of a regular
geometry (e.g., rectangular) with a minimum dimension of ten feet (10').
      (6)   Side court housing. A building or group of buildings containing
dwelling units arranged in a row, generally perpendicular to the street, with
one side yard configured as a courtyard. The following text provides standards
for side court housing.
         (i)   Dwellings must face a side yard configured as a courtyard with a
minimum dimension of twenty feet (20').
         (ii)   The primary entrance to each unit must be from the courtyard
or, in the case of units facing the street, the front yard.
         (iii)   Common living areas on the ground floor (i.e. living, dining
rooms, kitchens) must be open to the courtyard with large windows and, where
possible, doors.
         (iv)   Units without habitable space on the first floor must be
accessed by a stairway that may be open or covered, but not enclosed. No more
than three (3) units may be accessed by the same stairway.
         (v)   The overall usable area including hardscape and landscaping must
not be less than sixty percent (60%) of the total open space area.
         (vi)   When located adjacent to a courtyard, a driveway must be
separated from the courtyard through the use of fencing or raised planter that
provides a landscaped aesthetic between the driveway and the courtyard.
         (vii)   The building elevation abutting the side yard not containing
the required courtyard must be designed to provide at least one horizontal
plane break of at least three feet (3'), and one vertical break on building
walls exceeding forty feet (40') in length.
         (viii)   Parking facilities must be located a minimum of twenty feet
(20') behind the principal building frontage unless located in a subterranean
garage that does not extend more than three and a half feet (3-1/2') above
finished grade along the principal frontage.
      (7)   Courtyard housing. A group of dwelling units arranged to share one
or more common courtyards with dwellings taking access from the street or the
courtyard(s). The courtyard is intended to be a semi-public space that is an
extension of the public realm. The following text provides standards for
courtyard housing.
         (i)   Dwelling configuration occurs as townhouses, flats, or flats
located over or under flats or townhouses.
         (ii)   Ground floor units must have individual entries consisting of a
porch, terrace or stoop that faces the street or courtyard.
         (iii)   At least two (2) sides of each dwelling unit must be exposed
to the outdoors through use of operable windows, porches, balconies and/or
doors.
         (iv)   Units without habitable space on the first floor must be
accessed by a stairway that may be open or covered, but not enclosed. No more
than three (3) units may be accessed by the same stairway.
         (v)   Courtyard housing must be designed to provide a central
courtyard and/or partial, multiple, separated or interconnected courtyards with
a cumulative total area of at least fifteen percent (15%) of the lot area. Each
ground floor unit must have direct access to a courtyard.
         (vi)   Courtyards can be located on a podium no more than one story
above street level.
         (vii)   Minimum courtyard dimensions must be forty feet (40') when the
long axis of the courtyard is within forty-five (45) degrees of an east/west
orientation and thirty feet (30') when the courtyard is within forty-five (45)
degrees of a north/south orientation.
         (viii)   Courtyards must be connected to the public way and/or to each
other by paseos or zaguans.
            (aa)   Paseos must be a minimum of fifteen feet (15') wide.
            (bb)   Zaguans must be a minimum of ten feet (10') wide.
         (ix)   The overall usable area including hardscape and landscaping
must not be less than sixty percent (60%) of the total open space area.
         (x)   Parking entrances to subterranean garages and/or driveways must
be designed as an independent entry from the principal pedestrian entrance and
not located the middle fifty percent (50%) of the lot frontage.
      (8)   Stacked dwelling. An exclusively residential building comprised of
flats and/or other residential units which does not meet the requirements of
any other building type defined herein. The following text provides standards
for stacked dwellings.
         (i)   The entrance to the building must be through a street level
lobby or through a combination of street and podium lobby directly accessible
from the street.
         (ii)   The main entrance to each ground floor dwelling must be
directly from the street. Secondary access may be through an elevator and
corridor.
         (iii)   Interior circulation to each dwelling must be through one or
more interior or exterior corridors which may be single or double-loaded.
         (iv)   When dwellings are accessed via an interior corridor, the
length of the corridor must not exceed one hundred feet (100') in length.
         (v)   Dwellings can be accessed via a single-loaded, exterior
corridor, provided the corridor is designed per the following requirements:
            (aa)   The open corridor length does not exceed sixty feet (60').
            (bb)   The open corridor is designed in the form of a Monterey
balcony, a loggia, a terrace, or a wall with window openings.
         (vi)   The primary shared open space is the rear yard, which must be
designed as a courtyard. Courtyards may be located on the ground or on a podium
no more than one story above street level.
         (vii)   The minimum courtyard area must be fifteen percent (15%) of
the lot area.
         (viii)   Minimum courtyard dimensions must be forty feet (40') when
the long axis of the courtyard is within forty-five (45) degrees of an east/
west orientation and thirty feet (30') when the courtyard is within forty-five
(45) degrees of a north/south orientation.
         (ix)   Courtyards must be a minimum proportion of no less than 1:
1 between any horizontal dimension and adjacent building height.
         (x)   A minimum of sixty percent (60%) of the common usable open space
must be provided as a landscaped green area or garden, with the remaining area
in hardscape. The overall usable area including hardscape and landscaping must
not be less than sixty percent (60%) of the total open space area.
         (xi)   Parking entrances to subterranean garages and/or driveways must
be designed as an independent entry from the principal pedestrian entrance and
not located the middle fifty percent (50%) of the lot frontage.
      (9)   Mixed-use block. A building designed for occupancy by retail,
service, and/or office uses on the ground floor street frontage, with upper
floors configured for dwelling units. The following text provides standards for
the mixed-use block.
         (i)   The main entrance to each ground floor area must be directly
from and face the street.
         (ii)   Entrance to the residential and/or non-residential portions of
the building above the ground floor must be through a street level lobby or
through a podium lobby accessible from the street.
         (iii)   Elevator access must be provided between the subterranean
garage and each level of the building where dwelling and/or commerce access
occurs.
         (iv)   Parking structures may be incorporated into the building.
         (v)   Interior circulation to each dwelling must be through a corridor
which may be single or double-loaded.
         (vi)   When dwellings are accessed via an interior corridor, the
length of the corridor must not exceed one hundred feet (100') in length.
Corridors between buildings or wings may be interconnected provided there is a
physical break consisting of exterior vertical access combined with common open
space area.
         (vii)   Dwellings can be accessed via a single-loaded, exterior
corridor, provided the corridor is designed per the following requirements:
            (aa)   The open corridor length does not exceed sixty feet (60').
            (bb)   The open corridor is designed in the form of a Monterey
balcony, a loggia, a terrace, or a wall with window openings.
         (viii)   Minimum courtyard dimensions must be forty feet (40') when
the long axis of the courtyard is within forty-five (45) degrees of an east/
west orientation and thirty feet (30') when the courtyard is within forty-five
(45) degrees of a north/south orientation.
         (ix)   The minimum courtyard area must be fifteen percent (15%) of the
lot area.
         (x)   Courtyard dimensions must have no less than a one to one (1:1)
proportion between any horizontal dimension and adjacent building height.
         (xi)   A minimum of sixty percent (60%) of the common usable open
space must be provided as a landscaped green area or garden, with the remaining
area in hardscape. The overall usable area including hardscape and landscaping
must not be less than sixty percent (60%) of the total open space area.
         (xii)   Trash enclosures may be located within a parking structure
subject to approval by the waste hauler.
      (10)   All building types – affordable units:
         (i)   Affordable units and market rate units in the same development
must be constructed of the same or similar exterior materials and details such
that the units are not distinguishable.
         (ii)   Affordable units must be interspersed throughout the project
and not all located in one building in a multi building project.
         (iii)   Affordable units must be equivalent in terms of number of
bedrooms and the average floor area to the corresponding housing type of
market-rate units.
      (11)   Lot and building site(s). Buildings must be established on either
real or nominal lots such that each building type must front a street or
dedicated pedestrian corridor and comply with the building type standards. A
real or nominal lot associated with a building must be used exclusively to
demonstrate compliance with standards. For the purposes of this Article a
nominal lot is an illustrative site area of regular geometry inscribed within a
proposed project area in order to represent a lot line and demonstrate
compliance with this Article.
   The following table depicts the zone where each building type is permitted.
Building Type Zone Compatibility Matrix
                            R-A
 Lot Width (real or normal) R-E R-2 R-3 R-P-D SP-20
                            R-O
                            R-1
Building Type Zone Compatibility Matrix
                                    R-A
                 Lot Width (real or R-E R-2 R-3 R-P-D              SP-20
                 normal)            R-O
                                    R-1
Front Yard House 40-100 ft.         P   -   -   P (8 au/acre max.) -
Duplex           50-75 ft.          -   P   -   P                  P1
Triplex/Quadplex 50-100 ft.         -   -   P   P                  P1
Villa            75-100 ft.         -   -   P   P                  P1
Bungalow Court   100-150 ft.        -   -   -   P                  P1
Rowhouse         25-50 ft.          -   -   -   P                  P1
Side Court       75-150 ft.         -   -   P   P                  P
Courtyard        100-105 ft.        -   -   P   P                  P
Stacked Dwelling 100-150 ft.        -   -   P2  P2                 P2
Mixed-Use Block  100-200 ft.        -   -   -   -                  P
 
"P" = permitted in the corresponding zone.
"-" = not permitted in the corresponding zone.
1 Only allowed on sites or portions of sites not fronting onto Thousand Oaks
Boulevard.
2 Must be included within a project with other building types. A maximum of
fifty percent (50%) of the total units within a project can be in a stacked
dwelling building type.
   (f)   Frontage types.
      (1)   Porch. A porch is a common frontage associated with single family
houses, where the facade is setback from the right-of-way with a front yard.
The following standards must apply:
         (i)   Minimum clear width of twelve feet (12') centered on the entry.
         (ii)   Minimum clear depth of seven feet (7').
         (iii)   Minimum clear height of eight feet (8').
         (iv)   Maximum height of the porch above finished grade is three feet
(3').
         (v)   Minimum path of travel of three feet (3').
         (vi)   Maximum width of support pillars of one foot (1').
         (vii)   Minimum floor area clear of supports and path of travel to
entrance of four feet (4') by six feet (6').
         (viii)   Maximum projection of four feet (4') into setback.
         (ix)   A fence or wall at the property line may be used to define the
private space of the yard.
         (x)   Raised porch designs are acceptable including a raised front
yard with a retaining wall at the property line with entry steps to the yard.
      (2)   Stoop. Stoops are elevated entry porches with stairs placed close
to the front property line with the ground story elevated from the sidewalk,
securing privacy for the windows and front rooms. The stoop is suitable for
ground-floor residential use with short setbacks. The following standards must
apply:
         (i)   Clear width and depth must be a minimum of four feet (4') and
maximum of eight feet (8').
         (ii)   Maximum finished level above the sidewalk is three feet (3').
         (iii)   Minimum height clear of eight feet (8').
         (iv)   May project a maximum of four feet (4') into required setback.
         (v)   Entry doors must face the street or a courtyard required by the
applicable building type.
         (vi)   A shed roof may also cover the stoop.
      (3)   Terrace. Terraces are elevated gardens or patios that are set back
from the frontage line. This frontage type can effectively buffer residential
quarters from the sidewalk, while removing the private yard from public
encroachment. The terrace is also suitable for restaurants and cafes, making
the eye of a seated food establishment patron level with that of the standing
passerby. The following standards must apply:
         (i)   Maximum finish level above sidewalk of three feet (3').
         (ii)   Maximum perimeter wall height of six feet (6') above sidewalk
level.
         (iii)   Minimum clear depth of seven feet (7').
         (iv)   Minimum clear height of eight feet (8').
         (v)   Maximum length of terrace one hundred fifty feet (150'), with
minimum distance between stairs of fifty feet (50').
      (4)   Shopfront. This frontage type applies to retail stores. Shopfronts
are facades placed at or close to the right-of way line, with the entrance at
sidewalk grade. They are conventional for retail frontage and are commonly
equipped with cantilevered shed roof(s) or awning(s). The following standards
must apply:
         (i)   Minimum height of shop front opening must be eleven feet (11').
         (ii)   Maximum distance between glazing must be two feet (2').
         (iii)   Maximum depth of recessed entry is ten feet (10').
         (iv)    Minimum ground floor transparency of sixty-five percent (65%).
         (v)   If awnings are used, then the minimum clear height is eight feet
(8') and depth is four feet (4').
         (vi)   Recessed shopfronts are also acceptable.
         (vii)   The absence of a raised ground floor precludes residential use
on the ground floor facing the street. Residential use would be appropriate
above the ground floor or behind another use that fronts the street.
      (5)   Forecourt. Forecourts are uncovered courts within a storefront,
gallery or arcade frontage, wherein a portion of the facade is recessed from
the building frontage. The court is suitable for outdoor dining, gardens,
vehicular drop-offs, and utility of loading. The following standards must
apply:
         (i)   Width, clear: Ten feet (10') minimum and sixty feet (60')
maximum.
         (ii)   Depth, clear: Twenty feet (20') minimum and sixty feet (60')
maximum.
         (iii)   Maximum finish terrace level above sidewalk of three feet
(3').
         (iv)   Maximum perimeter wall height of three and half feet (3-1/2')
above terrace level.
         (v)   Minimum ground floor transparency of sixty-five percent (65%).
         (vi)   These standards are used in conjunction with the Shopfront
frontage type.
         (vii)   A fence or wall at the property line may be used to define the
private space of the court.   
         (viii)   The court may also be raised from the sidewalk, creating a
small retaining wall at the property line with entry steps to the court.
      (6)   Gallery. This frontage type consists of a Shopfront with a roof or
deck projecting from the façade of the building, supported by columns. The
following standards must apply:
         (i)   Minimum clear depth is twelve feet (12').
         (ii)   Minimum ground floor clear height is fourteen feet (14').
         (iii)   Colonnades must not screen the public view of storefront
facades more than twenty-five percent (25%).
         (iv)   Minimum height of shop front opening must be eleven feet (11').
         (v)   Maximum distance between glazing must be two feet (2').
         (vi)   Maximum depth of recessed entry is ten feet (10').
         (vii)   Galleries may be one (1) to two (2) stories in height, to
provide covered or uncovered porches at the upper stories.
      (7)   Arcade. Facades with an attached colonnade that is covered by upper
stories. The following standards must apply:
         (i)   Arcades must be no less than ten feet (10') wide clear in all
directions.
         (ii)   Along primary frontages, the arcade must correspond to
storefront openings.
         (iii)   Primary frontage storefront openings must be at least sixty-
five percent (65%) of the first-floor wall area and not have opaque or
reflective glazing.
   (g)   Building massing and articulation.
      (1)   Maximum building length. Buildings must not exceed a length of two
hundred feet (200') on any side.
      (2)   Façade articulation. All building facades that face or will be
visible from a public street must include the following treatments:
         (i)   Building base. The first story must be distinguished from the
upper stories by using two (2) or more architectural details across the front
elevation (e.g., arches, awnings, balconies, columns, cornices, lintels,
moldings, trellises, etc.).
            (aa)   Buildings over three (3) stories must provide a ground floor
elevation that is distinctive from the upper stories by providing a material
change between the first floor and upper floors along at least seventy-five
percent (75%) of the building façade that has frontage on a street or will be
visible from a public street.
         (ii)   Main building entrances. Main entrances must be easily
identifiable and distinguishable from other ground floor entries. Such main
building entrances must be at least one of the following:
            (aa)   Marked by a taller mass above the entrance, such as a tower,
or within a volume or façade projection that protrudes from the rest of the
building surface;
            (ab)   Located in the center of the facade, as part of a
symmetrical overall feature;
            (ac)   Accented by architectural elements, such as columns,
overhanging roofs, awnings, and ornamental light fixtures;
            (ad)   Marked or accented by a change in the roofline or change in
the roof type; or
            (ae)   If a corner mixed-use building, the entrance must provide a
prominent corner entrance for shops or other activity-generating uses.
         (iii)   Exterior building walls. Facades must vary in depth through a
pattern of offsets, recesses, or projections and must incorporate the
following:
            (aa)   A minimum one-foot (1') offset is required for any wall
plane that exceeds thirty feet (30') in length.
            (ab)   Buildings over three (3) stories tall must have major
massing breaks at least every one hundred feet (100') along any street
frontage, adjacent to public parks, publicly accessible outdoor space, or
designated open space, with varying setbacks and/or building entries. Major
breaks must be a minimum of thirty inches (30") deep and four feet (4') wide
and extend the full height of the building.
            (ac)   Buildings must have minor massing breaks at least every
fifty feet (50') along the street frontage, with varying setbacks, building
entries and recesses, or structural bays. Minor breaks must be a minimum of
twelve inches (12") deep and four feet (4') wide and extend the full height of
the building.
            (ad)   Blank walls (facades without doors, windows, landscaping
treatments) must be less than thirty feet (30') in length along sidewalks,
pedestrian walks, or publicly accessible outdoor space areas.
      (3)   Variety in height or roof forms. Building height must be varied so
that a portion of the building has a noticeable change in height; or roof forms
are varied over different portions of the building through changes in pitch,
plane, and orientation using the following standards.
         (i)   Roof line variation for two (2) or more units: Roofs must be
designed to incorporate a minimum of two (2) varying roof heights and types
(hip, gable, shed, flat, etc.).
         (ii)   Rooflines must be vertically articulated at least every fifty
feet (50') along the street frontage with architectural elements such as
parapets, varying cornices, reveals, clerestory windows, and varying roof
height and/or form.
         (iii)   Roof overhangs. Roof overhangs must be designed with a depth
of at least two feet (2').
      (4)   Building façade design.
         (i)   The building façade design must incorporate details such as
window trim, window recesses, cornices, belt courses, and other design
elements.
         (ii)   A minimum of two (2) features such as balconies, cantilevers,
dormers, bay windows, patios, individualized entries, and accent materials must
be incorporated into each façade facing a street or publicly accessible area.
Features, such as balconies (full, Juliet, etc.), garden boxes, etc. shall
function as such and be able to be to handle loads. Purely decorative features
are discouraged, but if used their base shall align with the bottom of the
window.
      (5)   Vertical articulation. In buildings over thirty-five feet (35') in
height, upper and lower stories must be distinguished by incorporating one or
more of the following features. These features may be applied to the
transitions between any floors, except where otherwise specified.
         (i)   A change in façade materials, along with a change in plane at
least one inch (1") in depth at the transition between the two materials.
         (ii)   A horizontal design feature such as a water table, belt course,
or bellyband.
         (iii)   A base treatment at the ground floor consisting of a material
such as stone, concrete masonry, or other material distinct from the remainder
of the façade and projecting at least one inch (1") from the wall surface of
the remainder of the building.
         (iv)   Setting back the top floor(s) of the building at least ten feet
(10') from the façade of the lower floors.
      (6)   Materials.
         (i)   Exterior treatments and materials. At least two materials must
be used on any building facade, in addition to glazing and railings. Any one
material must comprise at least twenty percent (20%) of any building facade,
excluding windows and railings.
         (ii)   Exterior finish materials must not appear artificial. Brick or
other veneer material must have the appearance of a full size and full
thickness brick or other material used. Trellises must be made using full size
members of two inches (2") by two inches (2"), or two inches (2") by four
inches (4"). Veneers are required to turn corners and must not create exposed
edges.
   (h)   Façade transparency and limitation on blank walls.
      (1)   At least twenty percent (20%) of the area of all stories of a
street-facing facade mixed use façade must consist of windows, doors, or other
openings. If located within the planning area of the Thousand Oaks Boulevard
Specific Plan (SP-20) or other Mixed-Use Specific Plan, fifty percent (50%) of
the area is required in lieu of twenty percent (20%).
         (i)   Windows details.
      (1)   Window design. Window recesses, trim and other window elements must
be designed to be substantial in depth to create shadows. The project design
must incorporate at least one of the following window features throughout the
project:
         (i)   Decorative trim elements that add detail and articulation, such
as wind ow surrounds must have at least a two-inch (2") depth and minimum depth
of at least five inches (5") from glass to exterior of the window trim. They
must be incorporated as an integral part of the architectural design; or
         (ii)   A minimum depth of at least three inches (3") from glass to
wall edge around windows if there is no trim (this is only allowed when
appropriate for
the architectural style, such as Spanish Revival, Contemporary or Modern).
      (2)   Divided lites/mullions. Divided-lite windows, where utilized, must
consist of true/full divided lites or simulated divided lites, in accordance
with the following standards:
         (i)   Muntins or grids must project at least three-eighths (3/8) of an
inch from the glass surface.
         (ii)   Muntins or grids must be used on both the exterior and interior
of the glass.
         (iii)   For simulated divided lites, spacers must be used between
panes.
      (3)   Materials.
         (i)   Window frames must be made of aluminum, fiberglass, wood, or
manufactured wood; or another material with a wood grain texture finish.
         (ii)   Glazing. Opaque, reflective, and mirrored window glazing are
prohibited.
      (4)   Shutters.
         (i)   Shutters must be proportionately sized to the height and width
of the window.
         (ii)   Shutter materials must be dictated by the architectural style
and must not be of a faux material.
   (j)   Private and common open space for multifamily developments.
      (1)   Outdoor seating must be provided at common usable open space areas
and outside of common laundry facilities.
      (2)   Multifamily developments (except Senior restricted multifamily
developments) exceeding one hundred (100) units must have three (3) open space
areas, one for general use, one for teenagers, and one for younger children.
For the purpose of this standard, adult open space does not include play
equipment, but does include tables with seating, and older children outdoor
areas include sports areas, age-appropriate park equipment, or other
recreational equipment.
      (3)   Children’s play areas. Developments that include twenty-five (25)
or more dwelling units and provide common open space within the development
must include at least one play area for children. Such play area must:
         (i)   Have a minimum dimension of fifteen feet (15') in any direction
and a minimum area of six hundred (600) square feet.
         (ii)   Play equipment for children under the age of five (5) must be
included in child play areas.
         (iii)   The play area must be visible to as many units as possible to
provide casual surveillance.
         (iv)   The play area must be separated from traffic and any adjacent
streets or parking lots with a fence or other barrier at least four feet (4')
in height.
         (v)   Benches or picnic tables for adults that are accompanying
younger children must be provided.
         (vi)   Exemptions. The play area requirement does not apply to any
development that is:
            (aa)   Age-restricted to senior citizens; or
            (ab)   Located within three hundred feet (300') of a public park
containing a children’s play area.
   (k)   Accessory structures, site and building elements.
      (1)   Perimeter fencing utilized along a public street must be
constructed of decorative iron, steel, pre-painted welded steel, or wood
material. Security fencing such as electrical, barbed wire, razor wire or
sharp, pointed features are not permitted in residential zones (TOMC Section 9-
4.2509.2).
      (2)   All fences and walls designed for screening purposes must be of
solid material. Chain link or chain link with slats is not permitted.
      (3)   Where an alley is not present, above ground equipment and trash
container areas must be located at least ten feet (10') behind the façade of
the building and be screened from view from the street with landscaping, fence
or other solid screening barrier. All exterior trash, recycling, and storage
utility boxes, service poles, ventilation systems, electric and gas meters,
fire sprinkler valves and backflow preventers and transformers must be screened
from public view either with landscaping, fencing or integrated into the design
of the primary or accessory structure.
      (4)   Roof top equipment must be screened by the roof structure or by
equipment screening from all pedestrian and vehicular views from adjacent and
surrounding public streets.
      (5)   Trash and recycling enclosures must be roofed in order to comply
with storm water pollution prevention.
      (6)   Private storage area for each multifamily unit must be provided
with a minimum of one hundred sixty (160) cubic feet of enclosed storage area,
which must be provided in garages, carports or patio areas and in which one
dimension must be at least six feet (6'). Units or projects designed with
individual garages for each unit are exempt from this requirement.
      (7)   All accessory buildings (e.g., garages, sheds, recreation
facilities) must incorporate the same design, materials, and colors as the
primary building.
(§ 2, Ord. 1698-NS, eff. April 29, 2022)
Article 23. Sign Regulations*
*   Sections 9-4.2301 through 9-4.2310, recodified from Sections 8159 and
8159.1 through 8159.6, T.O.O.C, as added by Ordinance No. 95, as amended by
Ordinance Nos. 126, 222, 135-NS, effective January 27, 1970, 141-NS, effective
March 26, 1970, and 162-NS, effective August 27, 1970, renumbered by Ordinance
No. 173-NS, effective November 5, 1970, amended in their entirety by Section I,
Ordinance No. 248-NS, effective January 6, 1972.
Sec. 9-4.2301. Purpose and intent.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of this article that a
comprehensive system of sign regulations is hereby adopted to assure proper
expression through visual communications involving signs that are compatible
with the character and environment of this community to promote the growth of
the City in an orderly, efficient, and attractive manner. It is further
declared that these regulations serve to reveal a great deal about the
community's pride and morale, aesthetic level, vitality, diversity,
originality, culture, and sense of order, giving it a distinctive appearance
and reinforcing the character of the Conejo Valley in its natural setting as
adopted in the General Plan. Such standards shall be uniformly applied to
promote fairness in competition and retain identity within the business
community. It is further determined that these regulations in and by themselves
cannot achieve the end result desired unless the community voluntarily upholds
these conditions within an atmosphere of responsible freedom, utilizing
principles of good design and mutual cooperation. Minimum standards are
provided to safeguard the life, health, property, and public welfare by
regulating and controlling the design quality of materials and the
construction, illumination, location, and maintenance of all signs, sign
structures, and billboards, and at the same time attempting to provide
functional flexibility, encourage variety, and create an incentive to relate
signing to the basic principles of good design while trying to eliminate visual
blight.
   (b)   Message neutrality. It is the policy of the City of Thousand Oaks to
regulate signs in a manner that does not favor commercial speech over non-
commercial speech, and that does not regulate protected non-commercial speech
by message content.
   (c)   Message substitution policy. Subject to the private property owner's
consent, a constitutionally protected non-commercial message of any category or
content may be substituted, in whole or in part, for any allowed commercial
message or any other protected non-commercial message, provided that the sign
structure or mounting device is legal without consideration of message content.
Such substitution of message may be made without any additional approval or
permitting. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any favoring of
commercial speech over non-commercial speech, or favoring of any particular
protected non-commercial message over any other protected non-commercial
message. Message substitution is a continuing right which may be exercised any
number of times. The message substitution right does not:
   (1)   Create a right to increase the total amount of sign display area on a
site or parcel;
   (2)   Create a right to substitute an off-site commercial message in place
of an on-site commercial message or in place of a non-commercial message;
   (3)   Affect the requirement that a sign structure or mounting device must
be properly permitted;
   (4)   Authorize changing the physical method of image presentation, such as
digital or neon display without a permit;
   (5)   Authorize a physical change to the sign structure without compliance
with applicable building codes, safety codes, and neutrally-applicable rules
for sign size, height, orientation, setback, separation or illumination.
(§ I, Ord. 248-NS, eff. January 6, 1972, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1621-NS, eff.
September 30, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.2302. Permit required.
   No sign or other advertising display shall be painted, placed, pasted,
posted, printed, tacked, fastened, constructed, erected or otherwise displayed
without first securing a permit pursuant to Section
9-4.2312. Change in copy and/or sign facia shall require a permit and sign
seal. The permit and seal requirements shall not be applicable to temporary
political signs.
(§ I, Ord. 248-NS, eff. January 6, 1972, as amended by § 18, Ord. 907-NS, eff.
February 11, 1986)
Sec. 9-4.2303. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this article are defined as follows:
   “Advertising display” shall mean any sign, device, or contrivance, and all
parts thereof, which is used to advertise products, goods, services, or
activities or otherwise promote the sale of objects or identify objects for the
sale thereof.
   “Animated sign” shall mean any sign that moves, or any portion of which
moves, revolves, or rotates in any manner.
   “Announcement sign” shall mean a sign erected, displayed, and used to
proclaim, state, or declare the future construction of a building project on
the subject property upon the approval of a development permit for that
project.
   “Area of a sign” shall mean and be computed as the entire area within a
single continuous perimeter of not more than eight (8) straight lines enclosing
the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem, logo, or any figure of
similar character, together with any material or color forming an integral part
or background of the display or used to differentiate such sign from the
backdrop or structure against which it is placed. Only one face of a double-
faced sign shall be considered in determining sign area provided both sides are
of essentially similar design and not more than twenty-four (24") inches apart.
The supports, uprights, structures, or extraneous design features of a sign
shall not be included in determining the sign area unless they are designed in
such a manner as to form an integral part or background of the display.
   “Balloon” shall mean an inflated sphere or ball shape commonly made out of
rubber, mylar, canvas or nylon material.
   “Banner” shall mean a strip of cloth, plastic or paper upon which a sign or
message is painted or printed.
   “Billboard” shall mean the same as “off-site freestanding sign.”
   “Building frontage” shall mean those frontages which face upon a public or
private street or parking area between such building and the street. Where a
building faces two (2) or more streets, the frontage containing the principal
entrance to the building shall be designated as the building frontage.
   “Business directory sign” shall mean a freestanding sign containing the name
of the shopping center on which the sign is located and the names of the
separate businesses also located within that center.
   “Changeable copy sign” shall mean a sign which is characterized by
changeable copy, including a painted sign, regardless of the method of
attachment.
   “Community” shall mean a physical entity of common interests, including
residential subdivisions or neighborhoods and industrial parks.
   “Construction sign” shall mean a sign stating the names of the individuals
or firms directly connected with the construction project. Such sign may
include the name of the City in which the business is located and emergency
telephone numbers.
   “Directional sign,” except a “subdivision directional sign” as defined in
this section, shall mean a sign which only contains any of the following words:
“entrance,” “enter,” “exit,” “in,”
“out,” or other similar words, or a sign containing arrows or other characters
indicating traffic directions and used either in conjunction with such words or
separately. No directional sign shall contain any advertising or trade name
identification.
   “Eave” shall mean that portion of the roof line extending beyond the
building wall or canopy attachment on the wall having the simulated appearance
of an eave.
   “Flag” shall mean a rectangular-shaped piece of cloth having a distinctive
symbol or design.
   “Flashing sign” shall mean any sign which contains or is illuminated by
lights which are intermittently on and off, which change in intensity, or which
create the illusion of flashing in any manner.
   “Foot lambert” shall mean a quantitative unit for measuring brightness equal
to one lumen per square foot.
   “Freestanding sign” shall mean a sign for which a building permit has been
issued and is permanently supported by one or more uprights, braces, poles, or
other similar structural components when utilizing earth, rock, the ground, or
any foundation set in the ground as a primary holding base. Such signs which
project through a roof projection or canopy, around which there are no
enclosing walls, and “monument signs,” as defined in this section, shall be
considered freestanding signs.
   “Height of sign” shall mean the vertical distance from the average surface
grade immediately surrounding the base of the sign to the top of its highest
element, including any structural element.
   “Illuminated sign” shall mean any sign for which a source of light is used
in order to make readable the message. This definition shall include internally
and externally lighted signs and reflectorized, glowing, or radiating signs.
   “Lumens” shall mean a quantitative unit for measuring light output or
intensity and as a relationship between candelas, lumens, and footcandles
(luminous intensity or candlepower = one candela).
   “Marquee” shall mean a permanent shelter used only as a roof and supported
by the main building and projecting in whole or in part over the building line
or public property.
   “Marquee sign” shall mean a sign attached to or hung from a marquee.
   “Menu board” shall mean a sign displaying the menu of a drive-through
restaurant where customers place their food and drink orders while seated in
vehicles in drive-through service lanes.
   “Monument sign” shall mean a low-profile freestanding sign incorporating the
design and building materials accenting the architectural theme of the
buildings on the same property. All such signs shall be subject to the
provisions of Article 18 (Design Review: Requirements and Procedure) of this
chapter.
   “Off-site sign” shall mean a sign which displays commercial or noncommercial
messages related to property, goods, services not found on or related to the
property upon which the sign is located.
   “On-site sign” shall mean a sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service, industry, or other activity which is sold, offered, or
conducted on the premises upon which such sign is located or to which it is
affixed. Not more than twenty (20%) percent of the total allowable on-site sign
area shall be devoted to the advertising of a standard namebrand commodity or
service which is not the exclusive commodity or service being sold or rendered
on the premises or a part of the name of the business concern involved. A
parcel of record having an access easement as its only street frontage may
place its on-site sign on such easement.
   “Order board” shall mean a sign associated with a drive-through restaurant,
other than a menu board, where customers seated in vehicles in drive-through
service lanes communicate with an attendant to place their food and drink
orders.
   “Parcel of record” or “property” shall mean any separate parcel of property
as shown on the latest available assessor’s maps; provided, however, when a
shopping center has been divided into separate parcels, it shall continue to be
considered as one parcel of record; and provided, further, where one tenant,
business, or enterprise occupies two (2) or more contiguous parcels, it shall
be considered as one parcel of record.
   “Pennant” shall mean a triangular or tapered-to-a-point shaped piece of
cloth, plastic or paper used for identification or signaling.
   “Permanent sign” shall mean a sign intended to be erected and maintained for
a period of time in excess of thirty (30) days.
   “Portable, moveable, or temporary sign” shall mean any sign for which a
building permit has not been issued, and which is not permanently affixed or
erected in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 9 of Title 8 of this Code,
or any sign which is intended to be moveable or capable of being moved from
place to place, whether or not wheels or other special supports are provided.
   “Political sign” shall mean a sign erected prior to an election to advise or
identify a candidate, campaign issue, election proposition, or other related
matters.
   “Preview board” shall mean a sign displaying the menu of a drive-through
restaurant where customers seated in vehicles in drive-through service lanes
preview the menu before pulling up to a menu board.
   “Projecting sign” shall mean any sign which projects more than twelve (12")
inches from the wall of a building.
   “Real estate sign” shall mean a sign which advertises the sale, rental or
lease of the property or a portion thereof.
   “Rider” shall mean an attachment to a sign that is not an integral part of
the display panel of the sign.
   “Roof” shall mean the cover of any building and shall include the eaves and
similar projections. Elevators or equipment housing, penthouses, or similar
structures shall not be considered in determining the roof location unless they
comprise more than sixty (60%) percent of the roof area.
   “Roof sign” shall mean any sign erected, constructed, or placed upon or over
a roof or parapet wall of a building and which is wholly or partly supported by
such building.
   “Sale” shall mean the act of transferring the ownership and title to
property from one person to another.
   “Sign” shall include, without limitation thereto, all outdoor advertising on
any card, cloth, paper, paint, plastic, metal, painted glass, or wooden or
stone material, and any and all devices, structural and otherwise, lighted or
unlighted, painted or not painted, attached to, made a part of, or placed in
the window of, or in the front, rear, sides, or top of any structure on any
land or any rock, bush, wall, tree, post, fence, building, or structure and
visible from any public or private street, way, thoroughfare, alley, or wall,
which device in any manner, or by any means, whether enumerated in this
subsection or not, announces or directs attention to the name, nature, merits,
availability, price, or type of goods, services, or products produced, sold,
stored, furnished, or available at that location or at any other location,
including signs specifically for the sale of real property, and includes all
parts, portions, units, and materials composing the same, together with the
frame, background, structure, support, and anchorage therefor, as the case may
be, but does not include official notices issued by any court (or public body)
or officer or directional warning or information signs or structures required
by or authorized by law or by Federal, State, County, or City authority. The
term “placed,” as used in this section, shall include erected, projected,
constructed, posted, painted, printed, tacked, glued, stuck, carved, or
otherwise fastened, fixed, or made visible in any manner whatsoever.
   “Shopping center” shall mean commercial retail buildings and associated
facilities which have been designed and developed together as an integrated
unit using modern site planning techniques as defined in Sections
9-4.1200,
9-4.1400, and
9-4.1500 of this chapter for the C-1, C-3 and C-4 Zones, respectively. In the
C-2 Zone, a shopping center shall mean a group of four (4) or more businesses
which function as an integral unit on a single parcel or separate parcels and
which businesses utilize common off-street parking or access.
   “Street frontage” shall mean the linear frontage of a parcel of record on a
private or public street providing its principal access or visibility. When a
parcel is served by an easement, only the frontage of that easement may be
computed as street frontage.
   “Subdivision” shall mean improved or unimproved land or lands divided, or
proposed to be divided, for the purpose of sale or lease or financing into five
(5) or more lots or parcels and having a tract number issued by the office of
the County Recorder.
   “Subdivision directional sign” shall mean any sign which informs the viewer
as to the route or change of direction of travel in order to arrive at the land
development project. This type of sign may only display necessary travel
directions, the name of the land development project, any characteristic
trademark, insignia, or similar device of the developer, and any identifying
material as required by these regulations.
   “Under-canopy sign” shall mean any lighted or unlighted display attached to
the underside of a projecting canopy or marquee protruding over public or
private sidewalks or rights-of-way and having the required ground clearance as
otherwise required in this article.
   "Way-finder sign" shall mean an off-site sign designed and constructed
solely for the purpose of providing direction to one or more destinations.
   “Window sign” shall mean any sign painted, attached, glued, or otherwise
affixed to a window and designed to be viewed from adjoining streets, malls, or
parking lots.
(§ I, Ord. 248-NS, eff. January 6, 1972, as amended by §§ I and II, Ord. 423-
NS, eff. February 14, 1974, as amended by Ord. 1130-NS, eff. January 7, 1992, §
1, Ord. 1218-NS, eff. September 27, 1994, § 1, Ord. 1321-NS, eff. June 18,
1998, § IV, Ord. 1477-NS, eff. June 14, 2007 and § 3, Ord. 1551- NS, eff.
February 10, 2011)
Sec. 9-4.2304. Construction, maintenance, and removal.
   (a)   Construction. Every sign and all parts, portions, units, and materials
comprising the same, together with the frame, background, supports, or
anchorage therefor, shall be manufactured, fabricated, assembled, constructed,
and erected in compliance with all applicable State, Federal, and City laws and
regulations.
   (b)   Maintenance. Every sign and all parts, portions, units, and materials
comprising the same, together with the frame, background, supports, or
anchorage therefor, shall be maintained in proper repair and a proper state of
preservation. The display surface of all signs shall be kept neatly painted
and/or posted.
   (c) Notices to maintain, alter, or repair. Upon a written notice from the
Building Official or Community Development Department, the necessary
maintenance, alterations, or repairs shall be made within ten (10) days after
the date of such notice.
   (d)   Removal. Signs pertaining to enterprises or occupants which are no
longer using the premises to which the sign relates shall be painted out,
obliterated, or removed from the premises within thirty (30) days after the
associated enterprise or occupant has vacated the premises. Permitted temporary
signs, such as political or construction signs, shall be displayed no sooner
than forty-five (45) days before, and removed no later than seven (7) days
after, the occurrence or completion of the event or election or other purpose
serviced by the sign.
   (e)   Public nuisances: Abatement. Any sign violating the provisions of this
section shall constitute a public nuisance and shall be subject to abatement
pursuant to the provisions of this section. The Community Development Director,
upon a determination that a sign is in violation of this article, shall give
notice to the candidate, property owner, sign owner, or, when a ballot
proposition is involved, the person or group advocating the vote described on
the sign to remove the offending sign. After reasonable opportunity has been
given to remove the sign or remedy the violation, the Community Development
Director may cause the sign to be removed, and the cost of removal shall be
billed to the sign’s owner, the property owner, or other responsible party,
which, in the case of political signs, shall be the candidate for which the
sign is displayed or the group advocating the position on the ballot
proposition which the sign supports. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
Community Development Director may cause any sign which is an immediate peril
to persons or property to be removed summarily and without prior notice. If a
sign is summarily removed pursuant to this section, the Community Development
Director shall give notice of the removal to the appropriate parties as soon as
it is reasonably possible after the removal.
   (f)   Unauthorized removal of political signs. No person shall remove,
destroy, relocate, or otherwise disturb any political sign without the
permission of the party who erected the sign. It shall be presumed, as to signs
for political candidates, that the political candidate or his or her
representative is the party who erected the sign. It shall further be assumed
that the committee who has registered with the Secretary of the State to
support a position on a ballot proposition is the party who erected the sign
taking the position on a ballot measure. Nothing in this subsection shall
prohibit the owner of a piece of property, or his or her authorized
representative, from removing a sign from his or her property when the
political sign has been erected without his or her consent; and provided,
further, nothing in this subsection shall prevent the Community Development
Director or his authorized representatives from taking action to abate sign
violations pertaining to political signs pursuant to subsection (e) of this
section.
(§ I, Ord. 248-NS, eff. January 6, 1972, as amended by § I, Ord. 359-NS, eff.
April 12, 1973, § 1, Ord. 741-NS, eff. April 3, 1980, and § I, Ord. 810-NS,
eff. June 24, 1982)
Sec. 9-4.2305. Residential zones.
   (a)   The following signs shall be permitted in the Rural-Agricultural (R-
A), Rural-Exclusive (R-E), Single-Family Estate (R-0), Single-Family
Residential (R-1), and Two-Family Residential (R-2) Zones:
   (1)   One unlighted sign, not more than six (6) square feet in area, with
copy pertaining only to the sale or lease of the property or premises upon
which it is displayed shall be permitted; provided, however, such sign shall
not be located closer than five (5’) feet to any property line abutting a
public road, street, or highway and shall not exceed six (6’) feet in height.
In addition, for parcels of land five (5) acres or more, such sign may be
increased to twenty-four (24) square feet in area provided the height shall not
exceed eight (8’) feet and no dimension of the panel face shall exceed six (6’)
feet. Such signs shall be removed within three (3) days following the
completion of the sale.
   (2)   The Community Development Director may authorize a low-profile
monument identification sign showing the name of a community provided the
overall size of the sign, including all riders, is not larger than fifty (50)
square feet, with no dimension exceeding ten (10’) feet. The number of such
signs shall be limited to not more than two (2) for any particular community.
   (3)   Temporary political signs shall be permitted and shall not exceed
twelve (12) square feet in area and six (6’) feet in visible height. No more
than one such sign per candidate or position on a ballot issue shall be
displayed on any one side of a parcel of record which has frontage on a public
street, but in no case shall any sign for any candidate or any position on a
ballot issue, on different street frontages, be closer than one hundred (100’)
feet, measured in a straight line between such signs. Such signs shall not be
placed in the public right-of-way or upon public property.
   (b)   The following signs shall be permitted in the Multiple-Family
Residential (R-3) and Residential Planned Development (R-P-D) Zones:
   (1)   All signs permitted as set forth in subsection (a) of this section and
Section
9-4.2306 of this article shall be permitted.
   (2)    The Community Development Director may authorize one unlighted or
softly backlighted low-profile monument sign, not to exceed a height of five
(5’) feet or an area of twenty-four (24) square feet, or an attached building
sign not to exceed ore square foot per dwelling unit and in no case exceeding a
total of fifty (50) square feet.
   (3)   After the issuance of a development permit, the Community Development
Director may permit one single-faced unlighted sign on a parcel of record to
identify the project, contractor, and/or leasing agent. Such sign shall not
total more than twenty-four (24) square feet in area. No portion of any sign
allowed by the provisions of this section shall have a height of more than ten
(10’) feet or have a dimension of the panel face that exceeds eight (8’) feet.
Such signs shall be removed within thirty (30) days after the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
   (4)   Temporary political signs shall be permitted and shall not exceed
twelve (12) square feet in area and six (6’) feet in visible height, and no
more than one such sign per candidate or issue shall be displayed per parcel of
record. Such signs shall not be in the public right-of-way.
   (5)   One unlighted sign, not more than six (6) square feet in area, with
copy pertaining only to the sale or lease of the property or premises upon
which it is displayed shall be permitted; provided, however, such sign shall
not be located closer than five (5’) feet to any property line abutting a
public road, street, or highway and shall not exceed six (6’) feet in height.
In addition, for parcels of land five (5) acres or more, such sign may be
increased to twenty-four (24) square feet in area provided the height shall not
exceed eight (8') feet and no dimension of the panel face shall exceed six (6’)
feet. Such signs shall be removed within three (3) days following the
completion of the sale.
   (6)   Religious facility directional signs may be located on private
property within a one-mile radius of the religious facility location provided
written consent from the property owner is submitted to the Community
Development Department and subject to a review by the Community Development
Director to determine if the location is appropriate. Such a determination
shall include, but not be limited to, a review of the sign visibility and
proximity to surrounding residences. The size of the sign panel shall be
limited to four (4) square feet, but no dimension shall exceed two (2') feet,
and the sign shall not exceed a height of eight (8') feet as measured from the
elevation of the adjacent public street centerline. The number of such signs
shall be limited to a maximum of two (2) per religious facility, unless there
is sufficient justification to consider the installation of one additional
sign, subject to the approval of the Community Development Director. To obtain
a uniform design, the sign shall be constructed of a dark stained wood material
including a wood panel. The sign copy shall contain the following information:
directions, distance or address, name, denomination, and logo, if the religious
facility desires.
(§ I, Ord. 248-NS, eff. January 6, 1972, as amended by §§ II and III, Ord. 359-
NS, eff. April 12, 1973, §§ III and IV, Ord. 423-NS, eff. February 14, 1974, §
I, Ord. 585-NS, eff. August 26, 1976, § 2, Ord. 741-NS, eff. April 3, 1980, §
28, Ord. 1392-NS, eff. June 7, 2002, and § 6, Ord. 1621-NS, eff. September 30,
2016)
Sec. 9-4.2306. Residential zones: New subdivisions.
   In the case of new subdivisions, the following signs may also be permitted;
provided, however, only subdivision directional signs may be permitted in
locations other than within the subdivision site boundaries:
   (a)   The Community Development Director may issue subdivision sign permits
for two (2) advertising signs and one subdivision directional sign after the
payment of a fee prescribed by Council resolution to the Community Development
Department. The Community Development Director may also authorize up to two (2)
additional signs after a final subdivision map has been recorded. Such signs
shall be subject to all the following provisions:
   (1)   The signs may be single-faced or double-faced, and advertising signs
shall not exceed eighteen (18’) feet in height, and subdivision directional
signs shall not exceed twelve (12’) feet in height.
   (2)   Neither the horizontal nor the vertical dimension of an advertising
sign face shall exceed fifteen (15'’) feet, and the total area shall not exceed
one hundred fifty (150) square feet.
   (3)   Neither the horizontal nor the vertical dimension of a subdivision
directional sign face shall exceed ten (10') feet, and the total area shall not
exceed sixty (60) square feet.
   (4)   No riders or illumination shall be permitted. There shall be no
additions, tag signs, streamers, devices, display boards, or appurtenances
added to the sign as originally approved.
   (5)   Any such sign approved for a particular subdivision within the City
shall not be changed to
advertise another subdivision without the prior approval of the Community
Development Director.
   (6)   Such signs may be established along, but not within, the right-of-way
of any highway, street, or thoroughfare; provided, however, such signs may not
be erected along established and existing freeways which have been designated
as freeway routes by the Division of Highways of the State.
   (7)   Such signs shall be at least one thousand (1,000) linear feet apart on
the same side of a public road or street and the same distance apart at an
intersection of such streets following the right-of-way line.
   (8)   Such signs shall be erected on a vacant unimproved parcel of record
unless such parcel exceeds five (5) acres in size and is situated one hundred
(100') feet from a structure on such parcel and set back a minimum of twenty
(20') feet from a structure on adjacent parcels.
   (9)   Unless a time extension is granted by the Community Development
Director, such signs may be maintained for a period of eighteen (18) months
from the date upon which the final subdivision map was recorded or a
preliminary subdivision public report was issued, or until all of the lots in
the subdivision have been initially sold, whichever occurs first.
   (10)   Prior to erecting any sign approved by the Community Development
Director, a cash deposit or certificate of deposit in the amount of Two Hundred
Fifty and no/100ths ($250.00) Dollars shall be filed with, and accepted by, the
Community Development Director for each sign, and the applicant shall file a
written statement from the property owner authorizing either the applicant or
the City to go onto the property at any time to remove the sign. In the event
of failure to perform or comply with any term or provision pertaining to such
sign, the Community Development Director may declare the deposit forfeited.
Upon the expiration of the sign approval and removal of the sign, the deposit
may be refunded by the Community Development Director upon an application made
thereto. The Two Hundred Fifty and no/100ths ($250.00) Dollar deposit may be
allowed to include more than one subdivision sign provided the estimated
removal cost of all such signs is less than the deposit amount and the signs
are erected by the same company and advertise the same subdivision.
   (11)    Political sign copy shall be permitted on existing advertising and/
or directional signs of subdivisions subject to the time limits set forth in
subsection (d) of Section
9-4.2304 of this article.
   (b)   One feature sign and one model home sign identifying each particular
model, not exceeding two (2') feet by three (3') feet in size, shall be
permitted. Model home complex flags may be displayed and shall be limited to
one flag per model. Such flags shall not exceed fifteen (15') feet in height
and a flag area of four (4) square feet. Such flags shall be replaced at least
once every eight (8) weeks from and after the commencement of their use. Prior
to erecting any flag approved by the Community Development Director, a cash
deposit or certificate of deposit in the amount of Two Hundred Fifty and no/
100ths ($250.00) Dollars shall be filed with, and accepted by, the Community
Development Director for all flags to guarantee the replacement of the flags
within a minimum time span of eight (8) weeks. Upon the removal of the flags
and proof of compliance with all the provisions of this section, the deposit
shall be refunded by the Community Development Director upon an application
made thereto.
(§ I, Ord. 248-NS, eff. January 6, 1972, as amended by § IV, Ord. 359-NS, eff.
April 12, 1973, § 1, Ord. 462-NS, eff. June 13, 1974, § XII, Ord. 581-NS, eff.
August 12, 1976, and § VII, Ord. 776-NS, eff. April 16, 1981)
Sec. 9-4.2307. Trailer Park Development Zones (T-P-D).
   Advertising signs, structures, or devices of any character placed or
maintained on any land used as a trailer park shall be used only for the
purpose of identifying or advertising the trailer park and the accommodations
offered. Before being erected, the size, character, location, and number of all
such advertising signs, structures, or devices shall be approved by the
Commission. Any proposed freestanding sign shall not exceed twenty (20') feet
in height or fifty (50) square feet in area, and any proposed wall sign shall
not extend above the top of the wall nor exceed one hundred (100) square feet
in area. A freestanding sign may be softly illuminated from the interior, but
any wall sign shall be only indirectly lighted. Small directional or traffic
control signs, lighted or unlighted, may be erected and maintained within the
limits of the trailer park or on adjoining property when approved by the
Community Development Director as to location and character. No other
advertising sign, structure, or device shall be permitted in the Trailer Park
Development Zone, except unlighted signs not exceeding one hundred (100) square
feet in area pertaining to the sale or lease of the lot upon which they are
displayed. Temporary political signs shall be permitted pursuant to the
requirements of Sections
9-4.2305 and
9-4.2306 of this article concerning signs in residential zones.
(§ I, Ord. 248-NS, eff. January 6, 1972, as amended by § 3, Ord. 741-NS, eff.
April 3, 1980)
Sec. 9-4.2308. Commercial and industrial zones.
   (a)   Building signs: Commercial and industrial zones. The following
building or facia signs shall be permitted:
   (1)   On-site advertising signs and structures painted upon or affixed to
any building, except in shopping centers and the Commercial Office (C-O) Zone,
subject to the following condition: The sign area shall not exceed one and one-
half (1-1/2) square feet of sign area for each lineal foot of building frontage
but not to exceed a total of three hundred (300) square feet on its principal
road, street, or highway. Where more than one business is located in a building
or upon a single parcel of record, the frontage of each separate business
building facing the right-of-way shall be considered as building frontage;
   (2)   On-site advertising signs in shopping centers painted upon or affixed
to any building, subject to the following conditions:
   (i)   The sign area shall not exceed one square foot of sign area for each
lineal foot of building frontage but not to exceed a total of three hundred
(300) square feet on its principal road, street, or highway. Where a shopping
center contains a major tenant, such sign area limitations may be exceeded by
fifty (50) square feet, subject to the approval of the Commission. Where more
than one business is located in a building or upon a single parcel of record,
the frontage of each separate business facing the right-of-way shall be
considered as building frontage. Where four (4) or more separate businesses are
located on a parcel of record and where two (2) or more of the businesses face
an arcade, mall, or walkway, or where a business has a second or third frontage
and entrance facing a parking area in a direction other than that facing the
principal street, an additional one-half (1/2) square foot of sign area per
lineal foot of each business building facing such parking area, arcade, mall,
or walkway shall be permitted, subject to all the conditions set forth in this
section.
   (ii)   Where a canopy, marquee, or eave extends over a walkway, arcade, or
mall, one under-canopy sign for each business may be permitted subject to the
following conditions:
   (aa)    The vertical dimension of an under-canopy sign shall not exceed
eighteen (18") inches, and the total area shall not exceed five (5) square
feet.
   (ab)    The sign shall have at least a seven foot six inch (7'6") vertical
clearance.
   (ac)    Under-canopy signs shall be of uniform size, design, and height and
shall be compatible throughout each development.
   (ad)    Only the name and type of business shall be displayed on an under-
canopy sign;
   (3)   Subject to the requirements and conditions of the planned development
permit, the following signs shall be permitted in the Commercial Office (C-O)
Zone:
   (i)   Business signs advertising only the business conducted or the services
provided on the premises shall be permitted. The total sign area permitted on
the front of the building shall be limited to one square foot of sign area for
each lineal foot of building frontage but not to exceed a total of one hundred
(100) square feet. Such sign area may be distributed and permitted on each side
of the building that faces a public street.
   (ii)   Business signs may be internally or reflectively illuminated.
   (b)   On-site freestanding signs: Commercial and industrial zones. The
following signs shall be permitted:
   (1)   Neighborhood Shopping Center (C-1) Zone and Highway and Arterial
Business (C-2) Zone on-site freestanding signs shall be permitted in the C-
1 and C-2 Zones pursuant to the following conditions:
   (i)   The sign area shall not exceed one square foot of sign area for each
two (2) lineal feet of street frontage, and in no case shall the length exceed
eight (8') feet or the height exceed six (6') feet, nor shall the sign copy
area exceed a total of thirty-two (32) square feet.
   (ii)   On-site freestanding signs shall consist of a monument sign as
defined in Section
9-4.2303 of this article.
   (iii)    Shopping centers having two (2) principal street frontages may have
one monument sign per frontage.
   (iv)    On-site freestanding signs shall be designed in accordance with the
standards contained in Section
9-4.2309 of this article.
   (v)   In-lieu of the on-site freestanding monument signs permitted herein
above, a “business directory sign” may be permitted in commercial shopping
centers in the Highway and Arterial Commercial (C-2) Zone if all buildings
within the commercial shopping center have a setback of one hundred fifty
(150') feet or more from the centerline of the street, or the building
storefronts face in a direction other than towards the primary frontage road,
and said sign is subject to the following limitations and conditions:
   (aa)    The top panel of the sign shall have a minimum height of eighteen
(18") inches and shall contain the name of the center only in letters with a
maximum height of six (6") inches. The copy may also include a logo.
   (ab)    Any individual business sign panels shall be located below the top
panel and address numerals and shall have a maximum height of six (6") inches.
Individual businesses shall not display more than one sign panel per business
directory sign which shall not exceed a sign area of two (2) square feet.
Tenant sign panels shall be alphabetically listed. All business panel lettering
shall have a maximum height of four (4") inches. The bottom of the bottom most
panel shall not be less than twelve (12") inches from top of grade.
   (ac)    Businesses located on end units which either face or side onto the
primary frontage road and do not meet the separation distance criteria shall be
prohibited from placing a business sign panel on the sign.
   (ad)    The business directory sign shall have the address numerals of the
property in minimum six (6") inch high characters in a prominent location
immediately under the top panel of the sign.
   (ae)    Business directory signs shall be made of sandblasted wood and
externally illuminated only. External illumination shall be of a low-profile
design shielded to prevent light spillage onto adjacent properties and public
rights-of-way and the fixtures shall be screened from view with low-profile
landscaping.
   (af)    Only one directory sign per center shall be allowed and said sign
must be oriented towards the primary frontage road. Business directory signs
shall be located in a landscaped planter as near to the primary entrance of the
shopping center as possible and shall comply with City standards in Plate D-10
for vehicular sight distance at the driveway intersection with the frontage
street.
   (ag)    All sign copy and the individual business sign panels shall utilize
the same color letters (copy), letter style and background color which shall be
one of the approved sign color(s) for the shopping center.
   (ah)    Maximum height and length shall not exceed the limits as set forth
in subsection (i) above.
   (2)   Community Shopping Center (C-3) Zone and Regional Shopping Center (C-
4) Zone, except for shopping centers, on-site freestanding signs shall be
permitted in the C-3 and C-4 Zones pursuant to the following conditions:
   (i)   The sign area shall not exceed one square foot of sign area for each
two (2) lineal feet of street frontage, and in no case shall the length exceed
eight (8') feet or the height exceed six (6') feet, nor shall the sign copy
area exceed a total of thirty-two (32) square feet.
   (ii)   On-site freestanding signs shall consist of a monument sign as
defined in Section
9-4.2303 of this article.
   (iii)    On-site freestanding signs shall be designed in accordance with the
standards contained in Section
9-4.2309 of this article.
   (3)   Industrial Park (M-1) Zone and Light Manufacturing (M-2) Zone signs
shall be permitted as follows:
   (i)   The sign area shall not exceed one square foot of sign area for each
two (2) lineal feet of street frontage, and in no case shall the length exceed
eight (8') feet or the height exceed six (6') feet, nor shall the sign copy
area exceed a total of thirty-two (32) square feet.
   (ii)   On-site freestanding signs shall consist of a monument sign as
defined in Section
9-4.2303 of this article.
   (iii)    On-site freestanding signs shall be designed in accordance with the
standards contained in Section
9-4.2309 of this article.
   (4)   Commercial Office (C-O) Zone signs shall be permitted as follows: one
low profile softly-lighted monument sign may be permitted with the following
limitations:
   (i)   Such sign shall be placed on the principal street frontage.
   (ii)   The sign area shall not exceed one square foot of sign area for each
two (2) lineal feet of street frontage, and in no case shall the length exceed
eight (8') feet or the height exceed six (6') feet, nor shall the sign copy
area exceed a total of thirty-two (32) square feet.
   (iii)    The sign shall be set back a minimum of ten (10') feet from all
public rights-of-way.
   (iv)    On-site freestanding signs shall be designed in accordance with the
standards contained in Section
9-4.2309 of this article.
   (c)   Off-site freestanding signs, in the Highway and Arterial Business/Auto
Mall Zone (C-2/AM) only, way-finder signs shall be allowed within the public
right-of-way only for the purpose of providing directional information to auto
dealership locations. Said signs may not be used for advertising in any way,
including advertising for sales or special events. The way-finder signs may be
monument signs or pole mounted signs and shall match the design theme at the
Auto Mall. The specific design, location, and components of way-finder signs
shall be subject to approval of a special use permit pursuant to Sec.
9-4.2310 of this article.
(§ I, Ord. 248-NS, eff. January 6, 1972, as amended by §§ I and II, Ord. 379-
NS, eff. June 14, 1973, §§ V, VI, VII, VIII, IX, X, and XI, Ord. 423-NS, eff.
February 14, 1974, § IV, Ord. 462-NS, eff. June 13, 1974, and § I, Ord. 683-NS,
eff. August 10, 1978, § 2, Ord. 1218-NS, eff. September 27, 1994, §§ 2–6, Ord.
1321-NS, eff. June 18, 1998, and § 4, Ord. 1551-NS, eff. February 10, 2011)
Editor's note: Ordinance No. 1557-NS adopted May 10, 2011 amending Sec. 9-
4.2308 is not yet effective and is pending codification until effective date as
determined in Part 4 of the ordinance.
Sec. 9-4.2309. Commercial and industrial zones: General requirements.
   The general requirements and limitations for all commercial and industrial
zones shall be as follows:
   (a)   Signs, except for public service time and temperature signs, shall not
be flashing, animated, or revolving in nature.
   (b)   Banners, pennants, and captive balloons. These types of temporary
advertising are limited as follows:
   (1)   Individual businesses. Four (4) special events may be authorized each
calendar year, not to exceed ten (10) consecutive days per event.
   (2)   Shopping center and Thousand Oaks Auto Mall events. That two (2)
additional special events advertising a special center-wide promotion may be
authorized each calendar year, not to exceed four (4) consecutive days per
event.
   (3)   Grand opening events. In addition to the above, a one-time “grand-
opening” special event permit may be authorized for new centers or individual
businesses to allow this temporary advertising to be limited to a period not to
exceed thirty (30) consecutive days.
   (4)   Banner sign requirements.
   (i)   Size. A banner shall not exceed a maximum length of twenty (20') feet
for all businesses except the Thousand Oaks Auto Mall which is limited to a
maximum of thirty (30') feet. The area shall be limited to a maximum of sixty
(60) square feet except for the Thousand Oaks Auto Mall which shall be limited
to a maximum of ninety (90) square feet.
   (ii)   Number. The number of sign banners shall be limited to one per store
or shopping center event, and in the Thousand Oaks Auto Mall one per building.
   (iii) Location. The location of banners shall be attached to the front of
the building for individual stores and businesses, strung between light
standards along street frontages for shopping centers, and may be attached to
either a building, store front, or strung between light standards along a
street frontage for the Thousand Oaks Auto Mall.
   (5)   Pennants, balloons and flags. Pennants and balloons may be used only
in conjunction with special events and are subject to the provisions of this
chapter. Additionally, flags shall not be used as an advertising device, and
shall only bear the seals of the United States of America, State of California,
City of Thousand Oaks, or bear the emblems of civic, philanthropic, educational
or religious organizations.
   (i)   Size and shape. Pennants shall be limited to a size not to exceed
twelve inches (12") in width and eighteen inches (18") in length and shall be
triangular or rectangular in shape. Balloons shall not exceed eighteen inches
(18") in diameter.
   (ii)   Length. A single string of pennants shall not exceed forty feet (40')
in length,
   (iii)    Location. For individual businesses a single string of pennants may
be attached to the front of the store or business. For shopping center
promotions a single string of pennants may be strung between two (2) light
standards located along the street frontage. The length of the string of
pennants may not exceed eighty (80') feet. Balloons are limited to a maximum of
six (6) per business, attached individually or in a single cluster. The
balloons may not be attached in a manner that would cause them to extend above
the eave or parapet of the roof of the building or store front.
   (c)   Portable, moveable, or temporary signs, except window or construction
signs as provided in this article, shall not be permitted. The Community
Development Director may permit two (2) internally or externally illuminated
gasoline or diesel price (changeable-copy poster) signs not to exceed the total
sign area set forth under items (1), (2), and (3). The sign shall be
permanently installed in the ground in accordance with all the provisions of
this article.
   (1)   Three products, six price signs. The maximum allowable “overall sign
area” for this sign is twenty-two (22) square feet. This figure includes an
eighteen (18") inch base which is required with the use of this sign.
   The maximum allowable “effective sign area” for this sign is sixteen (16)
square feet. This figure includes all of the area above the required eighteen
(18") inch base. No service station may use this sign to post less than three
(3) products and six (6) prices.
   (2)   Three products, three prices, or two products, four prices. The
maximum allowable “overall sign area” for this sign is nineteen (19) square
feet. This figure includes an eighteen (18") inch base, which is required with
the use of this sign.
   The maximum allowable “effective sign area” is fourteen (14) square feet.
This figure includes all of the area above the required eighteen (18") inch
base.
   (3)   Monument identification sign. Service stations desiring to use a
monument identification sign to post all pricing information may do so as
follows:
   (i)   Three products, six prices. The maximum allowable sign area that may
be devoted to changeable copy may not exceed sixteen (16) square feet. Service
stations choosing to use their monument ID signs to post grades of fuel and
prices under this section may not use the individual price signs described in
subsection (1).
   (ii)   Three products, three prices, or two products, four prices. The
maximum allowable sign area that may be devoted to changeable copy may not
exceed fourteen (14) square feet. Service stations who choose to use their
monument ID signs to post grades of fuel and prices under this section may not
use the individual price signs described in subsection (2).
   (iii)    One product, one price/two products, two prices. The maximum
allowable sign area that may be devoted to changeable copy may not exceed six
(6) square feet. However, this option may only be used in conjunction with
either of the two individual price signs as described above in subsections (1)
and (2).
   (4)   Grade of motor fuel designation. The height of the letters designating
the grade of motor fuel (i.e. regular, unleaded, diesel, etc.) must be a
minimum of two (2") inches high.
   (d)   Perimeter or floodlighting, whether used for illumination or
advertisement, which illuminates private land, whether improved or not, shall
be permitted only when such lighting is installed on private property and is
hooded or shielded so that no direct beams therefrom fall upon public streets,
alleys, highways, or private property.
   (e)   All signs shall comply with the intent, purpose, and standards of the
provisions of Article 18 of this chapter and the Architectural Design Standards
adopted by resolution of the City Council to assure conformity and harmony of
the sign with the exterior design, size, colors, materials and architectural
features of the subject buildings.
   (f)   Window signs.
   (1) Window signs shall be permitted on both the inside and/or outside of the
window. No permit shall be required.
   (2) Window signs shall be limited to twenty-five (25%) percent of the total
window area on any single facia of the building fronting on a street to be
displayed in conjunction with sales or special events for an indefinite period
of time. Additionally, two (2) separate events involving a larger portion of
the window beyond the twenty-five (25%) percent may be authorized on holiday
periods chosen by the individual business throughout the calendar year and
further limited to a maximum of twenty-one (21) consecutive days for each
event.
   (3)   Window signs stating the words “open,” “closed” and hours of operation
shall not be included within the meaning of window signs.
   (g)   A sign shall not project over a public right-of-way.
   (h)   No sign shall stand above the eave line of the roof of the building
upon which the sign is displayed unless the vertical clearance below the eave
line is less than seven (7') feet six (6") inches and a parapet wall or flat
surface, having a minimum width of four (4') feet, is provided above the eave
line and made an integral part of the design of the building. This provision
shall not prohibit the continued use of existing eave signs erected prior to
January 6, 1972, provided all other specifications of this article are met.
   (i)   All roof signs shall be prohibited within any zone.
   (j)   On-site building signs shall be parallel with the building and shall
not project more than twelve (12") inches therefrom.
   (k)   The Community Development Director may permit up to six (6) permanent
directional signs, not exceed three (3) square feet in area each, on a parcel
of record.
   (l)   Not more than one freestanding sign may be installed upon one parcel
of record, except as set forth in subsection (b) of Section
9-4.2308 of this article.
   (m)   Freestanding signs may be located within the required setback.
   (n)   On-site freestanding signs shall be located within the center eighty
(80%) percent of the property frontage, as measured from the side property
lines. On a corner lot, the eighty (80%) percent may be measured from the
corner or one side line or from the respective side lines and around the
corner.
   (o)   The Community Development Director may authorize an identification
sign showing the name of the community and the names of various civic
organizations, such as the Chamber of Commerce, at the main points of entrance
into the City provided the overall size of the sign, including all riders, is
not larger than fifty (50) square feet and no dimension exceeds fifteen (15')
feet.
   (p)   After the issuance of a development permit, the Community Development
Director may permit one single-faced unlighted sign on a parcel of record to
identify the project, contractor, and/or leasing agent. Such sign shall not
total more than twenty-four (24) square feet in area. No portion of any sign
permitted by the provisions of this section shall have a height of more than
fifteen (15') feet or have a dimension of the panel face that exceeds ten (10')
feet. Such sign shall be removed within ten (10) days after the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
   (q)   When the building or facia sign area permitted by the provisions of
the respective zones is less than would be permitted based upon the on-site
freestanding sign ratio, the latter ratio may be used in computing the
permitted sign area.
   (r)   No illuminated sign shall be erected closer than seventy-five (75')
feet to any residential land use district on which there exists structures used
for residential purposes unless such illuminated sign shall have labeled
thereon that the illumination factor does not exceed four hundred fifty (450')
foot lamberts measured by an approved light metering system. Such measurements
shall be taken directly upon the surface of the light source and when all other
external light sources in the same general vicinity are disconnected.
   (s)   Each application for a sign permit shall be submitted to the Community
Development Director to ascertain that the sign conforms with the provisions of
this article and will not adversely affect adjacent property values or the
public health, safety, or welfare. If the Community Development Director finds
that the sign so conforms and that there will be no such adverse effects, he
shall authorize the issuance of a permit. If he fails to issue the permit
within ten (10) days following the filing of the application, he shall schedule
the application for a public hearing and processing pursuant to the provisions
and procedures set forth in this chapter.
   (t)   Temporary vehicle signs are prohibited, except for permanently affixed
signage such as painted on signs which do not violate the Vehicle Code or
render the vehicle unsafe to drive.
   (u)   Scenic highway restrictions along Route 23 and Route 101 Freeways
shall be as follows:
   (1)   All commercial or industrial buildings, except for shopping centers,
which either directly back or side upon such freeways, may be permitted to use
up to ten (10%) percent of the allowable building sign area for the
identification of a business or service and not for the advertising of any
commodity or product on the building wall facing or siding onto the freeway;
however, the maximum requirement of only one sign and twenty-four (24) square
feet shall be allowed. This would not apply to those buildings or uses which
are separated by a public frontage road from the freeway.
   (2)   Freestanding signs for shopping centers proposed for buildings or uses
directly adjacent to and visible from such freeways are determined generally
inconsistent with the Scenic Highways Element of the General Plan and shall
only be granted by a special use permit. The Commission, or Council on appeal,
shall evaluate such requests on the basis of compliance with the goals and
policies of said Element of the General Plan and shall approve, conditionally
approve, or deny such requests, taking into consideration all appropriate
environmental and other information relating to such applications. The
requirements of this subsection would not apply to those buildings or uses
which are separated by a public frontage road from the freeway.
   (3)   No subdivision freestanding sign shall be visible from or located
within one thousand (1,000') feet of such freeways.
   (v)   Temporary political signs shall be permitted and shall not exceed
twelve (12) square feet in area and six (6') feet in visible height. No more
than one such sign per candidate or position on a ballot issue shall be
displayed on any side of a parcel of record which has frontage on a public
street, but in no case shall any signs on different street frontages be closer
than one hundred (100') feet. Furthermore, political sign copy shall be
permitted on existing off-site freestanding signs subject to the time limits
set forth in subsection (d) of Section
9-4.2304 of this article. Such signs shall not be placed in the public right-
of-way or upon public property.
   (w)    The following temporary real estate and/or lessee signs shall be
permitted:
   (1)   Parcels of record less than five (5) acres are limited to one sign
with a maximum area of sixteen (16) square feet and a maximum length of four
(4') feet. V-shaped signs are permitted provided that the total square footage
of both sides does not exceed sixteen (16) square feet. Additionally, the
panels may not be separated by more than ninety (90() degrees.
   (2)   Parcels of record greater than five (5) acres are limited to one sign
unless there are two (2) street frontages where one sign may be posted on each
frontage. The size is limited to a maximum of twenty-four (24) square feet
(unless there are two (2) permitted signs which shall be limited to sixteen
(16) square feet per sign) and the length to a maximum of six (6') feet. V-
shaped signs are permitted as follows:
   (i)   One street frontage. The total square footage of both panels may not
exceed twenty-four (24) square feet.
   (ii)   Two (2) street frontages. The total square footage of both signs may
not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.
   (iii)    The panels of V-shaped signs may not be separated by more than
ninety (90() degrees.
   (3)   General provisions for real estate signs.
   (i)   Amortization period. A six (6) month time period from the effective
date of the ordinance codified in this section will be allowed in order to
remove and replace all illegal and non-conforming real estate signs.
   (ii)   New signs. All signs installed after the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this section will need to comply with the new sign
requirements.
   (iii)    Sign permit applications. No sign permit applications will be
required for temporary real estate advertising signs.
   (iv)    Removal of temporary real estate advertising signs. All temporary
real estate advertising signs must be removed within thirty (30) days of the
lease of the leasehold space or sale of the property being advertised.
   (v)   Posted signs. Signs posted on real property may advertise property for
sale, for lease, or build-to-suit. Additionally, the words “proposed” or
“planned project” may be added to the text of the sign.
   (vi)    Sign riders. No unrelated sign riders, including political signs,
may affixed or in any manner attached to real estate advertising signs.
   (vii)    Lighting. All temporary real estate and/or lessee signs shall be
unlighted.
   (x)   Religious facility directional signs may be located on private
property within approximately a one-mile radius of the religious facility
location provided written consent from the property owner is submitted to the
Community Development Department and subject to a review by the Community
Development Director to determine if the location is appropriate. Such a
determination shall include, but not be limited to, a review of the sign
visibility and proximity to surrounding residences. The size of the sign panel
shall be limited to four (4) square feet, but no dimension shall exceed two
(2') feet, and the sign shall not exceed a height of eight (8') feet as
measured from the elevation of the adjacent public street centerline. The
number of such signs shall be limited to a maximum of two (2) per religious
facility, unless there is sufficient justification to consider the installation
of one additional sign, subject to the approval of the Community Development
Director. To obtain a uniform design, the sign shall be constructed of a dark
stained wood material including a wood panel. The sign copy shall contain the
following information: directions, distance or address, name, denomination, and
logo, if the religious facility desires.
   (y)   Off-site signs are prohibited except as permitted in Title 9, Chapter
23 of this Code.
   (z)   No sign, as defined in Section
9-4.2303, shall be permitted on any umbrella, or similar device or structure.
   (aa)    Intent and purpose. In order to create an aesthetically pleasing and
functional freestanding monument sign, the sign design, materials and colors
should complement the building architecture and enhance the overall site
appearance. Monument signs that comply with the intent of the following
standards may be considered by the Director of the Community Development
Department.
   On-site freestanding signs shall be subject to the following design
standards:
   (1)   General requirements. The provisions of the City’s Architectural
Design Review Guidelines Resolution for freestanding monument signs shall
apply.
   (2)   Signage area. The maximum sign copy area of any monument sign shall
not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet, and no portion of the proposed sign
shall exceed a height of six (6') feet from adjacent finished grade.
   (3)   Signage background. The background of monument signs shall use natural
materials and colors. The use of plastic material as a background for the
monument sign, is not permitted. The sign background material shall be opaque,
which means that any interior lighting source shall not penetrate the material
and illuminate the background but shall be limited to illuminating the sign
letters and any state and/or federal registered trademark or service mark only.
The background material, as well as the frame and sign base of the freestanding
sign shall be constructed with materials similar to those used on the building
(s), in accordance with the City’s Architectural Design Review Guidelines.
   (4)   Signage colors. The colors of the letters used on the freestanding
monument sign shall be consistent with the approved sign colors for the on-
building signs under the approved Uniform Sign Program, if any. This color
limitation shall not apply to any state and/or federal registered trade mark or
service mark signs. For projects without a Uniform Sign Program, the number of
colors proposed shall comply with the City’s Architectural Design Guideline
Resolution.
   (5)   Signage letter styles. The letter styles (fonts) shall be consistent
with the approved styles for the on-building signs under the approved Uniform
Sign Program, if any. This limitation shall not apply to any state and/or
federal registered trade mark or service mark signs. For projects without a
Uniform Sign Program, the letter styles shall comply with the City’s
Architectural Design Guidelines Resolution.
   (6)   Signage lighting. Monument signs shall incorporate creative lighting
designs which utilize halo, back-lit, or concealed exterior illumination.
Internal illumination can be used only when it is limited to lighting the sign
letters and any state and/or federal registered trade mark or service mark.
   (7)   Signage letter height. The portion of the sign having text with a
height of less than four (4") inches, shall not occupy more than twenty-five
(25%) percent of the area of the sign copy.
   (8)   Each side, front, back and top of a freestanding monument sign shall
include breaks. Design elements such as off-sets, curved forms, reveals, etc.,
are encouraged. In addition, the design and character of the monument sign
shall complement the architectural theme and design of the projects.
   (9)   There shall be at least two (2") inches between the sign copy and the
edge or frame of the sign and a neutral space between the sign’s text shall be
provided to create an aesthetically proportioned and balanced looking sign.
   (10)    Evidence of registration of state and/or federal agency trade mark
or service mark must be
provided, where such mark is proposed to be used on a sign.
   (11)    Nonconforming signs shall not be required to comply with these
design standards when the requested change to a sign involves a face copy
change only. If the requested change involves any alteration (other than change
of face copy), or the removal of an existing sign and the installation of a new
sign, then the provisions within this section shall apply to the design of the
sign.
   (12)    For easy access by emergency vehicles and passing motorists, the
inclusion of the building’s street address number is encouraged on the monument
sign, either on the front of the sign or on the side. The height of the numbers
shall be proportioned to the sign area.
   (ab)    Copy change(s) to an existing monument sign or an existing on-
building sign shall require review and approval by the Community Development
Department.
   (ac)   Menu boards, preview boards and order boards shall be subject to the
following standards:
   (1)   Each drive-through restaurant shall be allowed one (1) preview board
per service lane where customers preview the menu from their vehicles, one (1)
menu board per service lane where customers view the menu while ordering food
from their vehicles, and one (1) order board per service lane where customers
speak with an attendant and order food from their vehicles.
   (2)   
 
Type of Sign  Maximum Sign Area in Square Feet Maximum Height in Feet
Preview board 20                               7
Menu board    45                               7
Order board   5                                5
 
   (3)   No preview board, menu board or order board shall be placed where it
or a customer's vehicle is likely to interfere with traffic flow in the area.
   (4)   Each preview board and menu board shall incorporate materials and
colors that match or complement the materials and colors of the associated
building.
   (5)   Each preview board and menu board shall include an architecturally
complementary base that is proportional to the size of the sign.
(§ I, Ord. 248-NS, eff. January 6, 1972, as amended by §§ V and VI, Ord. 359-
NS, eff. April 12, 1973, §§ XII and XIII, Ord. 423-NS, eff. February 14, 1974,
§§ II and V, Ord. 462-NS, eff. June 13, 1974, § II, Ord. 585-NS, eff. August
26, 1976, § II, Ord. 683-NS, eff. August 10, 1978, § 4, Ord. 741-NS, eff. April
3, 1980, § I, Ord. 800-NS, eff. February 4, 1982, Ord. 853-NS, eff. February
21, 1983, § 19, Ord. 907-NS, eff. February 11, 1986, §1, Ord. 1130-NS, January
7, 1992, § 4, Ord. 1177-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, § 3, Ord. 1211-NS, eff. May
24, 1994, § 7, Ord. 1321-NS, eff. June 18, 1998, § 28, Ord. 1392-NS, eff. June
7, 2002, § V, Ord. 1477-NS, eff. June 14, 2007, and §§ 7 and 8, Ord. 1621-NS,
eff. September 30, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.2310. Special use permits.
   A freestanding sign, other than a way-finder sign in the C-2/AM Zone, not
meeting the requirements of this article may be permitted by the Planning
Commission, and on-building signs City-wide, as well as freestanding way-finder
signs in the C-2/AM Zone only, not meeting the requirements of this article may
be permitted by the Community Development Director, through the processing of a
special use permit application filed in accordance with Article 28 of this
chapter. In evaluating a special use permit application filed pursuant to this
section, the Commission or Director, as applicable, must find that the sign
will not be contrary to the purposes of this article, and that adverse effects
can be prevented with the imposition of conditions.
(§ I, Ord. 248-NS, eff. January 6, 1972, as amended by § 4, Ord. 899-NS, eff.
October 22, 1985 and § 1, Ord. 1330-NS, eff. March 3, 1999, as amended by § VI,
Ord. 1477-NS, eff. June 14, 2007, and § 5, Ord. 1551-NS, eff. February 10,
2011)
Sec. 9-4.2311. Nonconforming signs.
   Nonconforming signs shall be subject to the following provisions:
   (a)   Banners, pennants, flags, captive balloons, and similar paraphernalia
shall be removed on or before September 17, 1966.
   (b)   A portable, moveable, or temporary sign, other than those provided for
in subsection (d) of Section
9-4.2304 of this article, shall be removed on or before February 18, 1967.
   (c)   A nonconforming off-site sign shall be removed on or before March 18,
1970.
   (d)   All other lawfully erected or painted signs which are not made
conforming by the approval of a special use permit shall be completely removed
on or before March 18, 1972, or, if such sign is made nonconforming by virtue
of rezoning or annexation, it shall be completely removed within five (5) years
after the date of such rezoning or annexation.
   (e)   All signs rendered nonconforming by virtue of the provisions of this
article as amended by Ordinance No. 248-NS shall be amortized within a period
of time of eight (8) years, unless approved by a special use permit or
conditioned by a time limit. All flashing, rotating, revolving, or other such
animated signs shall be rendered nonconforming to the provisions of this
article on and after July 6, 1972, even if approved by a permit or a variance.
   (f)   A nonconforming sign shall not be altered, reconstructed, or moved
without complying in all respects with the provisions of this article. A sign
destroyed by the elements, fire, or other act of God to an extent exceeding
sixty (60%) percent of its valuation shall be subject to the provisions of this
article. No additional signs or the expansion of existing signs which would
render the total amount of sign area for any business nonconforming or further
nonconforming shall be permitted, except by a special use permit as provided in
Section
9-4.2310 of this article.
(§ I, Ord. 248-NS, eff. January 6, 1972)
Sec. 9-4.2312. Signs seal program: Exceptions.
   (a)   In addition to the permit required by Section
9-4.2302, every sign for which this chapter imposes standards shall have a City
seal which will include an identification number, the name of the installer,
the installation year, and when illuminated, the voltage. This seal shall be
placed on the exterior surface of the sign body in a location where such
information is readily visible after the installation and erection of the sign.
The fee for the seal shall be set by City Council resolution. Seals will be
assigned upon completion of the sign in accordance with applicable laws and
conditions of the permit.
   (b)   Change in copy and/or sign facia shall require a sign seal and permit
prior to its approval and registration.
   (c)   The seal and fee requirements of this section shall not apply to
temporary political signs.
(§ III, Ord. 462-NS, eff. June 13, 1974, as amended by § 5, Ord. 741-NS, eff.
April 3, 1980, and § 20, Ord. 907-NS, eff. February 11, 1986)
Sec. 9-4.2313. Outdoor display of merchandise.
   The outdoor display of merchandise for sale by commercial businesses within
the City is permitted subject to the following provisions:
   (a)   Outdoor display of merchandise in conjunction with operation of a
licensed business establishment is permitted whenever the establishment is open
for business. No additional application or license is required, except for a
valid business license.
   (b)   Outdoor display of merchandise shall be limited to the area
immediately in front of or along the sides of the business selling the
merchandise, and the area shall not extend laterally beyond the store or
building frontage or block access to the business or any other building/store
entrance(s). The items for sale must be the same as those sold inside the
store, or must be items that would typically be sold at the business. Any
support structures (tables, racks, etc.) used in conjunction with outdoor
display of merchandise shall be removed at the end of the business day.
   (c)   A minimum four (4') foot wide path of travel shall be provided and
maintained within the walkway and the store entranceway, where outdoor display
of merchandise will be placed, for pedestrian access to the business premises
and other premises served by the walkway. Outdoor display of merchandise shall
not be placed within this path of travel.
   (d)   Merchandise exceeding six (6') feet in height but no higher than
twelve (12') feet may be displayed provided it does not cover or block more
than twenty-five (25%) percent of the front or side of the retail business
selling the merchandise. The display of trees for sale are not subject to any
height limitation.
   (e)   No display of merchandise shall be allowed on public streets or within
the public right-of-way on sidewalks, in designated parking areas and vehicular
circulation areas, or within landscape planter areas.
   (f)   The use of mechanically produced sound, amplified sound or live music
is prohibited in conjunction with the outdoor display of merchandise.
   (g)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the business
owner shall obtain written authorization from the property owner or their
designated agent to display the merchandise outside the enclosed tenant space.
   (h)   Pennants, flags, banners, and other similar forms of hanging display
may be displayed only in accordance with Section
9-4.2309(b) of this chapter, regarding the location and duration of display.
   (i)   The regulations of this section shall supersede conflicting conditions
of any entitlement granted prior to the effective date, including conditions
which prohibit the outdoor display of merchandise.
   (j)   The regulations and standards of this section shall not apply to auto
dealerships and automotive service stations.
(§ 1, Ord. 1260-NS, eff. May 5, 1996)
Article 24. Off-Street Parking
Sec. 9-4.2401. Intent and purposes.
   The problem of providing adequate streets, highways, and parking to meet the
present and future traffic needs is of prime concern to both the City
government and individual citizens of the City. All types of property,
regardless of location or use, are harmed by inadequate off-street parking
facilities. Cars parked on the streets, as a result, create a safety hazard,
impede the flow of traffic, and delay emergency equipment. The provision of
adequate off-street parking, on the other hand, benefits the property owner by
adding security and stability to his property; benefits his neighbors by
relieving congestion; and benefits the entire City by allowing the streets to
be used as traffic movers.
   The City, after considerable research and study, has found that the
requirements set forth in the article are the minimum standards for off-street
parking facilities. A developer or builder will, though, often find it
necessary to exceed the minimum requirements to insure adequate parking space
for a successful development.
   A parking structure is an alternative method of complying with the off-
street parking requirements of the City. Parking structures can reduce the site
area devoted to exposed, surface parking lots, and achieve reasonable densities
that are dictated by the site’s natural and/or man-made limitations, with the
goal of improving the overall visual aesthetics of a project.
   Certain types of parking structures are to be encouraged, where appropriate
in certain areas, and discouraged in other areas within the Community. The
overall goal of establishing guidelines for parking structures is to maintain
the continuous commitment of the City in preserving the perception of a semi-
rural character that has shaped the quality of development within the City, as
viewed by residents and visitors alike. While not intended to be used for the
sole purpose of intensifying development, it is recognized that appropriately
designed parking structures may increase the intensity of development on a
given site. In establishing these guidelines, it should be emphasized that the
safety, visual appeal and increased landscaping associated with such parking
structures will be key elements of their design, carefully reviewed and
strongly implemented.
   The purpose of this article is to set forth the conditions under which
parking structures may be incorporated in a project and to provide guidelines
for their location and design.
   A Parking Structure Design Review Board, as appointed by the City Council,
may be formed to review any proposed development project that includes a
parking structure. The review shall be conducted at the early stages of the
development process, at the pre-application meeting, to review the proposed
parking structure design for compliance with this article, prior to the
processing of the project.
(§ 8161.1, T.O.O.C., as amended by § I, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970,
renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, as amended by § 2,
Ord. 1156-NS, eff. July 7, 1992)
Sec. 9-4.2402. Parking spaces required.
   Every use hereby inaugurated and every building or structure hereafter
erected or altered shall have permanently maintained parking spaces in
accordance with the provisions as set forth in this section.
   The number of off-street parking spaces required shall be no less than the
following:
Use Parking Spaces Required
Use              Parking Spaces Required
(a) Residential   
types
(1) Dwellings,   2 spaces (enclosed) per unit; 3 spaces (2 enclosed) per unit with 5-6 bedrooms;
single-family in 4 spaces (enclosed) per unit with 7 or more bedrooms. Covered parking may be
the R-A, R-E, R- authorized only in special circumstances as determined by the Community
O, R-1 and R-    Development Director
2 zones
(2) Dwellings,
single-family in 2 spaces (enclosed) per unit; 3 spaces (enclosed) per unit with 5-6 bedrooms; 4
the RPD and HPD  spaces (enclosed) per unit with 7 or more bedrooms
zones
(3) Dormitories
or clubs with    1 for each sleeping room; in case of dormitories, 100 square feet of floor area
sleeping         with sleeping facilities shall be considered a sleeping room
facilities
(4) Dwellings,
apartments
                 (i) Studio and one bedroom apartments, 1 space (covered) per unit; two bedroom
(i) unrestricted apartments, 1-1/2 spaces (1 covered) per unit; three or more bedroom apartments,
units            2 spaces (1 covered) per unit; plus an additional 1/2 space per each unit for
                 guest parking
(ii) for senior
citizens
(defined by Cal. (ii) 1 covered space per unit, plus an additional 1/4 space per unit for guest
Civil Code Sec.  parking
51.3, as
amended)
(iii) for        (iii) parking shall be based on a study provided by the developer to
persons with     substantiate parking need
disabilities
(iv) density
bonus program    (iv) Refer to Sec. 9-10.503(b)(9) concerning the density bonus program
incentive
(5) Dwellings,
attached          
townhomes,
condominiums
(i) unrestricted (i) 2 spaces (enclosed or covered) per unit, plus 1 additional space per unit
units            for guest parking
(ii) density
bonus program    (ii) Refer to Sec. 9-10.503(b)(9) concerning the density bonus program
incentive
(6) Mobile home  2 spaces (may be in tandem, 1 covered for each site); plus 1 space per each unit
parks            for guest parking
(7) Dwelling,    As provided in Article 45
accessory
(8) Dwelling,    Two (2) spaces (enclosed or covered) per unit, plus one (1) additional space per
Caretaker Unit   unit for guest parking
(b)
Institutional     
types
                 The required spaces shall be based on a parking demand analysis and expressed as
(1) Hospitals    spaces/bed when expansion includes beds, and spaces/s.f. when building expansion
                 does not include additional beds
(2) Children’s 1 for each 3 beds.
homes
(3) Convalescent
hospitals,
skilled nursing  0.75 for each bed.
facilities,
nursing homes
                 1 for every 4 fixed seats or 28 square feet where no permanent seats are
(4) Churches and maintained in the main assembly area. Every 20 inches on a bench shall be
mortuaries       considered as one seat for parking purposes. Additional parking shall be
                 provided for connected uses such as schools, day care facilities, etc., unless
                 alternating use of the facilities can be established.
(5) Libraries,
museums, and     1 for each 225 square feet of gross floor area.
galleries
(6) Elementary   1 for each classroom and 1 for every 5 fixed seats or for every 35 square feet
and junior high  of nonfixed seating area in the auditorium.
schools
                 6 for each classroom and 1 for every 5 fixed seats or for every 35 square feet
(7) High schools of nonfixed seating area in the auditorium, plus additional parking for
                 dormitories
(8) Colleges and 7 for each classroom and 1 for every 5 fixed seats or for every 35 square feet
universities     of nonfixed seating area in the auditorium, plus additional parking for
                 dormitories.
(9) Day          1 for every 5 children maximum enrollment, plus provision for loading/unloading
nurseries,       facilities.
preschools
(10) Assisted
living           0.6 for each bed.
facilities
(11) Continuing  1.4 for each independent living unit, plus parking required for the assisted
care retirement  living and skilled nursing components of the community.
communities
(c) Commercial    
types
(1) Any
commercial use
listed as
permitted in the
C-1, C-2, or C-
3 Zones,         1 for each 250 square feet of gross floor area.
irrespective of
where it is
maintained,
except as
specifically
provided below:
(2) Bowling      3 for each bowling lane, plus additional parking for connected commercial uses,
lanes            such as eating and drinking establishments.
(3) Automotive   1 for each 1,000 square feet of gross lot area devoted to display and sales plus
dealerships and  1 for each 5,000 square feet over 10,000 square feet of gross lot area, or a
other open air   minimum of one for each employee plus additional parking for connected
sales            commercial uses.
(4) Automotive   1 for each employee on the largest shift plus provision of adequate ingress/
car washes       egress stacking.
(conveyor)
(5) Automotive
car washes       1 for each employee on the largest shift plus 1.5 for each washing bay.
(self- service)
(6) Automotive
service stations
(self-service    2 plus 1 for each employee on the largest shift.
fuel dispensing
only)
(7) Automotive
service stations
(fuel dispensing 3 plus 2 for each service bay.
and mechanical
service and/or
repair)
(8) Automotive
repair           1 for each 200 square feet of gross floor area.
facilities
(9) Furniture,
carpet,
appliance stores
and other
similar uses
utilizing large
showroom area    1 for each 750 square feet of gross floor area.
for display of
bulk goods
excluding lamp
shops, plumbing
accessory shops,
and similar
specialty uses
                 1.25 for each unit, plus additional parking for connected commercial uses such
(10) Hotels and  as restaurants, retail shops, entertainment and assembly facilities contained
motels           within the hotel/motel complex unless alternating or mixed use of the facilities
                 can be established.
(11) Spectator
entertainment,   1 for every 5 fixed seats or for every 35 square feet of nonfixed seating area
theaters, sports in the auditorium.
arenas, stadiums
and similar uses
(12)
Participating    1 for each 45 square feet of gross floor area in the activity area plus 1 for
entertainment,   each 250 square feet of other floor area.
dance halls and
similar uses
(13) Skating
rinks and        1 for each 250 square feet of gross floor area plus provision for loading/
similar          unloading facilities.
recreational
uses
(14) Restaurants 1 for each 45 square feet of customer area and 1 for each 250 square feet of all
and similar      other floor area plus additional parking for connected commercial uses such as
dining           drinking establishments; no additional spaces are required for outdoor customer
establishments   dining areas within the seating limits set forth in Section
                 9-4.2523(a)(1).
(15) Cocktail
lounges,
taverns, bars    1 for each 35 square feet of gross floor area.
and similar
drinking
establishments
(16) Golf        10 per hole and 1 for each 35 square feet of gross floor area in assembly
courses          buildings connected with the course, plus 1 for each 250 square feet of gross
                 floor area for connected commercial uses.
(17) Golf        1.25 for each tee.
driving ranges
(18) Miniature   2 per hole and 1 for each 250 square feet of gross floor area for connected
golf courses     commercial uses.
(19) Game courts
(tennis,         3 for each court plus additional parking for connected commercial uses.
racquetball,
etc.)
(20) Public      1 for each 500 square feet of gross land area for pool and related facilities,
swimming pools,  plus 1 for each 45 square feet of pool water area.
swim clubs
(21) Exercise
rooms, dance and 1 for each 45 square feet of gross floor area in the activity area plus 1 for
aerobics studios each 250 square feet of other floor area.
and similar uses
(22) Health
clubs,
gymnasiums,
figure salons
and similar uses 1 for each 200 square feet of gross floor area in the activity area plus 1 for
with affixed     each 250 square feet of other floor area.
athletic
equipment and/or
mechanical
training
facilities
(23) Game        1 for each 250 square feet of gross floor area plus provision for adequate
arcades          bicycle parking.
(24) Trade
schools,
business         1 for every employee on the largest shift, plus 1 for each student maximum
colleges and     enrollment at any one time.
similar adult
schools
(25)
Instructional
clinics,
commercial
educational      1 for every employee on the largest shift, plus 1 for every 250 square feet of
facilities, and  gross floor area.
other training
schools for
children under
16 years of age
(26) Business    1 for each 250 square feet of floor area as calculated under Section
and professional 9-4.2403(d).
offices
(27) Medical,
dental, surgical 1 for each 200 square feet of gross floor area.
and physical
therapy offices
(28)
Psychologists,
psychiatrist,
chiropractors,   1 for each 250 square feet of floor area as calculated under Section
counselors and   9-4.2403(d).
other similar
uses with
individualized
patient programs
(29) Bicycle     1 for each 500 square feet of gross floor area; plus bicycle racks for 1 bicycle
stores           per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(30) Martial
arts studios
(karate, judo    1 for each 250 square feet of gross floor area.
and similar
self-defense
schools)
(31) Garden      1 for each 250 square feet of building gross floor area plus 1 for each 2,000
center           square feet of outdoor display and sales area
                 One (1) for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of building floor area up
(32) Home        to fifty thousand (50,000) square feet, plus one (1) for each three hundred
improvement      thirty-three (333) square feet of building floor area above fifty thousand
centers          (50,000) square feet, plus one (1) for each two thousand (2,000) square feet of
                 outdoor display and sales area
(d)
Manufacturing     
types:
(1) Industrial
uses listed as
permitted in the 1 for each 500 square feet of gross floor area or 1 for every 2 employees on the
M-1 and M-       largest shift, whichever is greater, plus 1 for each company vehicle, plus 1 for
2 Zones, except  each 250 square feet of gross floor area for incidental office use.
as specifically
provided below
(2) Research and 1 for each 300 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 for each company vehicle,
development      plus 1 for each 250 square feet of gross floor area for incidental office use.
facilities
(3) Automated or 1 for every employee on the largest shift, plus 1 for each company vehicle (2
semi-automatic   minimum) plus 1 for each 250 square feet of gross floor area for incidental
public or quasi- office use.
public utilities
(4) Warehouses,
exclusive of any 1 for every 1,000 square feet of gross floor area for the first 5,000 square
assembly,        feet of gross floor area, then 1 for every 5,000 square feet additional, plus 1
manufacturing,   for each 250 square feet of gross floor area for incidental office use.
or sales
activity
                 One (1) parking space for every 500 square feet of net floor area. A total of 20
                 percent of an occupant’s gross area may be devoted to office use in support of
(5) Technology   the principal use without providing parking spaces at a ratio greater than one
and/or life      space per 500 square feet of net office floor area. However, office area which
sciences         supports a principal use, and which exceeds 20 percent of an occupant’s area,
                 shall provide parking spaces for the entire office area at a ratio of one space
                 per 300 square feet of net office floor area.
                 Five (5) minimum spaces per self-storage facility, consisting of one (1) space
(6) Self-storage for every one-hundred (100) storage units or fraction thereof with a minimum of
facility         three (3) spaces being provided and two (2) additional spaces for the manager’s
                 office.
                 Required parking spaces shall not be rented as or used as vehicular storage.
 
(§ 8161.2, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 17, Ord. 86, § I, Ord. 208, §§ I and II,
Ord. 243, and § I, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, as renumbered by § XIV, Ord.
173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, as amended by § III, Ord. 683-NS, eff. August
10, 1978, § 1, Ord. 857-NS, eff. April 24, 1984, Ord. 1175-NS, eff. April 13,
1993, § 1, Ord. 1211-NS, eff. May 24, 1994, § 1, Ord. 1290-NS, eff. August 21,
1997, § 5, Ord. 1323-NS, eff. June 25, 1998, § 1, Ord. 1368-NS, eff. November
23, 2000, and § 29, Ord. 1392-NS, eff. June 7, 2002, § 4, Ord. 1412-NS, eff.
August 14, 2003, § 7, Ord. 1485-NS, eff. October 11, 2007, § 2, Ord. 1541-NS,
eff. October 20, 2010, § 6, Ord. 1554-NS, eff. May 13, 2011, § 6, Ord. 1569-NS,
eff. March 9, 2012; § 17, Ord. 1614-NS, eff. April 22, 2016, § 2, Ord. 1623-NS,
eff. September 30, 2016,§ 6, Ord. 1631-NS, eff. July 14, 2017, § 4, Ord. 1664-
NS, eff. October 25, 2019, Part 8, Ord. 1678-NS, eff. February 28, 2020,§ 5,
Ord. 1706-NS, eff. December 2, 2022, and § 8, Ord. 1732-NS, eff. November 22,
2024)
Sec. 9-4.2403. Computation of off-street parking spaces.
   (a)   Required off-street parking. All off-street parking spaces shall be
computed as set forth in Section
9-4.2402 of this article, except as follows:
   (1)   When the application of said Section
9-4.2402 results in the requirement of a fractional parking space, any fraction
up to one-half (1/2) may be disregarded, and any fraction equaling one-half (1/
2) or more shall be construed as requiring one full parking space.
   (2)   When required parking computations are based on floor area, floor area
devoted exclusively to parking shall have no off-street parking space or
landscaping requirements.
   (b)   Mixed uses. In the case of mixed uses, the total requirements for off-
street parking spaces shall be the sum of the requirements for the various
uses. Off-street parking facilities for one use shall not be considered as
providing parking facilities to any other use.
   The Commission, and in cases not otherwise involving permits which require
approval by the Commission, the Community Development Director or a designee
may approve alternating use of parking facilities where parties wish to
cooperatively establish and operate parking facilities and where these uses
generate parking demands primarily during hours when the remaining uses are not
in operation (for example, if one use operates during the daytime or on
weekends and the other use operates at other times).
   The burden of proof for a reduction in the total number of required parking
spaces, however, shall remain with the applicant, and documentation shall be
submitted to the decision-making body or officer substantiating the reasons for
this requested parking reduction. As a condition precedent to approving such
alternating use, the decision-making body or officer shall require:
   (1)   That whenever alternative units of measurement are required for
computing off-street parking requirements, that unit of measurement which
provides the greatest number of off-street parking spaces shall control;
   (2)   The submission of satisfactory statements by the parties providing
such facilities, and the parties such facilities are to serve, describing the
nature of the uses and times when such uses operate so as to indicate the lack
of conflict between them; and
   (3)   Such additional documents or agreements as the Commission and City
Attorney may deem necessary in each particular case to assure provisions for
and the maintenance of the required off-street parking spaces.
   (c)   Uses not specified. The parking space requirements for uses not listed
in Section
9-4.2402 of this article shall be defined by the Commission. Such determination
shall be based upon the requirements for the most comparable use specified in
said Section
9-4.2402.
   (d)   Non-retail business and professional offices.
   (1)   New multi-tenant buildings. For the purpose of calculating parking
space requirements for multi-tenant nonretail business, professional offices
and other similar uses, approved under this Title after August 22, 1997, the
square footage described in subsections (26) and (28) of Section
9-4.2402(c) shall mean only the building’s gross leasable floor area. For the
purpose of this calculation, “gross leasable floor area” shall mean the area
within the total dimensions on each floor as measured from the outside walls,
but excluding the interior common areas used for corridors, lobbies, stairways,
common restrooms, elevator or mechanical shafts, and for any unmanned
electrical or mechanical rooms. In order to qualify as a “corridor” under this
section, the area shall be a shared interior circulation hallway or common
walkway feature more than five (5') feet in width with permanent walls on both
sides that are constructed from floor to ceiling.
   (2)   Other buildings. For the purpose of calculating parking space
requirements for any nonretail business, professional offices, other similar
uses, and for multi-tenant offices approved under this title prior to August
22, 1997, which buildings are not covered by subsection (d)(1) of this section,
the square footage described in subsections (26) and (28) of Section
9-4.2402(c) shall mean the building’s gross floor area. For the purposes of
this calculation “gross floor area” shall mean the entire area within the total
dimensions on each floor as measured from the outside walls.
   (e)   Technology and life sciences use.
   (1)   For the purpose of calculating parking space requirements for the use,
regardless if it is locating within new construction or in an existing
building, no off-street parking spaces are required for floor area exclusively
used and maintained for interior common areas such as corridors, lobbies,
conference rooms, stairways, common restrooms, elevator or mechanical shafts
and rooms, any unmanned electrical or mechanical rooms, and employee only
kitchens, lunchrooms, exercise, or locker rooms. Any portion of the occupied
space designated as Warehouse shall be parked according to Sec.
9-4.2402(d)(5) - Warehouses, exclusive of any sales activity.
(§ 8161.3, T.O.O.C., as amended by § I, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, as
renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, as amended by § 2,
Ord. 1203-NS, eff. March 22, 1994, § 2, Ord. 1290-NS, eff. August 21, 1997, §
5, Ord. 1664-NS, eff. October 25, 2019)
Sec. 9-4.2404. General installation requirements of parking areas.
   Every use hereby inaugurated, and every building or structure hereafter
erected, or altered, shall have permanently maintained parking spaces in
accordance with the provisions as set forth in this section. For the purposes
of this section, vehicle parking spaces in the driveway shall not be considered
in computing required parking spaces.
   (a)   Size.
   (1)   Each off-street parking space shall be at least nine (9') feet by
twenty (20') feet for ninety (90º) degree stalls, eighteen (18') feet by
seventeen and eight-tenths (17.8') feet for thirty (30º) degree stalls, twelve
and seven-tenths (12.7') feet by twenty and five-tenths (20.5') feet for forty-
five (45º) degree stalls, ten and four-tenths (10.4') feet by twenty-one and
eight-tenths (21.8') feet for sixty (60º) degree stalls, and twenty-four (24')
feet by nine (9') feet for one hundred eighty (180º) degree stalls.
   (2)   All parking stalls shall be double-striped with four (4") inch wide
stripes, sixteen (16") inches on center.
   (b)   Location and type.
   (1)   Dwellings. Parking spaces shall be located on the same lot or building
site as the dwelling they are to serve. Covered or enclosed spaces required for
all dwelling units shall maintain an unencumbered interior width of nine (9')
feet and an unencumbered interior depth of twenty (20') feet.
   (2)   Other uses. Parking spaces shall be located either on the same lot or
parcel as the building or use they are to serve or on a contiguous lot unless
otherwise approved by the Planning Commission.
   (3)   Overhang. Depths for standard parking stalls may be reduced to a
dimension of eighteen (18') feet and depths for compact parking stalls may be
reduced to a dimension of fifteen (15') feet when spaces abut a landscape
planter with a minimum width of six (6') feet or a sidewalk or similar paved
area with a minimum width of six (6') feet. In cases involving overhang or
projection of vehicles from more than one direction into the same unencumbered
area, a minimum planter or sidewalk width of eight (8') feet shall be required.
   (4)   Tandem parking shall be prohibited in commercial, industrial and
manufacturing zones unless approved by the City.
   (c)   Access and circulation.
   (1)   Driveways.
   (i)    Adequate vehicular and pedestrian sign visibility shall be provided
and maintained at all intersections of public streets and private driveways in
accordance with the criteria specified within Plate D-10 of Public Works
Department standards and also at all points of interchange within the interior
of the parking lot facility. The improvement plans for all projects shall
demonstrate compliance with this plate and a means to execute ongoing
maintenance to guarantee preservation of sight visibility. Stopping sight
distance shall be a principal criteria in determining appropriate location of
on-site or off-site improvements. It is especially critical that mature
landscaping be considered in evaluating visibility, not just the barren ground.
Stopping sight distance less than the minimum criteria as specified within
Plate D-10 shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission, if
determined necessary by the City Traffic Engineer or the Community Development
Director. Where applicable, C.C. and R’s shall require continued compliance
with this condition and the requirements contained within Plate D-10.
   (ii)   Exits from parking lots shall be clearly posted with “Stop” signs.
   (iii)    Appropriate directional signs shall be maintained where needed and
as required by the Community Development Director.
   (iv)    Driveway access to parking spaces for single-family dwellings shall
not be less than ten (10') feet in width throughout, and turnaround areas may
be used for required parking spaces. In cases where private private driveway
exceeds fifty (50') feet in length, two (2) additional guest parking spaces and
appropriate turnaround shall be required.
   (v)   Driveway access to all other uses shall have a width of not less than
fourteen (14') feet if one-way or less than twenty-five (25') feet for a two-
way access. In the C-2 Zone, however, driveway access may be reduced to a width
of not less than twelve (12') feet for a one-way access or twenty (20') feet
for a two-way access provided both such widths are entirely unencumbered to a
height of ten (10') feet. All driveway access points shall utilize a flared,
radius curb return in order to facilitate ingress and egress to and from public
streets unless otherwise determined by the Public Works Director.
   (2)   Circulation.
   (i)    No parking spaces shall be located so that a vehicle will maneuver
within ten (10') feet of a vehicular entrance to the property.
   (ii)    A turnaround area shall be provided of at least twenty-five (25')
feet for ninety (90°) degree parking, eighteen (18') feet for sixty (60°)
degree parking, fourteen (14') feet for forty-five (45°) degree parking, and
twelve (12') feet for thirty (30°) degree or parallel parking (provided there
are at least four (4') feet between each two (2) parallel spaces).
   (iii)    Speed bumps or similar devices designed to control vehicular
velocities within parking facilities may be required by the Community
Development Director. Installation specifications shall be in accordance with
standards set forth by the City Traffic Engineer and shall include a means of
clearly identifying and demarcating said devices such as painting or striping.
   (d)   Compact parking.
   (1)   All multi-family residential, institutional, commercial and
manufacturing-type land uses may utilize parking spaces of reduced size to
satisfy the off-street parking requirements not to exceed the percentages
listed below, provided it is demonstrated that the utilization of compact
stalls or reduced-size stalls will benefit the development site design, by, but
not limited to, reduction of unsightly paved areas, increasing landscape areas,
reduction of grading and reduction in use of retaining walls, providing site
design flexibility for properties with physical constraints, or aiding existing
developments which are characterized by a substantiated deficiency in off-
street parking or substandard circulation. Utilizations of compact stalls or
reduced size stalls is not appropriate solely to achieve land use
intensification.
   (i)   Multiple-family residential uses: A maximum of thirty-five (35%)
percent of all required guest parking may be compact spaces.
   (ii)   Institutional uses: A maximum of twenty-five (25%) percent of all
required parking may be compact spaces.
   (iii)   Commercial, retail, service and general office uses: A maximum of
twenty-five (25%) percent of all required parking may be compact spaces.
   (iv)   Industrial uses and large-scale employment centers: A maximum of
thirty-five (35%) percent of all required parking may be compact spaces.
   (2)   The above-listed percentages may be increased to a maximum of fifty
(50%) percent of all required parking in certain circumstances provided a
special use permit is obtained in a manner as set forth in Article 28 of this
chapter.
   (3)   Size.
   (i)   Compact parking spaces for multi-family residential uses,
institutional uses, industrial uses and large-scale employment centers shall be
at least eight (8') feet by sixteen (16') feet for ninety (90°) degree stalls,
sixteen (16') feet by fourteen feet eleven inches (14'11") for thirty (30°)
degree stalls, eleven feet four inches (11'4") by seventeen (17') feet for
forty-five (45°) degree stalls, nine feet three inches (9'3") by seventeen feet
ten inches (17'10") for sixty (60°) degree stalls, and twenty (20') feet by
eight (8') feet for one hundred eighty (180°) degree stalls.
   (ii)   Compact parking spaces for commercial, retail, service and office
uses shall be at least nine (9') feet by sixteen (16') feet for ninety (90°)
degree stalls, eighteen (18') feet by fourteen feet eleven inches (14'11") for
thirty (30°) degree stalls, twelve feet eight inches (12'8") by seventeen (17')
feet for forty-five (45°) degree stalls, ten feet four inches (10'4") by
seventeen feet ten inches (17'10") for sixty (60°) degree stalls, and twenty-
four (24') feet by nine (9') feet for one hundred eighty (180°) degree stalls.
   (iii) All compact parking stalls shall be double-striped with four (4") inch
wide stripes, sixteen (16") inches on center.
   (4)   General requirements.
   (i)   Maneuvering and required back-up space. The required maneuvering and
back-up space for compact spaces shall be as mandated in subsection (c)(2)(ii).
There shall be no reduction of driveway or aisle widths for compact stalls.
   (ii)   Location. Compact spaces shall be dispersed evenly throughout the
parking lot. For developments characterized by distinct, segmented parking
areas the maximum permitted percentage of compact stalls shall apply to each
area or segment of the parking lot. Compact spaces shall be located in areas
characterized by a “through” method of circulation and shall avoid locations
adjacent to retaining walls or other formidable barriers which prevent adequate
vehicle overhang. Compact stalls within commercial, retail, service and office
uses shall be located adjacent to paved or landscaped areas in order to
accommodate vehicle overhang. The location of all compact stalls shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Community Development Director.
   (iii)    Marking. All compact car spaces shall be clearly designated with
pavement and/or wheelstop/curb signs to the satisfaction of the Community
Development Director.
   (iv)   Landscaping. New developments electing to incorporate compact stalls
into an overall site design (i.e., developments which have not inaugurated an
approved use in accordance with Section
9-4.2811(c) of this Code) shall be required to exceed minimum parking lot
landscaping area requirements by an additional area not less than twenty-five
(25) square feet for each compact car space.
   (v)   Restriping existing parking facilities. Existing multi-family
residential, commercial, manufacturing and institutional parking facilities may
be restriped to accommodate compact parking stalls after approval of a
modification application or a comparable review procedure as determined by the
Community Development Director. All proposals shall be subject to the
requirements set forth in this article.
   (e)   Landscaping.
   (1)   Ten (10%) percent of open parking and driveway areas shall be
landscaped. This shall be in addition to landscape requirements for setback
areas, perimeter property line landscaping and landscape planters located
adjacent to structures. Such landscape areas shall be evenly distributed
through the entire parking area as required by the Community Development
Director. The ten (10%) percent parking requirement shall be calculated based
on the total amount of parking and driveway areas on the approved plan(s),
except parking spaces provided for display purposes or for enclosed vehicles
storage areas. The Community Development Director or the Planning Commission
may allow any landscaped area which would be within an open service or work
area and not viewable from any perimeter street to be relocated to a more
functional location within the other parking areas on the property provided
such relocation does not decrease the total required percentage of required
interior landscaping of the parking area.
   (2)   A ten (10') foot wide landscape strip, with planting maintained at
either a height of three (3’) feet or a height otherwise approved by the
Community Development Director or designee, shall be provided along the
property lines adjacent to any public or private street or alley (except within
the approved exit and entrance ways) whenever the parking or circulation abuts
such streets or alleys except:
   (i)   In the C-2 Zone, in which a twenty (20') foot wide landscape strip
shall be provided along the front property line, with a ten (10') foot wide
landscape strip in all other locations as required by this subsection; and
   (ii)   In the C2/AM Zone, in which a fourteen (14') foot wide landscape
strip shall be provided along the front property line, with a four (4') foot
wide landscape strip in all other locations as required by this sub-section.
The regulations of this sub-section for the C2/AM zone shall supersede
conflicting conditions of any entitlement granted prior to the effective date
of the ordinance adopting this sub-section, where said conditions require a
wider landscape strip than provided by this sub-section.
   (3)   A four (4') foot wide landscape strip, with planting maintained at
either a height of three (3') feet or a height acceptable to the Community
Development Director, shall be provided along the interior property lines or
along interior project boundaries for projects occupying a portion of a larger
parcel of property (except within the approved exit and entrance ways) when
adjacent to parking facilities and paved areas.
   (4)   Any of the following driveways or open parking areas shall be
separated by a planting strip four (4') feet wide:
   (i)   Where there are two (2) or more driveways or two (2) or more buildings
or parcels, each of which has one (1) or more parking lots;
   (ii)   Where there are two (2) or more parking lots for vehicles adjacent to
one another which do not use a common driveway;
   (iii)   Where a parking lot for vehicles abuts a driveway which does not
provide access to that parking lot; and
   (iv)   All landscaped areas shall be enclosed within a brick or masonry
planter box or concrete curb not less than six (6") inches high and shall be
provided with a permanent sprinkler system. When landscaping is to be placed
adjacent to a public street, curbing shall be required unless otherwise waived
by the Community Development Director.
   (5)   Landscape trees shall be selected and planted in such a manner as to
minimize root damage to parking lot hardscape.
   (6)   All landscaping in or adjacent to any parking lot area shall be
installed and maintained in accordance with the applicable approved project
conditions and landscape plans, the City's adopted landscape design, planting
and maintenance standards, and Chapter 27 of Title 5 of this Code.
   (f)   Maintenance. While encouraging upgrades of parking lots through a
maintenance program, public safety and security shall be taken into
consideration in upgrading the facilities, regarding lighting, traffic
circulation, and landscaping.
   (1)   The following improvements to parking lots shall be considered “minor”
repair and maintenance and shall not require any type of permit application to
the Community Development Department:
   (i)   Repair of defects in the surface of the parking areas, including holes
and cracks;
   (ii)   Restriping of a parking area with identical delineation of parking
spaces;
   (iii)   Repair or replacement in the same location of damaged planters and
curbs;
   (iv)   Slurry coating and restriping the parking stall lines in same
configuration. The property owner shall file a letter with the Community
Development certifying that the existing parking area and/or proposed slurry
coating and restriping meet or will meet applicable disabled accessibility and
drainage requirements;
   (v)   Parking area overlay and restriping the parking stall lines in same
configuration, which does not include the required disabled parking spaces and
disabled paths of travel. The property owner shall file a letter with the
Community Development Department certifying that the existing parking area and/
or proposed parking area overlay and restriping meet or will meet applicable
disabled accessibility and drainage requirements;
   (vi)   Sprinkler/line repair, or refurbishment of landscaped areas with
similar plant species;
   (vii)   Necessary trimming and required maintenance of established
landscaping; and
   (viii)   Replacement or repair of lighting fixtures.
   (2)   The following improvements to parking lots shall be considered "major"
repair and maintenance:
   (i)   Restriping of parking areas in which the number of parking spaces or
their configuration is changed;
   (ii)   Altering the number, shape, or size of parking area planters;
   (iii)   Overlaying and restriping any part of the parking area which
includes any required disabled parking spaces or disabled path of travel.
   If the site area affected by the work is 2.0 acres or less, then a Design
Review application is required in accordance with Section
9-4.1804(f) of this chapter; otherwise, a Minor Modification application to the
project's underlying entitlement (e.g., development permit, special use permit)
in accordance with Section
9-4.2804 is required.
   Such major repair and maintenance improvements shall require concurrent
compliance with the disabled access and parking requirements set forth in
Section 9-4.2404(g) of this chapter, subject to review and approval of the
Community Development Department through the applicable process set forth
above.
   (g)   Disabled parking. The City shall impose all applicable requirements of
the California Uniform Building Code, Title 24 of the California Code
Regulation, and any applicable federal law or regulations related to parking
and exterior accessibility for the disabled, for all tenant improvements and
new construction within the City.
(§ 8164.4, T.O.O.C., as amended by §§ 1, 2, and 3, Ord. 90, § 1, Ord. 143, §§
II and III, Ord. 208, § I, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970, § XIV, Ord. 162-NS,
eff. August 27, 1970, as renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5,
1970, as amended by §§ II and III, Ord. 236-NS, eff. November 4, 1971, § I,
Ord. 295-NS, eff. August 10, 1972, §§ I and II, Ord. 524-NS, eff. May 1, 1975,
§ XIII, Ord. 581-NS, eff. August 12, 1976, § IV, Ord. 636-NS, eff. July 14,
1977, § VIII, Ord. 776-NS, eff. April 16, 1981, § V, Ord. 778-NS, eff. June 11,
1981, § 2, Ord. 857-NS, eff. April 25, 1984, §§ 1 and 2, Ord. 900-NS, eff.
December 3, 1985, §§ 1, 2, Ord. 988-NS, eff. February 16, 1988, § 4, Ord. 1156-
NS, eff. July 7, 1992, § 19, Ord. 1217-NS, eff. September 27, 1994, §§ 3 and 4,
Ord. 1220-NS, eff. October 11, 1994, § 3, Ord. 1230-NS, eff. April 18, 1995, §
1, Ord. 1402-NS, eff. February 6, 2003, § 2, 1529-NS, eff. December 17, 2009, §
6, Ord. 1551-NS, eff. February 10, 2011, and § 39, Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August
12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.2405. General design standards of parking areas.
   Every use hereby inaugurated and every building or structure hereafter
erected or altered shall have permanently constructed and maintained parking
facilities in accordance with the provisions as set forth in this section
unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission.
   (a)   Surface improvements.
   (1)   Paving, drainage, and slope. All on-site parking areas, maneuvering
areas, turn-around areas, and any other driveways used for access thereto shall
comply with the following provisions:
   (i)   Paving.
   (aa)   Concrete surfacing shall be designed in accordance with standards set
forth by the Public Works Director. All concrete shall be constructed in a
workmanlike manner and to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director.
   (ab)   Asphalt type surfacing shall be compacted to a minimum thickness of
three (3") inches and laid over a base of crushed rock, gravel, or similar
material compacted to a minimum thickness of six (6") inches; or
   (ac)   The Public Works Director may approve alternate materials and
specifications in lieu of foregoing requirements and/or greater or lesser
standards without notice or hearing and may require substantiating evidence by
a soils engineer.
   (ii)   Drainage.
   (aa)   Parking and circulation areas shall be designed with an adequate
drainage system, and improvements shall consist of two (2') foot wide concrete
gutters, subsurface drains, and other appropriate drainage devices as
determined by the Public Works Director. Use of ribbon drains and similar
drainage devices shall be discouraged and will be considered only under special
circumstances as determined by the Public Works Director and the Community
Development Director.
   (iii)   Slope.
   (aa)   All parking lot areas used exclusively for parking and turnarounds
shall be designed and improved with grades not to exceed a maximum of two and
five-tenths (2.5%) percent slope. Grades exceeding two and five-tenths (2.5%)
percent slope shall be discouraged but may be approved in special circumstances
as determined by the Public Works Director and the Community Development
Director.
   (ab)   All driveways within a parking lot used exclusively for ingress and
egress or interior parking lot circulation shall be designed and improved with
grades not to exceed a seven (7%) percent slope.
   (iv)   Permits.
   (aa)   All new or replacement on-site paving and/or drainage improvements of
greater valuation of One Thousand and no/100ths ($1,000.00) Dollars, as
determined by the Public Works Director, shall comply with the provisions of
this article and shall be subject to an on-site paving and/or drainage
improvement permit. Such parking lot modification shall require concurrent
compliance with disabled access and parking requirements as set forth in
Section
9-4.2404(g) of this chapter, subject to review and approval of the Community
Development Department. All single family residence installations shall be
excepted from this permit requirement. The fees applicable to the issuance of
such on-site paving permit shall be paid in accordance with the schedule
adopted by Council Resolution.
   (v)   Plans.
   (aa)   With each application for an on-site paving and/or drainage
improvement permit, three (3) sets of plans shall be submitted to the Public
Works Department for approval. Such plans shall be prepared to the
specifications of the Public Works Director and shall comply with the approved
development or special use permits for the subject property.
   (vi)   Fees.
   (aa)   Prior to the acceptance of such plans, the Public Works Director
shall collect a plan-checking fee. Prior to the issuance of an on-site paving
and/or drainage improvement permit, the permittee shall pay an inspection fee
to the City. Such fees shall be set forth in Section
9-3.304 of Article 3 of Chapter 3 of this title.
   (2)   Peripheral walls. A parking area which abuts another parcel, or
portions of the same parcel, which is zoned residential shall be separated from
this parcel by a six (6’) foot high slumpstone or decorative block wall. Such
wall shall be two and one-half (2-1/2’) feet in height from the front lot line
to a depth equal to the required front yard on the abutting residential zoned
property.
   (3)   Concrete wheel stops.
   (i)   Concrete bumper guards or wheel stops shall be installed for all
parking spaces and shall be maintained in a manner acceptable to the Community
Development Director.
   (ii)   For developments in excess of five (5) acres in size, the concrete
wheel stops may be waived by the Community Development Director provided a
minimum eight (8’) foot wide continuous raised decorative sidewalk and/or
landscape planter and/or other innovative acceptable device is installed at
appropriate locations within the parking lot to channelize interior traffic
circulation. The number and location of such improvements shall be subject to
the approval of the Community Development Director. However, concrete wheel
stops shall be installed on parking spaces if such spaces are adjacent to a
building wall or a landscape planter less than six (6’) feet in width or other
similar parking lot improvements.
   (iii)   For developments in excess of ten (10) acres in size, the Community
Development Director may waive concrete wheel stops for specific parking spaces
when such spaces are located in areas remotely removed from main buildings and
landscaping is installed to channelize the traffic flow.
   (b)   Lighting.
   (1)   All on-site parking areas, maneuvering areas, and turnaround areas
shall comply with the following provisions:
   (i)   Parking lot lights shall be designed and arranged in such a manner so
that light is reflected away from adjoining residential properties and streets.
   (ii)   All light poles, standards and fixtures shall be of a low-profile
decorative variety and shall be compatible with the architectural theme of the
building and/or facility they intend to service.
   (iii)   All light poles, standards and fixtures shall not exceed a height of
twenty (20’) feet above grade level. Light poles, standards and fixtures
determined by the Community Development Director to be illuminating parking
areas which abut residential properties and streets shall observe a maximum
height of fourteen (14’) feet above grade level.
   (iv)   All light sources used to illuminate parking areas shall achieve a
color rendition which is compatible and in harmony with the existing
development pattern of the surrounding area.
   (v)   All levels of illumination shall comply with the Building Security
Ordinance.
   (vi)   All parking lot lighting installations shall comply with applicable
Uniform Building Code requirements.
   (c)   Off-street loading and unloading spaces.
   (1)   Every use hereafter inaugurated and every building or structure
hereafter erected or altered shall have permanently maintained off-street
loading and unloading spaces as follows:
   (i)   Spaces required: General office uses.
Under 30,000 square feet: None
30,001 to 50,000 square feet: 1 space
Excess of 50,000 square feet: 2 spaces
   (ii)   Spaces required: Retail/commercial and industrial/manufacturing.
Under 5,000 square feet: None
5,000 to 30,000 square feet: 1 space
Excess of 30,000 square feet: 2 spaces
   (iii)   Size and location. Each loading space for general office uses and
for retail/commercial uses less than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet shall
be located off the street and shall be not less than twelve (12’) feet in width
by twenty-five (25’) feet in depth by fourteen (14’) feet in height. All other
loading spaces, regardless of use, shall not be less than twelve (12’) feet in
width by fifty (50’) feet in depth by fourteen (14’) feet in height. Loading
zone requirements may be increased in special circumstances based on the nature
of the use or combination of uses as well as the specific design
characteristics of the project.
(§ 8161.5, T.O.O.C., as amended by § I, Ord. 149-NS, eff. May 7, 1970,
renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, as amended by § IV,
Ord. 236-NS, eff. November 4, 1971, § 3, Ord. 857-NS, eff. April 24, 1984, § 3,
Ord. 900-NS, eff. December 3, 1985, § 3, Ord. 1156-NS, eff. July 7, 1992, and §
2, Ord. 1402-NS, eff. February 6, 2003)
Sec. 9-4.2405.5. Parking structures: General design guidelines.
   In order to be compatible with existing and surrounding developments,
parking structures are required to follow the special design guidelines
described in this section. The intent of these guidelines is to provide a
benefit to the community while offsetting the visual impact of parking
structures when viewed by pedestrians and motorists from the adjacent public
right-of-way. This benefit can be achieved by using superior site and
architectural design, which incorporates the requirements of this section.
   (a)   Below-grade parking structures.
   (1)   Definitions.
   (i)   A “basement parking structure” shall mean a parking structure that is
under a building designed for human occupancy where the floor level above the
parking structure is not more than six (6') feet above finished grade for at
least fifty (50%) percent of the perimeter, and does not exceed twelve (12')
feet above finished grade at any point.
   (ii)   A “stand-alone below-grade parking structure” shall mean a parking
structure that is not under a building designed for human occupancy where its
floor level is more than four (4') feet below finished grade for more than
fifty (50%) percent of the total perimeter, or more than eight (8') feet below
finished grade.
   (2)   Permitted zones:
   (i)   C-2, C-3, C-4, M-1, M-2, and P-L Zones.
   (ii)   R-3 and Residential Planned Development Zones, if needed to
accommodate residential densities of 20 or more dwellings per net acre.
   (3)   Special development requirements.
   (i)   Non-residential projects: The minimum lot size for projects proposing
below grade parking structures shall be 1 acre, unless otherwise permitted by
the Planning Commission or City Council or as specifically authorized in an
adopted specific plan.
   (ii)   Below-grade parking structures shall be located to minimize the
visual impact from adjacent streets as much as possible, in order to screen the
parking structure from public view. Furthermore, the specific location of the
parking structure must also comply with the Thousand Oaks Police Department
security and safety requirements.
   (iii)   In order to improve the overall project aesthetics, and to minimize
the potential design conflict with nearby existing developments, projects
incorporating below-grade parking structures shall provide increased
landscaping setbacks from streets and property lines, both for the parking
structure itself and its associated development, as follows:
   (aa)   Front yard and any street frontage landscape setbacks shall be
increased by a minimum of five (5') feet, as compared to the requirement of the
underlying zone.
   (ab)   Rear yard landscape setbacks shall be increased by a minimum of five
(5') feet, as compared to the requirement of the underlying zone.
   (ac)   Side yard landscape setbacks shall be increased by a minimum of four
(4') feet, as compared to the requirement of the underlying zone.
   (iv)   The perimeter of any below-grade parking structure, above grade,
visible to view, shall be provided with a landscape planter of at least five
(5') feet in width at ground level.
   (v)   Structure Design. The following guidelines shall apply to the design
of both types of below-grade parking structures:
   (aa)   The height of the above-grade, visible portions of the below-grade
parking structure shall not be included in the overall maximum building height
as defined in Section
9-4.202. Furthermore, the entry elevation to the parking structure, with its
unavoidable visible above-grade walls, should be designed and located in a
manner that reduces its impact and exposure to public view.
   (ab)   Any exposed elevations of the below-grade parking structure shall be
designed to reflect architectural compatibility with existing or proposed
structure(s). The above-grade, visible portions of the
exterior elevations of the below-grade parking structure shall be designed to
minimize the use of blank facades through the combined use of appropriate
architectural treatment such as heavy
textured concrete, planters, openings, indentations, and projections of
exterior walls to provide visual interest.
   (vi)   All parking stalls within below-grade parking structures shall be
designed for the use of owners, tenants, and employees only. Appropriate
signing and circulation access devices shall be installed to assure compliance
with this requirement.
   (b)   Single-level above-grade parking structures.
   (1)   Definitions.
   (i)   A “freestanding single-level parking structure” is a parking structure
with only one aboveground parking level that is not an integral part of a
building designed for human occupancy where its floor level is not more than
four (4') feet below finished grade for more than fifty (50%) percent of the
total perimeter, nor more than eight (8') feet above finished grade at any
point.
   (ii)   An “intermixed single-level above-grade parking structure” is a
parking structure with only one aboveground parking level that is an integral
part of a building designed for human occupancy where the floor above the
parking structure is more than six (6') feet above finished grade for more than
fifty (50%) percent of the perimeter of the structure, or more than twelve
(12') feet above finished grade at any point.
   (2)   Permitted zones.
   (i)   C-2, C-3, C-4, M-1, M-2, and P-L Zones.
   (ii)   R-3 and Residential Planned Development Zones: Intermixed single-
level above grade parking structures are permitted if needed to accommodate
residential densities of 20 or more dwellings per net acre.
   (3)   Special development requirements. The following site design guidelines
shall apply to both types of single-level above-grade parking structures:
   (i)   Non-residential projects: The minimum lot size shall be 3 acres,
unless otherwise permitted by the Planning Commission or City Council or as
specifically authorized in an adopted specific plan.
   (ii)   Single-level above-grade parking structures shall be located to
minimize the visual impact from adjacent streets as much as possible. Single-
level above-grade parking structures should be located at the rear of the
subject property, or behind the proposed or existing building in order to
screen the parking structure from public view. Furthermore, the specific
location of the parking structure must also comply with Thousand Oaks Police
Department security and safety requirements.
   (iii)   Non-residential projects: In order to improve the overall project
aesthetics and to minimize the potential design conflict with nearby existing
developments, projects incorporating single-level above-grade parking
structures shall provide increased landscaping setbacks from streets and
property lines, both for the parking structure itself and its associated
development, as follows:
   (aa)   Front yard and any street frontage landscape setbacks shall be
increased by a minimum of seven (7') feet, as compared to the requirement of
the underlying zone,
   (ab)   Rear yard landscape setbacks shall be increased by a minimum of five
(5') feet, as compared to the requirement of the underlying zone,
   (ac)   Side yard landscape setbacks shall be increased by a minimum of four
(4') feet, as compared to the requirement of the underlying zone.
   (iv)   All parking stalls within a single-level above-grade parking
structure, for office use only, may be designated for the use of owners,
tenants, and employees only, with the approval of the Planning Commission and/
or City Council. However, if the single-level above-grade parking structure is
designed for general parking use, then appropriate security measures, as deemed
necessary by the Thousand Oaks Police Department, shall be incorporated within
the proposed project. Parking stalls within a single-level above-grade parking
structure, for commercial retail uses, other than office, may be designed for
general parking use by the public. Appropriate signing and circulation access
devices shall be installed to assure compliance with this requirement.
   (v)   Single-level above-grade parking structures shall comply with the
height requirements of the underlying zone or applicable Specific Plan.
Furthermore, the height of the above-grade, visible portions of the single-
level above-grade parking structure shall be included in the overall maximum
building height as defined in Section
9-4.202.
   (vi)   The perimeter of any single-level above-grade parking structure shall
be provided with a landscape planter of at least five (5') feet in width at
ground level. The landscaping plans for the project as submitted and approved
by the Community Development Department, shall incorporate these requirements.
   (vii)   Single-level above-grade parking structures, visible from streets,
which give the appearance of surface parking lots due to their visual and
physical relationship to the street will be required to meet the landscape
percentage requirements of a surface parking lot.
   (viii)   Any exposed elevations of a single-level above-grade parking
structure shall be designed to reflect architectural compatibility with
existing or proposed structure(s) within the project. The exterior elevations
of a single-level above-grade parking structure shall be designed to minimize
the use of blank facades through the combined use of appropriate architectural
treatment such as heavy textured concrete, planters, openings, indentations,
and projections of exterior walls to provide visual interest.
   (c)   Multi-level above-grade parking structures.
   (1)   Definitions.
   (i)   A “freestanding multi-level parking structure” is a parking structure
with two or more aboveground parking levels that is not an integral part of a
building designed for human occupancy.
   (ii)   An “intermixed multi-level aboveground parking structure” is a
parking structure with two or more aboveground parking levels that is an
integral part of a building designed for human occupancy.
   (2)   Permitted zones:
   (i)   C-2, C-3, C-O, M-1, M-2, and P-L Zones.
   (ii)   R-3 and Residential Planned Development Zones: Intermixed multilevel
above grade parking structures are permitted if needed to accommodate
residential densities of 20 or more dwellings per net acre.
   (3)   Special development requirements.
   (i)   Non-residential projects: The minimum lot size shall be 5 acres,
unless otherwise permitted by the Planning Commission or City Council or as
specifically authorized in an adopted specific plan.
   (ii)   Non-residential projects: In order to improve the overall project
aesthetics, and to minimize the potential design conflict with nearby existing
developments, projects incorporating multi-level above-grade parking structures
shall provide increased landscaping setbacks from streets and property lines,
both for the parking structure itself and its associated development, as
follows:
   (aa)   Front yard and any street frontage landscape setbacks shall be
increased by a minimum of ten (10') feet, as compared to the requirement of the
underlying zone.
   (ab)   Rear yard landscape setbacks shall be increased by a minimum of seven
(7') feet, as compared to the requirement of the underlying zone.
   (ac)   Side yard landscape setbacks shall be increased by a minimum of four
(4') feet, as compared to the requirement of the underlying zone.
   (iii)   Separations between a multi-level above-grade parking structure and
other buildings on the same site shall comply with the Uniform Building Code.
However, for buildings located on adjacent parcels, there shall be a minimum
separation between structures that is one and one-half (1-1/2) times the height
of the proposed multi-level above-grade parking structure.
   (iv)   All parking stalls within a multi-level above-grade parking
structure, for office use only, may be designated for the use of owners,
tenants, and employees only, with the approval of the Planning Commission and/
or City Council. However, if the multi-level above-grade parking structure is
designed for general parking use, then appropriate security measures, as deemed
necessary by the Thousand Oaks Police Department, shall be incorporated within
the proposed project. Parking stalls within a multi-level above-grade parking
structure, for commercial retail uses other than office, may be designed for
general parking use by the public. Appropriate signing and circulation access
devices shall be installed to assure compliance with this requirement.
   (v)   Multi-level above-grade parking structures shall comply with the basic
height requirements of the underlying zone or applicable specific plan;
provided, however, that the height of the multi-level above-grade parking
structure may not exceed the basic height limit even if the property is subject
to H overlay zoning.
   (vi)   The perimeter of any multi-level above-grade parking structure shall
be provided with a landscaped planter of at least ten (10') feet in width at
ground level. The width of this planter shall be increased at increments of
five (5') feet for each additional allowed exposed level, above two (2).
   (vii)   Due to the impracticality of significantly landscaping exposed upper
level parking decks, there shall be a transfer of parking landscape
requirements to visible ground level locations. No less than ten (10%) percent
of the multi-level above-grade parking structure footprint shall be utilized as
additional surface parking lot landscaping at ground level adjacent to public
rights-of-way or adjacent to proposed structures.
   (viii)   Multi-level above-grade parking structures should be located in
such a manner as to “fit-in” and not be visually imposing on the site. To
achieve this design concept, the structure should be situated within the rear
portion of the site where it can be screened, as much as possible, from public
view and adjacent public streets and thus minimize its visual effect on
surrounding properties. However, any portion of a multi-level above-grade
parking structure visible from a public right-of-way should be treated
architecturally to mitigate its negative impacts, such as visible parked
vehicles and exposed interior lighting fixtures. Furthermore, the specific
location of the parking structure must also comply with Thousand Oaks Police
Department security and safety requirements.
   (ix)   Multi-level above-grade parking structures shall be architecturally
designed to be compatible and consistent, but subordinate, to the existing or
proposed structure(s). However, if the multi-level above-grade parking
structure is located on a prominent location on the subject property, visible
to vehicular and pedestrian public view, then it should be architecturally
designed to be compatible and consistent with the existing or proposed
structure(s). The exterior elevations of multi-level above-grade parking
structures shall be designed to minimize the use of blank facades through the
combined use of appropriate architectural treatment such as heavy textured
concrete, planters, trellises (on roof levels), openings, indentations, and
projections of exterior walls to provide visual interest, and where
appropriate, roof elements. Furthermore, to reduce the perceived scale of the
structure, each level may be “stepped-back” from the lower level. When such
stepped parking level designs are used, the requirements for additional five
(5') feet of perimeter landscaping width for each level above two (2) levels,
shall not be required, provided that each parking level, above two (2), is
stepped back a minimum distance of five (5') feet from the level below it.
   (x)   Parked vehicles located on roof decks and within multi-level above-
grade parking structures shall be screened from public view from the adjoining
street levels on each parking level through the combined use of landscaping
planters, trellises and/or decorative screen walls. Additional screening of
roof decks shall be required where adjoining streets or public rights-of-way
are higher than the parking deck roof.
   (d)   Hybrid parking structure configurations.
   (1) Definition: “Hybrid configuration parking structure” shall mean a
project utilizing more than one design approach for a parking structure.
   (2)   This type of parking structure shall comply with the more restrictive
of the standards and guidelines of the types utilized.
   (e)   The construction and use of parking structures cannot be approved
administratively unless they are part of a housing project that is allowed “by
right” under California law.
   (f)   Standards and design guidelines applicable to all parking structures.
   (1)   Appropriate security measures shall be incorporated into the design of
parking structures, including, but not limited to, location of the structure,
entrances, exits and openings, the use of security video systems, security
gates, fencing, lighting, security patrols, twenty-four (24) hour surveillance,
limited hours of operation, graffiti control measures and other means deemed
necessary by the Thousand Oaks Police Department.
   (2)   An eight-foot two inch (8'2") minimum vertical clearance shall be
required for all entrances and exits, including turnaround areas for vehicular
required access. The vertical clearance dimension shall be measured from the
finished surface of the parking level to the lowest structural surface, or
electrical, plumbing, mechanical or signage appurtenance above.
   (3)   Parking structures shall comply with the provisions of Sections
9-4.2404 and
9-4.2405 of this article, with regard to parking stall dimensions, aisle
widths, disabled parking and the general installation requirements for parking
areas.
   (4)   Unless otherwise permitted by the decision-making body, all areas used
exclusively for parking and turnarounds, shall be designed with grades not to
exceed a maximum of two and one-half (2.5%) percent slope. Grades exceeding two
and one-half (2.5%) percent slope up to five (5%) percent slope may be allowed
on parked access ramps. A slope of seven and one-half (7.5%) percent up to ten
(10%) percent may be allowed on unparked access ramps with a non-skid surface.
   (5)   If an access ramp is provided to a public street, all access points
shall meet sight distance requirements as specified in the City Road Standards,
and shall be designed to the satisfaction of the City Traffic Engineer.
   (6)   No loading/unloading activities, trash enclosures or recycling bins
shall be permitted within a parking structure. These activities shall be
designed and provided for separately, within the site, to serve the proposed
project.
   (7)   Surface water, rainfall and other forms of water runoff, must be
collected and diverted to the storm drain system. Water runoff may not be
directed to the wastewater system.
   (8)   Interior architectural lighting with a uniform lighting level shall be
provided, in accordance with the Building and Security Ordinance, Section
8-1.22 of this Code. Additional architectural lighting may be required at
public entrances.
   (9)   Parking structures shall provide variations in finish materials and
colors at public entrances that include use of accent tiles, floor pavers and
other special wall, floor and ceiling finishes and colors.
   (10)   Parking structures shall use landscape planters, light wells, and
other amenities that provide a visually pleasing aesthetic effect.
   (11)   Parking structures shall provide natural ventilation and openings to
the outside where possible.
   (12)   Non-residential projects: Above-grade parking levels shall not be
permitted within twenty-five (25') feet of any adjacent residentially zoned
properties, unless a determination is made that unusual site, topography, and/
or physical and legal constraints are present that would prevent compliance. As
a condition of any waiver of this regulation, the walls of the parking
structure adjacent to and facing residentially zoned properties shall be
designed to prohibit any direct openings through which noise, light or air
pollutants may be transmitted.
   (13)   Due to the impracticality of significantly landscaping exposed upper
level parking decks, there shall be a transfer of parking landscape
requirements to visible ground level locations. No less than ten (10%) percent
of the parking structure footprint shall be utilized as additional surface
parking lot landscaping at ground level adjacent to public rights-of-way or
adjacent to proposed structures.
   (14)   No on-building identification or advertisement signs, except
directional or parking entrance signs, shall be allowed on the exterior
elevations. The frontage of such structure shall not be used in calculating the
size of permitted signs for the project.
(§ 3, Ord. 1156-NS, eff. July 7, 1992, § 2, Ord. 1569-NS, eff. March 9, 2012)
Sec. 9-4.2406. Applicability of amendments.
   Amendments to this article shall apply prospectively and shall not apply to
any development permit (D-P), residential planned development permit (R-P-D),
or other entitlement or modification or extension thereof approved by the
Planning Commission or City Council prior to the adoption of the amending
ordinance. However, nothing contained herein shall be construed to limit the
ability of a development to voluntarily comply with the provisions of this
article subject to the review and approval of the Community Development
Director.
(§ 4, Ord. 857-NS, eff. April 24, 1984)
Article 25. Height, Yard, Area, and Building Conditions and Exceptions
Sec. 9-4.2501. Building height.
   (a)   Residential zones.
   (1)   In the R-A, R-E, R-O, R-1, and R-2 Zones, except as described herein,
no main building or structure shall exceed twenty-five (25') feet in height.
The maximum height may be increased by not more than ten (10') feet provided
that each such dwelling has two (2) side yards of not less than fifteen (15')
feet each, but such dwellings shall in no event exceed three (3) stories.
   (2)   In the R-P-D Zone, except as described herein, no single-family
dwelling shall exceed twenty-five feet (25') in height. In the R-3 and R-P-
D Zones, the maximum height for multi-family dwellings must not exceed thirty-
five feet (35'). Projects including twenty percent (20%) or more affordable
housing units in the very and low-income categories are allowed to exceed
thirty-five feet (35') up to forty-five feet (45') as long as the taller
portion does not cover more than forty percent (40%) of the building footprint.
   (3)   Accessory buildings shall be limited to a maximum building height of
fifteen (15') feet, except accessory dwelling units as provided in Article 45.
   (4)   In any R Zone the height of religious facility buildings, including
spires, shall be restricted to the height limit set forth in this article for
each zone unless waived or modified by the Commission, based on the
circumstances of each individual application, so long as the public health,
safety, and welfare are upheld.
   (b)   Commercial zones.
   (1)   In the C-1, C-2, and C-3 Zones, no building or structure shall exceed
thirty-five (35') feet in height.
   (2)   In the C-4 Zone, no building or structure shall exceed seventy-five
(75') feet in height.
   (c)   Manufacturing zones.
   (1)   In the M-1 and M-2 Zones, no building or structure shall exceed
thirty-five (35') feet in height.
   (2)   In the M-2 Zone wherever property abuts a residential or commercial
zone, the required standard setback on the front, side, or rear yard which
abuts the residential or commercial zone shall be increased by one (1') foot
for each two (2') feet in height that a structure located in the M-2 zoned
property exceeds a height of thirty (30') feet.
   (d)   Height limit overlay zone (h). The building height limits set forth in
subsections (b) and (c) of this section may be waived if the subject property
is designated within the Height Limit Overlay Zone (H), as defined by Article
33 of this chapter.
(§ 8160, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 6, Ord. 89, §§ 14 and 15, Ord. 126, § XVI,
Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, as renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff.
November 5, 1970, as amended by § I, Ord. 331-NS, eff. December 7, 1972, §§ I
and II, Ord. 495-NS, eff. October 10, 1974, § III, Ord. 997-NS, eff. May 17,
1988, § 30, Ord 1392-NS, eff. June 7, 2002, § 4, Ord. 1569-NS, eff. March 9,
2012, Part 7, Ord. 1678-NS, eff. February 28, 2020, and § 3, Ord. 1698-NS, eff.
April 29, 2022; § 4, Ord. 1732-NS, eff. November 22, 2024)
Sec. 9-4.2502. Building height: Exceptions.
   (a)   Through lots.
   (1)   On through lots having a depth of one hundred fifty (150') feet or
less, the height of buildings thereon may be measured from the adjoining
sidewalk level on either street.
   (2)   On through lots having a depth of more than one hundred fifty (150')
feet, the height regulations and basis of height measurements for the street
permitting the greater height shall apply to a depth of not more than one
hundred fifty (150') feet from such street.
   (b)   Roof attachments. Roof attachments such as flagpoles, towers, wireless
masts, television antennas, and similar diminutive roof attachments, may be
erected above the height limits set forth in this chapter provided such roof
attachments or any other device shall not exceed twenty (20') feet above the
prescribed height limit.
   (c)   Flagpoles. Flagpoles, freestanding or constructed below the roof line
of a building, shall not exceed the maximum heights as described below,
measured from the grade.
Zone                          Maximum Flagpole Height
R-A, R-E, R-O, R-1, R-2       25'
RPD, HPD, R-3                 25'
C-O                           25'
C-1, C-2, C-3, C-2/AM, C-2/CC 35'
C-4                           40'
M-1, M-2                      35'
OS                            25'
PL                            35'
 
   (d)   Ham radio towers. Ham radio towers, freestanding, may be erected to a
vertical height of seventy-five (75') feet above grade within the R-A, R-E, R-
0, R-1, and R-2 Zones, subject to the approval of the Community Development
Director, and within the R-3, R-P-D, and H-P-D Zones, subject to the approval
of a special use permit.
(§ 8160.1, T.O.O.C., as amended by §§ IV and V, Ord. 166-NS, eff. September 24,
1970, as renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, as amended by
§ I, Ord. 779-NS, eff. June 11, 1981, and § 1, Ord. 1499-NS, eff. March 12,
2008)
Sec. 9-4.2503. Yards: General.
   (a)   Whenever two (2) or more main buildings, one of which is to be used
for residential purposes, are constructed on a lot or parcel of land, there
shall be a minimum distance of twenty (20') feet between such main buildings in
lieu of any required yard.
   (b)   No yard area or other open space provided around any building for the
purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be considered as
providing a yard or open space for any other building.
   (c)   No yard or open space on adjoining property shall be considered as
providing required yard or open space for another lot or parcel for the purpose
of complying with the provisions of this chapter.
   (d)   Vehicles may be parked, but not stored, on a driveway or other City-
approved parking area for a residential dwelling unit. No vehicle may be parked
within any front yard area as defined by this chapter except on a driveway as
stated above. No vehicle may be parked or stored within three (3) feet of any
side property line or within twenty (20) feet of any rear property line. Except
as specifically provided elsewhere in this chapter, no required yard are or
open space provided around any building shall be used for garages or other
accessory buildings. For purposes of this subsection, “stored” shall mean the
keeping and maintaining of a vehicle, as defined by the State Vehicle Code,
continuously for a period of time in excess of thirty (30) days in the driveway
or approved parking area without operating and moving said vehicle.
   (e)   Detached garages or other accessory buildings shall not be located
within any required front yard.
   (f)   For the purpose of side yard requirements, the following dwellings
shall be considered as one building occupying one lot provided such dwellings
have common party walls:
   (1)   Two-family dwellings;
   (2)   Three-family dwellings;
   (3)   Four-family dwellings; and
   (4)   Row houses which are not more than two (2) rooms deep.
   (g)   In computing the depth of a rear yard for any building rearing upon an
alley, one-half (1/2) the width of such alley may be considered as a portion of
the required rear yard for the purposes of this chapter.
   (h)   For dwellings permitted above nonresidential structures, the front,
side, and rear yard requirements for residential uses shall not be applicable
provided all yard requirements for the zone in which such structure is located
are complied with.
(§8160.2, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by §XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970,
as amended by §V, Ord. 236-NS, eff. November 4, 197 1, §§I and II, Ord. 636-NS,
eff. July 14, 1977, and §5, Ord. 1220-NS, eff. October 11, 1994, as amended by
§ 3, Ord. 1449-NS, eff. November 1, 2005)
Sec. 9-4.2504. Front yards.
   (a)   Residential zones.
   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in Section
9-4.2510 of this article, in the R-A, R-E, R-1, R-2, and R-3 Zones, each lot
shall have a front yard of not less than twenty (20') feet.
   (2)   In the R-0 Zone each lot shall have a front yard of not less than
twenty-five (25%) percent of the depth of the lot, except that such front yard
need not exceed thirty-five (35') feet.
   (b)   Commercial zones.
   (1)   In the C-2 Zone every lot shall have a front yard of not less than
twenty (20') feet, unless waived by the Commission.
   (2)   In the C-1 and C-3 Zones no permanent building or structure shall be
located within one hundred (100') feet of the center line of any public road,
street, or highway, unless otherwise stated in the development permit. The
conditions and limitations set forth in this subsection shall apply in all
cases, unless modified or waived by the Commission and so stated in the permit.
Additional yard, area, and width requirements may be imposed by the Commission
where such are reasonably necessary to assure the compatibility of the proposed
use in detail with existing uses in the same vicinity and zone.
   (c)   Manufacturing zones. In the M-2 Zone the standard front yard setback
shall be ten (10') feet. In the M-1 Zone all buildings or structures shall be
located in accordance with the provisions of Section
9-4.1605 of Article 16 of this chapter.
(§ 8160.4, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 7, Ord. 89, § 16, Ord. 126, renumbered by
§ XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, amended by § VI, Ord. 236-NS, eff.
November 4, 1971, and § III, Ord. 495-NS, eff. October 10, 1974)
Sec. 9-4.2505. Side yards.
   (a)   Residential zones.
   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in Section
9-4.2510 of this article, in the R-A, R-E, R-0, R-1, and R-2 Zones each lot
shall have the following side yards:
   (i)   Interior lots shall have a side yard on each side of any building
thereon.
   (aa)    One-story dwellings shall have side yards of five (5') feet or more,
and the sum of the side yards to the nearest foot shall equal or exceed fifteen
(15%) percent of the width of the lot, if the lot is wider than seventy (70')
feet, or ten (10') feet or more where the width of the lot is seventy (70')
feet or less.
   (ab)    Two (2) story dwellings shall have a side yard of five (5') feet or
more, except that any side yard adjacent to a two (2) story dwelling wall shall
be ten (10%) percent of the width of the lot or more, measured to the nearest
foot, and two (2) story walls with windows shall have a minimum side yard of
ten (10') feet.
   (ac)    In cases where the side yard requirements exceed five (5') feet on
one side and ten (10') feet on the other side, the provisions of subsections
(aa) and (ab) of this subsection shall not apply to those tracts for which a
tentative map has been approved subsequent to December 7, 1961, and prior to
January 2, 1964, and for which a final map is recorded prior to January 2,
1965.
   (ii)   Corner lots shall have the side yards prescribed for interior lots
except in the case of reverse-corner lots. Each reverse-corner lot shall have a
side yard on the street side of such lot of not less than ten (10') feet.
   (2)   In the R-3 Zone interior lots shall have a side yard on each side of
any building thereon. Multiple dwellings shall have side yards of eight (8')
feet or more, and the sum of the side yards to the nearest foot shall equal or
exceed sixteen (16') feet. Two (2) story walls with windows shall have a
minimum side yard of ten (10') feet to a line midway between such walls. For
accessory buildings each side yard shall be increased by at least one-half (1/
2') foot for each two (2') feet, or fraction thereof, in height that any
accessory building extends above fifteen (15') feet.
   (b)   Commercial zones.
   (1)   In the C-2 Zone each lot shall have the following side yards:
   (i)   Where the side of such lot abuts a lot in a residential zone, there
shall be a side yard not less than five (5') feet on the side adjacent to the
residential zone.
   (ii)   Where the rear of a reverse-corner lot abuts a lot in a residential
zone, there shall be a side yard not less than ten (10') feet in the street
side.
   (iii) Where the rear of a corner lot abuts the rear of a lot in a
residential zone, there shall be a side yard not less than five (5') feet on
the street side.
   (2)   In the C-1 and C-3 Zones all buildings or structures shall be located
in accordance with the provisions of Section
9-4.1504 of Article 15 of this chapter.
   (c)   Manufacturing zones.
   (1)   In the M-2 Zone wherever the side of the property abuts a residential
or commercial zone, the standard setback shall be ten (10') feet.
   (2)   In the M-1 Zone all buildings or structures shall be located in
accordance with the provisions of Section
9-4.1605 of Article 16 of this chapter.
(§ 8160.5, T.O.O.C., as amended by §§ 8 and 9, Ord. 89, § 7, Ord. 126,
renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, amended by § IV, Ord.
495-NS, eff. October 10, 1974, § 5, Ord. 1569-NS, eff. March 9, 2012, and § 4,
Ord. 1698-NS, eff. April 29, 2022)
Sec. 9-4.2506. Reserved.
(§ 8160.3, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5,
1970, and repealed by § 40, Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.2507. Reduced side yards.
   Whenever the zone classification of any land is changed, any lot of record
therein prior to the effective date of the new zone classification may be used
as a building site even though the lot has less lot area or lot width than the
new requirements, and whenever the lot width is less than the new requirements,
the side yard of any building may be reduced to not less than ten (10%) percent
of the average lot width or three (3') feet, whichever is greater. For the
purposes of this section, “lot of record” is any lot shown as part of a
recorded subdivision or any parcel of land described by metes and bounds in a
recorded deed or record of survey or other appropriate document recorded in the
office of the County Recorder, except that no lot or parcel of land created
without compliance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act (former
Sections 11500 et seq. of the Business and Professions Code of the State) or
this Code shall be entitled to the waiver of the provisions of this section.
(§ 8160.12, T.O.O.C., renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970,
as amended by § 27, Ord. 1437-NS, eff. July 7, 2005)
Sec. 9-4.2508. Rear yards.
   (a)   Residential zones. Except as otherwise provided in Section
9-4.2510 of this article, in the R-A, R-E, R-O, R-1, R-2, and R-3 Zones each
lot shall have a rear yard not less than twenty (20') feet.
   (b)   Commercial zones.
   (1)   In the C-2 Zone each lot need not have any rear yard, except that
where the side or rear of such lot abuts a lot in a residential zone, there
shall be a rear yard not less than ten (10') feet.
   (2)   In the C-1 and C-3 Zones all buildings or structures shall be located
in accordance with the provisions of Section
9-4.1504 of Article 15 of this chapter.
   (c)   Manufacturing zones.
   (1)   In the M-2 Zone wherever the rear of the property abuts a residential
or commercial zone, the standard setback shall be ten (10') feet.
   (2)   In the M-1 Zone all buildings or structures shall be located in
accordance with the provisions of Section
9-4.1605 of Article 16 of this chapter.
(§ 8160.6, T.O.O.C., as amended by §§ 10 and 11, Ord. 89, § 18, Ord. 126,
renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, amended by § V, Ord.
495-NS, eff. October 10, 1974)
Sec. 9-4.2509. Projections into required yards.
   The following intrusions may project into required yards to the extent and
under the conditions and limitations indicated:
   (a)   Accessory buildings in rear yards, exclusive of detached accessory
dwelling units pursuant to Article 45.
   (1)   Detached accessory buildings, including garages, or parking spaces
required in the absence of garages, may occupy not more than twenty-five (25%)
percent of a required rear yard provided such building is not more than fifteen
(15') feet in height and the wall of such building or parking space is located
not less than six (6') feet from the nearest wall of a main building on the
same lot or a contiguous lot.
   (2)   Except for the R-3 Zone, no accessory building in excess of fifteen
(15') feet in height shall occupy any part of a required rear yard.
   (3)   In the case of reversed frontage, no accessory building shall be
erected nearer than six (6') feet to the line of the abutting lot to the rear
thereof.
   (4)   On the rear one-third (1/3) of a lot the walls of an accessory
building not used for human habitation may be built to within five (5') feet of
the interior lot line and the rear lot line, but on a corner lot the accessory
building shall observe the stated side yard setback requirement on the street
side.
   (5)   A breezeway connecting a main building to an accessory building may be
permitted. Such breezeway shall remain open on one side and shall not be
considered part of the main building.
   (b)   Accessory buildings in front yards on through lots. In any case where
a through lot has a depth not more than one hundred forty (140') feet,
accessory buildings not exceeding fifteen (15') feet in height may be located
in one of the required front yards provided every portion of such accessory
building is not less than ten (10') feet from the nearest front line.
   (c)   Covered patios. A covered patio, attached or unattached, which is
enclosed on not more than three (3) sides may extend into the required rear
yard provided the distance between the rear property line and the patio at the
nearest point is not less than ten (10') feet.
   (d)   Architectural features. Eaves, cornices, canopies, belt courses,
sills, buttresses, or other similar architectural features may project into
required yards provided such extensions shall not be nearer than two (2') feet
to any rear or side line of the lot or parcel. Where more than one building is
located on the same lot or parcel, such features shall not be nearer than two
(2') feet to a line midway between the main walls of such buildings.
   (e)   Chimneys and fireplaces. Masonry chimneys and fireplaces may project
into required yards not more than two (2') feet provided such chimneys or
fireplaces shall not be nearer than three (3') feet to any side line or the lot
or parcel. Where more than one building is located on the same lot or parcel,
such chimneys or fireplaces shall not be nearer than three (3') feet to a line
midway between the main walls of such buildings.
   (f)   Balconies, fire escapes, and stairways. Open, unenclosed stairways or
balconies not covered by roofs or canopies may extend into required rear yards
not more than four (4') feet and into required front yards not more than two
and one-half (2-1/2') feet.
   (g)   Landings and porches. Uncovered porches, platforms, or landings which
do not extend above the level of the first floor of the building may extend
into required yards not more than six (6') feet; provided, however, an open-
work railing not more than two and one-half (2-1/2’) feet in height may be
installed or constructed on such porch, platform, or landing.
   (h)   Depressed ramps. Open-work fences, hedges, guard railings, or other
landscaping or architectural devices for safety protection around depressed
ramps may be located in required yards provided such devices are not more than
three and one-half (3-1/2’) feet in height.
   (i)   Fences and walls.
   (1)   General. A fence, wall or hedge not to exceed six (6’) feet in height
may be located or maintained along the side or rear lot lines, but may not be
located closer than ten (10’) feet from the front lot line. A fence, wall or
hedge may be placed in the front yard as allowed by the applicable zone if it
does not have a height of more than three (3’) feet, except as allowed along
side lot lines as stated above or otherwise provided herein. The height of a
fence, wall or hedge shall be measured from the adjacent grade level facing the
public right of way, except that the height of a fence, wall or hedge along a
side or rear lot line that is sloped shall be measured from the highest side of
the adjacent grade level. The height limits of this subsection may be exceeded
as authorized in Subsection
9-4.2805(b)(8). In cases of corner lots, such fence, wall or hedge also shall
not extend into the side yard required adjacent to the side street nor into
that portion of the rear yard abutting the intersection street, in which
portion accessory buildings are prohibited, unless that fence, wall or hedge is
found by the Traffic Engineer and the Community Development Director to provide
adequate vehicular and pedestrian sight visibility which shall be maintained at
all intersections of public streets and private driveways and that adequate
means are available to offset the visual impact of the fence, wall or hedge.
Such a fence review shall be initiated upon application to the Community
Development Director. This subsection shall not prohibit the erection of fences
enclosing school sites if such fences do not extend beyond the front line of
the main building. This subsection shall not apply to a fence or wall required
by any law or regulation of the State, or any agency thereof.
   (2)   Noise attenuation along arterial roads. Notwithstanding subsection (1)
above, a fence or wall not to exceed nine (9' 0") feet in height may be located
or maintained along a rear property line, or in the case of a corner lot, a
side property line, when the Community Development Director finds that the
criteria listed in this subsection are satisfied. Any fence or wall not meeting
the following criteria may be authorized by the Planning Commission.
   (i)   The location of the fence or wall is adjacent to an arterial that is
designated as a four (4) or more lane road in the Circulation Element of the
General Plan; and,
   (ii)   The additional height and material is necessary and effective to
attenuate noise at the site to acceptable levels as specified as goals in the
Noise Element of the General Plan; and,
   (iii)   The additional height will not interfere with adequate sight
visibility of pedestrians or vehicles entering, leaving, or passing the
property or adjacent properties as determined by the Traffic Engineer and
Community Development Director; and,
   (iv)   Any fence or wall shall be terraced unless a terraced fence or wall
design is not feasible due to physical constraints related to the location of
the fence or wall; and,
   (v)   The materials and colors of a fence or wall are consistent or
compatible with the materials and colors of the existing approved fences or
walls and/or tract perimeter fences or walls; and,
   (vi)   A fence or wall is decorative and utilizes architectural elements,
including but not limited to, pilasters, planters, horizontal bands, or
landscaping, to soften the mass of the structure. Materials such as smooth
vinyl or untreated cinderblock may not be used unless determined to be
consistent with existing fence/wall design along the perimeter.
   (j)   Pilasters. Freestanding decorative pilasters in the required front
yard area of single-family detached residences shall be permitted as follows:
   (1)   The design of pilasters shall take into consideration existing site
conditions, i.e., topography, existing landscaping, etc., regarding their
location and proportional relationship of the pilaster’s width, depth and
height.
   (2)   The side of the pilaster that faces the public right-of-way shall not
exceed forty-eight (48”) inches in height, measured from the adjacent grade
level to the top of the pilaster cap. The use of ornamental features, including
lighting fixtures, shall not be included in the height of the pilaster.
   (3)   The height of light fixtures or ornamental features on top of the
pilasters shall not exceed one-half (1/2) the overall height of the pilaster.
Lighting fixtures shall be designed and selected to avoid excessive spillage of
illumination onto public right-of-way and adjacent properties, by using a
subdued light source in keeping with the character of the residential
neighborhood.
   (4)   The footprint of any pilaster shall be in proportion to its height,
and shall not exceed twenty-four (24”) inches nor be less than sixteen (16”)
inches in width.
   (5)   The spacing of pilasters shall not be less than twelve (12’) feet
measured from the exterior face. When pilasters are used as a sidewalk entry
features, the spacing shall not be less than four (4’) feet.
   (6)   The height of decorative solid fencing/walls between pilasters shall
not exceed thirty (30”) inches. However, wrought-iron fencing between pilasters
either as an addition to the thirty (30”) inches solid fencing, or as the only
fencing used, with a height that matches the height of the pilasters, shall be
permitted.
   (7)   Decorative caps shall be provided on top of pilasters and also on any
proposed walls between pilasters.
   (8)   Colors and materials of pilasters and any other proposed fencing shall
be compatible with the principal residence being served.
   (9)   If address numbers are to be installed on the pilasters, the letters
shall be a minimum of six (6”) inches in height.
   (10)   A building permit shall be required for pilasters exceeding thirty
(30”) inches in height. An electrical permit shall also be required if lighting
fixtures are proposed.
   (11)   The placement of driveway gates with pilasters shall comply with
Public Works Department’s Plate E-1 regarding design standards for residential
driveways.
   (12)   The review and approval of pilasters shall be in accordance with
Section
9-4.1803 of the Architectural Design Review Ordinance of the Thousand Oaks
Municipal Code.
   (13)   Where corner lots occur, such pilaster(s) shall not extend into the
required side yard adjacent to the side street nor encroach into that portion
of the rear yard abutting the intersecting street, unless the design and
placement of the pilaster(s) are found by the City Traffic Division and the
Community Development Department not to impair the required vehicular and
pedestrian sight visibility which shall be maintained at all intersections of
public streets, including sidewalks and private driveways.
(§ 8160.9, T.O.O.C., renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970,
as amended by § 1, Ord. 854-NS, eff. March 27, 1984, §§ IV and V, Ord. 997-NS,
eff. May 17, 1988, and § 3, Ord. 1249-NS, eff. January 9, 1996, and § 2, Ord.
1423-NS, eff. January 13, 2004, § 1507-NS, eff. October 23, 2008, and Part 9,
Ord. 1678-NS, eff. February 28, 2020, and § 7, Ord. 1732-NS, eff. November 22,
2024)
Sec. 9-4.2509.1. Setback reductions in residential areas.
   After holding a noticed public hearing, the Planning Commission may grant a
yard setback reduction for structures in residential zones as provided in this
section.
   (a)   When the distance between the two (2) structures is or will be equal
to the combined normally required setbacks for both adjacent yard areas, and
the structures are likely to remain such a distance apart, a reduction of up to
one hundred (100%) percent of a yard setback requirement may be granted,
provided the Commission finds that:
   (1)   No other reasonable design and layout of the proposed structure can be
accommodated on the lot and such a reduced setback is necessary for any viable
use of that property; or
   (2)   Because of a prior mistake in the construction of the structure, an
encroachment into the normally required setback area occurred, and the owner
purchased the property without knowledge of such an illegal encroachment, and,
further, that an unreasonable hardship will be incurred by the property owner
in removing the encroachment.
   (b)   The likelihood of the structure’s separation distance remaining as
found above is established when the adjacent property is burdened with an
easement, deed restriction, zoning restriction or similar development
restriction that would legally prevent the construction of any structure,
excluding fences, within this minimum separation area.
   In authorizing the setback reductions described in this section, the
Commission may impose such conditions, development standards, and restrictions
as it deems necessary to protect the public safety, health and welfare.
(§ 3, Ord. 1136-NS, eff. February 18, 1992)
 Sec. 9-4.2509.2. Electrical, barbed wire, broken glass, etc. in fencing.
   (a)   Electrical charges to fencing. No fence installed or maintained in the
City shall be charged with electricity for security or any other reasons except
as provided in this section. Electrically charged fences may be approved by the
Community Development Department for farming, ranching, or the keeping of
horses in the R-A, R-E or R-O zones, provided, the amount of electrical charge
is only sufficient to restrain the animal without harm to humans, and such
fences are posted with warning signs of a size equal to two feet by two feet
(2’ x 2’), and placed no greater than at twenty (20’) foot intervals and such
other warnings or restrictions as determined appropriate by that department.
   (b)   Barbed wire, razor wire, other security measures. No fence or wall
shall include barbed wire, razor wire, or other types of sharp, pointed wire,
metal or glass in any zone except as provided in this section. Barbed wire is
authorized for oil and gas facilities as set forth in Section
9-4.2814, and for the keeping of livestock animals or horses in the R-A, R-
E and R-O zones if within a recognized agricultural preserve, or the fence has
been approved as part of a farm animal permit, special use permit or other
entitlement. In the manufacturing/industrial and commercial zones, barbed wire,
razor wire or other types of security devices may be utilized in a fence or
wall, provided:
   (1)   That type of fence is authorized as part of a development permit or
special use permit;
   (2)   The barbed wire, razor wire or other sharp security device does not
project over the public right-of-way;
   (3)   The barbed wire, razor wire or other sharp security devices are
securely placed on top of a six (6') foot high, or taller, chain link fence,
wrought iron fence, or other types of approved fencing or wall;
   (4)   The barbed wire, razor wire or other sharp security device does not
project over any exterior property line, and if the property abuts a
residentially zoned or used parcel, such material shall be at least six (6')
feet over the ground level of the abutting parcel;
   (5)   The barbed wire, razor wire or other sharp security device is not
observable from any public right-of-way or road, however, screening material or
landscaping may be used;
   (6)   Warning signs are posted in conspicuous locations.
   (c)   Security fencing standards and conditions. The Community Development
Department may develop other written standards and criteria, consistent with
this section, for the placement of any fencing mentioned in this section, and
describing where such fencing must be located on the parcel in relationship to
street frontage, and such standards needed to mitigate any aesthetic impact
caused by that fencing.
(§ 1, Ord. 1030-NS, eff. June 27, 1989)
Sec. 9-4.2509.5. Area requirements for accessory buildings.
   (a)   Accessory buildings, excluding any secondary residential accessory
dwelling units authorized by Article 45, in all R Zones shall not have a floor
area in excess of six hundred (600) square feet nor shall any accessory
building in any R Zone have a floor area in excess of fifty (50%) percent of
the footprint of the principal or main building unless otherwise authorized as
part of a residential planned development permit in the RPD and HPD zones or
subject to the approval of an Administrative Approval in the R-A, R-E, R-O, R-
1 and R-2 Zones in accordance with Section
9-4.2815.
   (b)   Cumulative floor area of accessory buildings in any R Zone exclusive
of accessory dwelling units pursuant to Article 45 shall not exceed one hundred
(100%) percent of the footprint of the principal or main building on a single
lot or parcel of land.
   (c)   Estate lots in the R-A, R-E, R-O and R-1 Zones which are five (5)
acres in size or greater shall be considered exempt from area requirements for
accessory buildings except for area requirements applicable to accessory
dwelling units pursuant to Article 45.
(§ VI, Ord. 997-NS, eff. May 17, 1988, as amended by Part 10, Ord. 1678-NS,
eff. February 28, 2020; and as amended by § 3, Ord. 1732-NS, eff. November 22,
2024)
*Sec. 9-4.2510. Lot area.
   (a)   In the following zones each lot shall have an area as follows:
   (1)   In the R-1, R-2, and R-3 Zones each lot shall have an area not less
than seven thousand (7,000) square feet.
   (2)   In the R-E Zones each lot shall have an area not less than ten
thousand (10,000) square feet.
   (3)   In the R-O Zones each lot shall have an area not less than twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet.
   (4)   In the R-A Zones each lot shall have an area not less than one acre
(43,560 square feet).
   (b)   The lot area per dwelling unit shall be as follows:
   (1)   In the R-2 Zones there shall be three thousand five hundred (3,500)
square feet per dwelling unit.
   (2)   In the R-3 Zones there shall be one thousand (1,000) square feet per
dwelling unit.
(§ 8160.7, T.O.O.C., as amended by §§ 12 and 13, Ord. 89, renumbered by § XIV,
Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, and § 1, Ord. 219-NS, eff. August 19, 1971)
*   Section 9.4.2510 entitled “Yards: Modifications,” codified from Section
8160.18, T.O.O.C., renumbered by Section XIV, Ordinance No. 173-NS, effective
November 5, 1970, repealed by Section 1, Ordinance No. 219-NS, effective August
19, 1971.
Sec. 9-4.2511. Substandard reverse-corner and wedge-shaped lots.
   (a)   Reverse-corner lots. Interior side yards for reverse-corner lots of
record prior to being rezoned from Zone A-4 shall be as provided as prescribed
in this chapter. However, in such cases the side yard requirements for the
street side shall not be interpreted to reduce the buildable width of such lots
to less than twenty-eight (28') feet nor to prohibit accessory buildings where
such prohibition cannot reasonably be complied with.
   (b)   Wedge-shaped lots. The required width of wedge-shaped lots shall be
measured along the required front and rear yard lines which are set back the
required distance from property lines. The resultant front and rear yard areas
shall be deemed to be the areas required by the provisions of this chapter.
Permitted accessory buildings or structures may not occupy more than forty
(40%) percent of such resultant rear yards. Wedge-shaped lots shall conform to
all the other requirements of this chapter for the zone in which they are
located.
(§ 8160.11, T.O.O.C., renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970,
and § 1, Ord. 219-NS, eff. August 19, 1971)
Sec. 9-4.2512. Lot splits.
   (a)   One main building per lot. All buildings hereafter erected or
structurally altered shall be located on the lot as set forth in this chapter,
and in no case shall there be more than one main building and its accessory
buildings on one lot except as expressly authorized in a particular zone and as
set forth in this section.
   (b)   Individual parcels of land. Every individual parcel of land which was
of record on April 18, 1947, shall be deemed to be one lot, and not more than
one main building shall be permitted on such parcel except as authorized and
provided for the particular zone in which located or as required by the
provisions of Section 9-4.2708 of Article 27 of this chapter. Such parcel may
not be divided into more than four (4) parcels unless and until a subdivision
tract map is recorded with the County Recorder in the manner provided by law
for subdivisions. However, if such parcel contains an area of fourteen thousand
(14,000) square feet or more, but not more than two (2) acres, an additional
separate building may be erected for each seven thousand (7,000) square feet of
area contained in such parcel if located in any R Zone; provided, however, all
other regulations pertaining to such R Zone shall be complied with.
   (c)   Creation of nonconforming lots. Every individual parcel of land which
was of record on April 18, 1947, shall be deemed to be one lot. No such lot
shall be divided into two (2) or more separate lots if such division will
create any separate lot which is nonconforming because of less lot area, width,
or yards than required for the zone in which the property is located.
(§ 8160.13, T.O.O.C., renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970,
and § 1, Ord. 219-NS,-eff. August 19, 1971, amended by § II, Ord. 353-NS, eff.
March 22, 1973)
Sec. 9-4.2513. Building setback lines for property adjoining roads, streets,
and highways.
   (a)   A lot or parcel of land in any zone adjoining a public road, street,
or highway for which the alignment and width has been determined shall have a
building setback line equal to the yard required in the zone, plus a distance
of:
   (1)   Forty-two (42') feet measured from the center line of each adjoining
two (2) or four (4) lane road, street, or highway;
   (2)   Fifty-four (54') feet measured from the center line of each adjoining
six (6) lane road, street, or highway;
   (3)   Sixty-two (62') feet measured from the center line of each adjoining
expressway; or
   (4) One-half (1/2) of the planned ultimate width of a local road or street
measured from the center line of such local road or street.
   (b)   A building or structure shall not be erected or maintained on a lot or
parcel of land which abuts a public road, street, or highway having only a
portion of its required width dedicated to, or otherwise acquired by, the City
and where no part of, or less than one-half (1/2) of, such width would revert
to such lot or parcel of land if the public road, street, or highway were
vacated unless the yards provided and maintained in connection with the
building or structure have sufficient width or depth in that portion of the lot
or parcel of land needed to complete the road, street, or highway width, plus
whatever width or depth of yards is required on the lot or parcel of land by
the zone in which it is located.
(§ 8160.16, T.O.O.C.. renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970,
and § 1, Ord. 219-NS, eff. August 19, 1971)
Sec. 9-4.2514. Structures within mapped roads, streets, and highway rights-of-
way.
   (a)   As used in this section, “mapped highway” shall mean a highway, road,
or street indicated as a major or secondary highway on the circulation element
of the County master or general plan (also known as the General Plan of
Highways) and for which there is on file in the office of the City Engineer a
City Engineer’s map of such size, scale, and detail that the exact location on
the ground which the highway, road, or street is to occupy can be ascertained.
   (b)   No person shall hereafter erect, without a permit, any building or
structure, other than a temporary structure costing less than Five Hundred and
no/100ths ($500.00) Dollars, within the area of any mapped highway.
   (c)   Prior to issuing any building permit, the Building Official, or such
other person as may be appointed, shall examine the circulation element of the
County master or general plan (also known as the General Plan of Highways) and
determine if there is on file in the office of the City Engineer a City
Engineer’s map indicating the exact location on the ground which the mapped
road or highway is to occupy. If he finds that the building or structure
proposed to be erected will lie within the boundaries of any mapped highway, he
shall grant a permit if the cost of the proposed building or structure is Five
Hundred and no/100ths ($500.00) Dollars or less. Otherwise, he shall refuse
such permit and notify the owner or applicant for the permit the reason for
such refusal.
   (d)   Any person aggrieved by the refusal of a building permit under this
section may request a hearing on the matter before the Commission. Before
taking any action authorized by this section, the Commission shall hold a
hearing at which the applicant and any other interested persons shall have an
opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be
mailed to the applicant, property owner of record, and any other interested
persons not later than ten (10) days prior to the date of such hearing. Written
notice of the time and place of the hearing shall also be given to the City
Engineer, Community Development Director, Buliding Official, and City Manager.
   (e)   The Commission shall authorize the granting of the permit if it finds
any of the following is true:
   (1)   That the property on which the mapped highway location is a part is of
such nature that the owner of the land will be substantially damaged by the
refusal to grant the permit;
   (2)   That the property will not earn a reasonable return on the owner’s
investment unless the construction is authorized; or
   (3)   That in balancing the interests of the public in preserving the
integrity of mapped highways against the interests of the owner of the land in
using his property, the granting of the permit is required by considerations of
justice and equity.
   (f)   The Commission shall not authorize the granting of the permit if it
finds any of the following is true:
   (1)   That the owner of the land will not be substantially damaged by
locating the proposed structure on his land other than within the bed of the
mapped highway; or
   (2)   That in balancing the interests of the public in preserving the
integrity of mapped highways against the interests of the owner of the land in
using his property, the resulting disadvantages to the City would be
unreasonable and disproportionate to the advantages of the owner from using the
property.
   (g)   Any owner or applicant dissatisfied with the decision of the
Commission may appeal the decision to the Council in the manner set forth in
Section
9-4.2807 of Article 28 of this chapter.
   (h)   Upon the denial of an application for a building permit written notice
of the denial shall be given to the Council, Community Development Director,
and City Engineer, and a copy thereof shall be mailed to the applicant at the
address shown on his application and to the property owner of record. Upon the
denial of an application for a permit by the Commission or the Council, written
notice of the denial shall be sent to the applicant at the address shown on his
application and to the property owner of record. At the expiration of a period
of six (6) months after the date of mailing of any such notice, the permit
shall be issued upon the request of the owner or applicant if the City has not
acquired such property or has not instituted legal proceedings to acquire such
property.
   (i)   The City has adopted a circulation element of the County master or
general plan (also known as the General Plan of Highways) in conformity with
the provisions of Chapter 3 of Division 7 of the Government Code of the State
containing many miles of proposed County major and secondary highways.
(§ 8160.17, T.O.O.C., renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970,
and § 1, Ord. 219-NS, eff. August 19, 1971)
Sec. 9-4.2515. R Zone restrictions.
   No building shall be erected, used, or maintained for a school, religious
facility, hospital, institution, or similar use pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter unless such building is removed at least twenty-five (25') feet
from every boundary line of any property included in any R Zone. Further, no
front or side yard of the property on which such building or use is located
shall be used for play or parking purposes.
(§ 8160.10, T.O.O.C., renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970,
§ 1, Ord. 219-NS, eff. August 19, 1971, and § 31, Ord. 1392-NS, eff. June 7,
2002)
Sec. 9-4.2516. Transportable facilities for dwelling purposes.
   Mobile homes, trailers, and other transportable facilities may be used for
dwelling purposes when neither within a trailer park nor offered for rental or
lease as follows:
   (a)   The owner of a lot in the R-A, R-E, R-O, R-1, R-2, or R-3 Zones may
use a mobile home as his temporary dwelling unit for six (6) months during the
construction of a residence for which a building permit is in full force and
effect. Occupancy of such mobile home shall be discontinued.within thirty (30)
days after the notice of completion is recorded or the constructed residence is
occupied.
   (b)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the owner of a
lot in the R-A, R-E, R-2, or R-3 Zones occupying his mobile home on his lot as
his dwelling unit on January 12, 1965, may continue such occupancy for the
remainder of his lifetime, after which time a mobile home may be maintained on
such property only if a special use permit has been obtained in the manner set
forth in Article 28 of this chapter. After obtaining such permit such use may
continue if it conforms to every term and condition of the permit and
applicable laws of the City and State. If such lot is transferred or if the use
of such property for mobile home purposes is abandoned for a period of one year
or more, the property may thereafter be used for mobile home purposes only
after obtaining a special use permit in the manner set forth in Article 28 of
this chapter.
   (c)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the owner of a
lot in the R-1 or R-O Zones occupying his mobile home on his lot as his
dwelling unit on January 12, 1965, may continue such occupancy for the
remainder of his lifetime, after which time a mobile home may be maintained on
such property only if a variance has been obtained in the manner set forth in
Article 28 of this chapter. After obtaining such variance such use may continue
if it conforms to every term and condition of the permit and applicable laws of
the City and State. If such lot is transferred or if the use of such property
for mobile home purposes is abandoned for a period of one year or more, the
property may thereafter be used for mobile home purposes only after obtaining a
variance, in the manner set forth in Article 28 of this chapter.
   (d)   Except as provided in subsection (e) of this section, no temporary
structure or trailer or vehicle shall be used for any temporary or permanent
dwelling unit or office or for any commercial or industrial purpose in the
commercial or industrial zones without qualifying as a permanent building in
accordance with the currently adopted Building Code.
   (e)   In the commercial and industrial zones, temporary structures and
trailers for a construction office, supplies, and/or a dwelling unit for
security guard purposes may be placed on the property of a construction project
during the time of construction and for sixty (60) days thereafter.
   (f)   The owner of a lot in a residential zone may occupy a mobile home,
trailer or other transportable facility as an emergency dwelling if the
permanent home on that lot is either destroyed or declared uninhabitable by the
Building Official due to a physical disaster (e.g. fire, flood or earthquake)
subject to the following:
   (1)   The landowner shall obtain an emergency dwelling permit from the
Community Development Department.
   (2)   The emergency dwelling shall be located on the same parcel as the
permanent home and occupied by the landowner and the members of his/her
household.
   (3)   The emergency dwelling shall be suitable for human habitation and
connected to water, wastewater and electric utilities in conformance with all
required plumbing and electric codes.
   (4)   The location of the emergency dwelling on the property shall be
subject to Community Development Department approval. Notwithstanding the
regulations in Section
9-4.2503 of this Title concerning setbacks for vehicle parking and storage, a
transportable facility used as an emergency dwelling may be placed within the
required setbacks, if necessary.
   (5)   The owner must have approved building permits within six (6) months of
issuance of the permit provided for in this subsection (f)(1). The Community
Development Director or designee may grant up to two (2) thirty-day (30-day)
extensions to receive approved building permits.
   (6)   Occupancy of such emergency dwelling shall be discontinued within
thirty (30) days after the permanent home is reconstructed or repaired and
available for occupancy, but not more than twelve(12) months after the date
that the emergency dwelling permit was issued. The landowner may request an
extension of time for an additional six (6) months and an extension may be
approved if the Building Official determines that construction or repair of the
permanent home has been taking place with necessary permits and is being
diligently pursued toward completion.
(§ 8160.8, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 1, Ord. 232, as renumbered by § XIV, Ord.
173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, and as amended by § 1, Ord. 219-NS, eff. August
19, 1971; and as amended by § 1, Ord. 1465-NS, eff. June 27, 2006; and as
amended by § 3, Ord. 1466-NS, eff. August 11, 2006)
Sec. 9-4.2517. Trees on required parkways.
(§ 8160.19, T.O.O.C., as added by § 1, Ord. 49, as renumbered by § XIV, Ord.
173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, and as amended by § 1, Ord. 219-NS, eff. August
19, 1971; repealed by § II, Ord. 549-NS, eff. November 13, 1975)
Sec. 9-4.2518. Home occupations.
   A home occupation shall include any use customarily conducted entirely
within a dwelling or building accessory thereto and carried on by the
inhabitants thereof. The use shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the
principal use of the residence.
   (a)   Home occupation permits: Issuance. A home occupation permit shall be
issued if the Community Development Director determines that such use complies
with the following criteria:
   (1)   A maximum of two (2) employees per day, not occupants of the residence
and only during the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., shall be allowed at the
residence. No more than one employee shall be allowed at the residence at a
time.
   (2)   No use of material or mechanical equipment which creates or emits
light, sound, or vibration, or produces an odor, which can be heard, felt, or
otherwise sensed upon adjoining property or public rights-of-way shall be
permitted except uses compatible with the permitted residential uses.
   (3)   No commodities or services shall be advertised on the premises.
   (4)   No signs or structures shall be permitted other than those normally
permitted in the zone.
   (5)   The use shall not create pedestrian or vehicular traffic other than
normal to the residential use of said premises as follows:
   (i)   No more than four (4) visitors or customers a day shall be allowed in
connection with the home occupation and may only be present between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., except as provided in subsection (ii).
   (ii)   No more than two (2) students shall be allowed on the premises at the
same time for music lessons, tutoring, or other instructional purposes and may
only be present between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. However, group
instruction of up to eight (8) students at the same time shall be allowed once
a week.
   (6)   No identifiable commercial vehicles in connection with the home
occupation shall be permitted for delivery of materials to or from the premises
except those vehicles that normally make deliveries to or pickups from
households in residential areas.
   (7)   No outdoor storage of materials or supplies visible from the public
street or adjacent property shall be permitted in connection with the home
occupation.
   (8)   The appearance of the structure shall not be altered, nor shall the
conduct of the occupation within the structure be such that the structure may
be reasonably recognized as serving a nonresidential use.
   (9)   The home occupation must have sufficient parking on the premises to
accommodate both residential and home business uses.
   (10)   No more than one vehicle used exclusively for, or in any way
identifiable as related to, the home occupation may be used or stored on the
premises. There shall be no parking or storing of commercial vehicles on public
streets in connection with the home occupation. Commercial vehicles used for,
or in any way related to the home occupation shall not be stored on the
premises, or parked on the street unless otherwise permitted. As used herein,
commercial vehicles are as defined in the California Vehicle Code.
   The Community Development Director or designee may impose conditions upon
the approval of a home occupation permit, as deemed necessary to insure
compliance with the criteria listed in this section, to maintain the
residential character of the neighborhood, and to require compliance with all
Federal, State and local requirements.
   (b)   Home occupation permits: Revocation. A home occupation permit granted
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter may be terminated if the
Community Development Director makes any of the following findings:
   (1)   That any condition of the home occupation permit has been violated;
   (2)   That the use has become detrimental to the public health or traffic or
constitutes a nuisance;
   (3)   That the permit was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud;
   (4)   That the use for which the permit was granted has ceased for six (6)
consecutive months or more; and
   (5)   That the condition of the premises, or of the area of which it is a
part, has changed so that the use is no longer justified under the meaning and
intent of this section.
   Any determination of the Community Development Director under the provisions
this section may be appealed to the Commission pursuant to the provisions of
Article 28 of this chapter.
   (c)   Home occupation permits: Nontransferability. A home occupation permit
granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall not be
transferred, assigned, or used by any person other than the permittee, nor
shall such permit authorize such home occupation at any location other than the
one for which the permit is granted.
   (d)   Nonconforming home occupations. Non-conforming home occupations shall
be discontinued or shall comply with all the provisions of this section on or
before December 3, 2003.
(§ 8160.15, T.O.O.C., as amended by § II, Ord. 231, as renumbered by § XIV,
Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, § 1, Ord. 219-NS, eff. August 19, 1971, and
§ 1, Ord. 1409-NS, eff. July 3, 2003)
Sec. 9-4.2519. Garage sales and boutique sales.
   (a)   Defined: Garage sales and boutique sales.
   (1)   “Garage sale,” as used in this section shall refer to a sale from a
residence or residential property of personal property which has been owned or
used previously by an individual or resident residing on the premises where the
sale is conducted. A yard or patio sale shall be included within the definition
of “garage sale.” The term “garage sale” shall not include the mere incidental
sale of one or two (2) items of personal property when such sale is not a part
of a general sale of a number of items of personal property.
   (2)   “Boutique sale” as used in this section shall refer to a sale from a
residence or residential property of small handcrafted items produced entirely
by local persons within their own residence. These items may include, but are
not limited to, the following: Items produced by sewing, needlework, ceramics
and woodworking.
   (b)   General retail sale prohibited. The conduct of general retail sales or
commercial activities in residential areas, except as is otherwise expressly
authorized under this Code, shall be prohibited.
   (c)   Permitted: Limitations. Garage sales and boutique sales shall be
permitted only insofar as they are conducted consistent with the following
limitations:
   (1)   No more than two (2) garage sales or boutique sales shall be conducted
on the premises in any calendar year; provided, however, a third sale shall be
permitted if satisfactory proof of a bona fide change in ownership of real
property is first presented to the Community Development Director or his duly
authorized representative. No single sale shall be conducted for longer than
two (2) consecutive weekends, or seventy-two (72) hours, whichever is the
lesser. Garage sales or boutique sales may be conducted during daylight hours
only.
   (2)   Personal property offered for sale at a garage sale or a boutique sale
may be displayed on a driveway, in a garage, and/or in a rear yard, but only in
such areas. No personal property offered for sale at a garage sale shall be
displayed in any front yard area or in any public right-of-way.
   (3)   Except as provided below, signs used in conjunction with a garage sale
or boutique sale shall be displayed only on the premises upon which the sale is
conducted. Two (2) off-site directional signs may be permitted by the Community
Development Director provided the premises upon which the garage sale or
boutique sale is conducted is not on a major thoroughfare, and written
permission to erect such signs is received from the property owners on whose
property such signs are to be placed. Signs may be displayed only during the
hours the garage sale or boutique sale is actively being conducted and shall be
removed at the close of the sale activities, or by the end of daylight,
whichever first occurs, each day. No sign may be placed in the public right-of-
way.
   (4)   A nonprofit organization or association of persons may conduct a
garage sale or a boutique sale at the residence of one or more of its members
pursuant to all of the requirements of this section. One such sale may be held
per year without such sale being deemed one chargeable to the premises in
question for the purposes of applying the two (2) sales per year limitation set
forth in subsection (1) of this subsection.
   (5)   No garage sale or boutique sale shall be held so as to include more
than one residence or parcel as the site of the sale unless a permit is first
obtained from the Community Development Director or his authorized
representative. In granting a permit for a garage sale or boutique sale
encompassing more than one residence or parcel, the Community Development
Director may impose reasonable conditions consistent with the policies of this
section.
   (6)   Nothing contained herein regarding authorization of garage sales and
boutique sales shall be intended to displace or supersede tract covenants,
codes and restrictions found in title to affected properties within the City.
(Ord. 535-NS, eff. July 17, 1975, as amended by Ord. 842-NS, eff. September 13,
1983)
Sec. 9-4.2520. Food cooperatives.
   (a)   General. A food cooperative shall include a use conducted entirely
within a single-family dwelling or building accessory thereto and carried on by
the inhabitants thereof. The use shall be clearly incidental and secondary to
the principal use of the single-family residence. A special use permit for a
food cooperative shall include all of the following requirements:
      (1)   No employees shall be permitted other than members of the
residential family and cooperative. A list of members shall be provided.
      (2)   No use of material or mechanical equipment which creates sound,
vibration, smells or effects which can be heard, felt, or otherwise sensed upon
adjoining property or public rights-of-way shall be permitted.
      (3)   No signs or structures shall be permitted other than those normally
permitted in the zone.
      (4)   The use shall not generate excessive pedestrian or vehicular
traffic beyond that normal to the zone in which it is located other than
occasional deliveries by commercial vehicles.
      (5)   No outdoor storage of materials, supplies, or commercial vehicles
visible from the public street or adjacent property shall be permitted in
connection with the food cooperative beyond the normal to the residential
character of the zone.
      (6)   The appearance of the structure shall not be altered, nor shall the
conduct of the occupation within the structure be such that the structure may
be reasonably recognized as serving a nonresidential use.
      (7)   A certificate from the County Department of Environmental Health,
if required.
      (8)   The hours on days of operation shall be limited between 7:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m.
   (b)   Food cooperatives: Revocation. A food cooperative special use permit
granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter may be terminated if
the Community Development Director makes any of the following findings:
      (1)   That any condition of the special use permit has been violated;
      (2)   That the use has become detrimental to the public health or traffic
or constitutes a nuisance;
      (3)   That the permit was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud;
      (4)   That the use for which the permit was granted has ceased for six
(6) consecutive months or more; or
      (5)   That the condition of the premises, or of the area of which it is a
part, has changed so that the use is no longer justified under the meaning and
intent of this section.
   Any determination of the Community Development Director under the provisions
of this section may be appealed to the Commission pursuant to the provisions of
Article 28 of this chapter.
(§ IX, Ord. 834-NS, eff. June 21, 1983, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1401-NS, eff.
February 6, 2003)
Sec. 9-4.2521. Accessory dwelling units.
(§ 8, Ord. 858-NS, eff. April 24, 1984; as amended by § 30, Ord. 1178-NS, eff.
April 27, 1993, § 1, Ord. 1412-NS, eff. August 14, 2003, § 4, Ord. 1631-NS,
eff. July 14, 2017, Part 11, Ord. 1678-NS, eff. February 28, 2020; repealed by
§ 1, Ord. 1732-NS, eff. November 22, 2024)
Sec. 9-4.2522. Fire protection.
   Water wells shall not be used to satisfy Fire Department requirements for
fire flow for new construction. Fire flow requirements shall only be provided
by connection to an existing public water system.
(§ 1, Ord. 1133-NS, eff. February 4, 1992)
Sec. 9-4.2523. Restaurant outdoor customer dining areas.
   (a)   No person shall establish or maintain an outdoor customer dining area
without first obtaining approval of a minor modification to the applicable
development permit or special use permit pursuant to Section
9-4.2804(a)(5) of this chapter. The applicant shall submit with the
application, a written authorization for the outdoor customer dining area from
either the property owner or the owner’s agent or property manager of the
property on which the restaurant is located.
   (b)   Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, no outdoor customer
dining area shall be located within fifty (50') feet of any residentially zoned
property unless authorized by the Planning Commission through the approval of a
major modification application submitted pursuant to Section
9-4.2803 of this chapter.
   (c)   Limited restaurant outdoor customer dining areas may be established
within private walkways without increasing the required number of parking
spaces, subject to the following regulations:
   (1)   A maximum of five (5) tables, with no more than four (4) chairs each,
shall be permitted without increasing the required parking. Additional parking
shall be provided for any extra tables or seating in excess of the foregoing
limits at the ratio of one parking space for each forty-five (45) square feet
of additional outdoor customer dining area, including any area necessary for
circulation and access.
   (2)   A path of travel shall be maintained for pedestrian and disabled
access circulation to and within the outdoor customer dining area. Said path of
travel shall be not less than four (4') feet in width.
   (3)   The restaurant operator shall maintain the outdoor customer dining
area in a clean and safe condition at all times, and shall properly dispose of
all trash generated by the operation.
   (4)   If an enclosure wall or fence is provided for the outdoor customer
dining area, it shall include appropriate relief elements to break up a
monotonous, linear appearance. Said enclosure wall or fence shall complement
the design, scale, colors and materials of the adjacent building.
   (5)   The height of any solid or predominantly solid portion of an enclosure
wall or fence for an outdoor customer dining area shall not exceed thirty (30")
inches. Materials which allow visual access, such as glass or wrought-iron
fencing, may extend above this height; provided, that the overall height of
said enclosure wall, measured from the exterior grade facing public rights-of-
way, shall not exceed sixty (60") inches. However, any solid or predominantly
solid portion of an enclosure wall or fence in excess of thirty (30") inches in
height shall be set back a minimum of ten (10') feet from the street frontage
property line.
   (6)   No identification or advertisement signs shall be allowed on any walls
or fencing enclosing an outdoor customer dining area.
   (7)   Dining establishments that serve alcoholic beverages in an outdoor
customer dining area shall comply with all regulations of the State of
California Alcoholic Beverage Control Board, and of other state and local
agencies with jurisdiction.
   (8)   Establishments with outdoor customer dining areas shall comply with
all requirements of the Health Department of the County of Ventura and any
other applicable health regulations.
   (d)   Limited encroachment of restaurant outdoor customer dining areas
within the required landscape setbacks may be permitted if all requirements set
forth in Sections
9-4.2523 (a), (b) and (c) are met and the outdoor customer dining areas comply
with specific guidelines for location and aesthetic design, as follows:
   (1)   A landscaped setback shall be provided, averaging not less than ten
(10') feet in width from the outside edge of the outdoor customer dining area
to any property line abutting a public street and to provide access from the
public sidewalk to the dining area that is designed to meet physically
challenged accessibility requirements. Up to fifty (50%) percent of an outdoor
dining area may encroach into the required ten (10') foot landscape setback
along a public street, when matched by an equivalent recess (measured along the
total enclosed dining area fronting the public street), if: (1) lines of sight
along the public street are not impaired, and (2) the required landscape
portion of the setback area is not utilized for non-landscape purposes.
   (2)   A landscaped setback shall be provided, measuring not less than four
(4') feet in width from the outside edge of the outdoor customer dining area
and/or its enclosure wall or fence, in connection with subsection (d)(1) of
this section, to any driveway, parking spaces or other areas used by motor
vehicles. Said required minimum width shall be exclusive of any curbs,
sidewalks or other hardscape features. This requirement shall also be provided
where an existing interior landscaped or parking area is being converted to an
outdoor dining use, but does not apply to outdoor dining areas located within
existing walkways that are adjacent to interior driveways and/or parking spaces
within commercial projects.
   (3)   Existing trees within a landscaped area which is proposed to be
converted to an outdoor customer dining area shall either be preserved and
integrated into the design of the area, or transplanted to a location within or
adjacent to the area. Transplanting shall only be allowed for trees which will
survive the transplanting process and survive in good health in the new
location.
(§ 2, Ord. 1211-NS, eff. May 24, 1994, as amended by §§ 3, 4, Ord. 1248-NS,
eff. January 9, 1996)
Sec. 9-4.2524. Residential Sports Facilities.
   (a)   Intent and purpose. The intent and purpose of this section is to
define what type of sports facilities installed in conjunction with single
family residences are permitted within the City of Thousand Oaks and what
design guidelines and limitations are imposed for such facilities. Section
9-4.202 of the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code provides a definition for such
facilities.
   (b)   Permitted: Conditions and limitations. Residential Sports Facilities
may be installed as an accessory use in single-family residential zones if a
Precise Plan of Design application has been approved as provided by Article 18
of this chapter, subject to the following installation standards:
   (1)   Lighting. The use of lighting must be integrally designed as part of
the built environment and should reflect a balance of the lighting needs for
the sports facility and surrounding nighttime characteristics of the community.
Lighting should be designed to minimize glare and light spillover and maximize
energy conservation. Full cut-off fixtures, reduced mounting heights, and the
use of shielding should be utilized to effectively control glare and light
trespass. Photometric plans are required with all applications requesting
exterior sports facility lighting.
      (i)   Installation. Maximum height of any light standard shall be
fourteen (14'0") feet. Low pressure sodium and mercury vapor lamps are
prohibited.
   (2)   Enclosed fencing. No fence or other enclosure of the residential
sports facility shall be higher than twelve (12'0") feet as measured from the
higher adjacent finished grade. Enclosures shall be constructed of dark
plastic-coated wire. Residential sports facilities may require screening as
determined through the Precise Plan of Design process. Batting cages may have a
maximum height of fourteen (14'0") feet.
   (3)   Colors and materials. Earthtone hues are encouraged. The final
approval of specific colors and materials will be subject to the Precise Plan
of Design (PPD) approval.
   (4)   Setbacks. Each facility shall maintain a minimum setback prescribed
for the zone and type of lot specified for accessory buildings.
   (5)   Residential sports facilities shall not be used for commercial
purposes.
(§5, Ord. 1486-NS, eff. October 11, 2007)
Sec. 9-4.2525. Emergency Shelters.
   Emergency shelters shall be subject to the following special standards:
   (a)   One off-street automobile parking space shall be provided per staff
person during the largest shift.
   (b)   Bicycle racks shall be provided.
   (c)   A client intake area shall be provided at the building entrance and
shall include a service counter and a reception area with seating and work
space.
   (d)   No emergency shelter shall be located less than three hundred (300')
feet from another emergency shelter.
   (e)   Each emergency shelter shall provide on-site management at all times
while the shelter remains open, consisting of a minimum of one staff person per
fifteen (15) clients that enforces and complies with the following
requirements:
   (1)   Shelter staff shall receive training in emergency evacuation
procedures, shelter operating procedures, first-aid and non-violent crisis
intervention.
   (2)   Shelter clients shall be provided with clean sanitary beds and
sanitation facilities, including toilets, showers, bedding, soap, towels and
toilet tissue.
   (3)   Laundry facilities shall be provided for clients to wash their clothes
or shelter staff shall help clients make arrangements for laundry services.
   (4)   According to their needs, clients shall be referred to appropriate
medical, psychiatric, housing, educational, social and nutritional services.
   (5)   No individual shall be denied shelter because of an inability to pay.
   (6)   Shelter rules shall be posted and made known to all clients.
   (7)   Management shall establish and enforce rules prohibiting the use of
alcohol, illegal use of controlled substances, violent or illegal behavior.
   (8)   Management shall maintain an attendance log to document the
demographic characteristics of the clients served and provide an annual report
to the City describing the demographics of shelter users and the services
provided.
   (9)   Management shall remove any litter in the vicinity attributable to use
of the shelter within 48 hours.
   (10)   No items, including, but not limited to, possessions brought to the
shelter by clients, shall be stored outdoors.
   (11)   Except for low-barrier navigation centers, the length of stay for any
shelter resident shall not exceed six (6) months.
   (12)   No pets shall be allowed in the shelter unless separate indoor kennel
facilities are provided for pets.
   (13)   Each shelter shall provide an outdoor smoking area(s) on the
premises.
   (f)   Each shelter shall provide the following basic security measures:
   (1)   Entrances and exits shall be clearly marked and well-lighted.
   (2)   Adequate external and internal security lighting shall be provided.
   (3)   Individual lockers shall be provided to allow clients to secure their
private possessions while using the shelter.
   (4)   Separate sleeping areas shall be provided for men, women and families.
   (5)   Separate bathing facilities shall be provided for men and women.
   (6)   No person shall be allowed to camp on the premises or sleep on the
premises outside of the shelter building.
(§ 30, Ord. 1547-NS, eff. January 12, 2011; § 3, Ord. 1730-NS, eff. May 24,
2024; § 5, Ord. 1733-NS, eff. January 3, 2025)
Sec. 9-4.2526. Reasonable accommodations for persons with disabilities.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide a procedure for
allowing reasonable accommodations in the application of land use, zoning and
building regulations, policies and procedures for persons with disabilities
seeking equal access to housing under the Federal Fair Housing Act and the
California Fair Employment and Housing Act.
   (b)   Applicability. A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by
any person with a disability or a developer of housing for people with
disabilities, when the application of a land use, zoning or building
regulation, policy or practice acts as a barrier to fair housing opportunities.
A person with a disability is a person who has a mental or physical disability
as defined in Section 12926 of the Government Code (California Fair Employment
and Housing Act).
   (c)   Application Requirements. A request for a reasonable accommodation
shall be submitted on an application form provided by the Community Development
Department, or in a letter to the Director of Community Development, containing
the following information:
   (1)   The applicant's name, address and telephone number.
   (2)   Address of the property for which the request is being made.
   (3)   The current use of the property.
   (4)   The basis for the claim that the individual is considered disabled and
any information pertaining to that claim that the applicant considers to be
confidential and not available for public inspection.
   (5)   The regulation, policy or practice for which a reasonable
accommodation is being requested.
   (6)   The reason that the reasonable accommodation is necessary for the
person with the disability to use the property.
   (7)   If the project for which the request for reasonable accommodation is
being made requires some other discretionary approval (including, but not
limited to, a precise plan of design), the applicant may file the request for
concurrent review with the other application for discretionary approval.
   (d)   Review Authority.
   (1)   A request for reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed by the
Community Development Director, or designee, if no approval is sought other
than the reasonable accommodation. The Community Development Director, or
designee, shall grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for
reasonable accommodation within 45 days of receiving a complete application.
   (2)   A request for a reasonable accommodation submitted for concurrent
review with another discretionary application shall be reviewed by the
authority reviewing the other discretionary application. The review authority
shall grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for a reasonable
accommodation concurrently with the decision on the other discretionary
application.
   (e)   Findings and Conditions of Approval.
   (1)   Findings. The written decision to grant a request for reasonable
accommodation shall be based on consideration of the following findings:
   (i)   That the housing which is the subject of the request will be used by a
person with disabilities;
   (ii)   That the request is necessary to make the housing which is the
subject of the request available to a person with a disability;
   (iii)   That the request would not impose an undue financial or
administrative burden on the City;
   (iv)   That the request would not require a fundamental alteration in the
nature of a City program or law, including but not limited to land use and
zoning; and
   (v)   That there is no alternative reasonable accommodation that would be
less at variance with City standards.
   (2)   Conditions of Approval. In granting a request for reasonable
accommodation, the reviewing authority may impose any conditions of approval
deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the reasonable accommodation
complies with the required findings.
   (f)   Appeals. A determination to grant or deny a request for reasonable
accommodation by the Community Development Director may be appealed to the
Planning Commission in compliance with Section
9-4.2807 (b) and (c) and a determination by the Planning Commission may be
appealed to City Council in compliance with Section
9-4.2808 of this chapter.
(§ 31, Ord. 1547-NS, eff. January 12, 2011)
Sec. 9-4.2527. Transitional and Supportive Housing.
   Transitional and supportive housing shall be considered a residential use of
property and be subject only to the restrictions that apply to other
residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone.
   Pursuant to Government Code Sections 65650 through 65656, Supportive housing
shall be a use by right in zones where multifamily and mixed uses are
permitted, including nonresidential zones permitting multifamily uses, if the
proposed housing development satisfies all of the following requirements:
   (a)   Units within the development are subject to a recorded affordability
restriction for 55 years.
   (b)   One hundred percent of the units, excluding managers’ units, within
the development are restricted to lower income households and are or will be
receiving public funding to ensure affordability of the housing to lower income
Californians. For purposes of this paragraph, “lower income households” has the
same meaning as defined in Section 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code. The
rents in the development shall be set at an amount consistent with the rent
limits stipulated by the public program providing financing for the
development.
   (c)   At least 25 percent of the units in the development or 12 units,
whichever is greater, are restricted to residents in supportive housing who
meet criteria of the target population. If the development consists of fewer
than 12 units, then 100 percent of the units, excluding managers’ units, in the
development shall be restricted to residents in supportive housing.
   (d)   The developer provides the planning agency with the information
required by Government Code Section 65652.
   (e)   Nonresidential floor area shall be used for onsite supportive services
in the following amounts:
      (1)   For a development with 20 or fewer total units, at least 90 square
feet shall be provided for onsite supportive services.
      (2)   For a development with more than 20 units, at least 3 percent of
the total nonresidential floor area shall be provided for onsite supportive
services that are limited to tenant use, including, but not limited to,
community rooms, case management offices, computer rooms, and community
kitchens.
   (f)   The developer replaces any dwelling units on the site of the
supportive housing development in the manner provided in paragraph (3) of
subdivision (c) of Government Code Section 65915.
   (g)   Units within the development, excluding managers’ units, include at
least one bathroom and a kitchen or other cooking facilities, including, at
minimum, a stovetop, a sink, and a refrigerator.
(§ 32, Ord. 1547-NS, eff. January 12, 2011; as amended by § 6, Ord. 1733-NS,
eff. January 3, 2025)
Sec. 9-4.2528. Self-storage facilities.
   (a)   Intent and purpose. The intent and purpose of this section is to
define where a self-storage facility may be permitted within the City of
Thousand Oaks and to provide development requirements, design guidelines, and
operational standards and limitations imposed for such facilities. Section
9-4.202 of the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code provides a definition for such
facilities.
   (b)   Permitted: Conditions and limitations. Self-storage facilities may be
a primary use in the M-1 and M-2 zones if a Special Use Permit application has
been approved by the Planning Commission and as provided by Article 18 of this
chapter. The physical building the self-storage facility use is located within
is subject to the prescribed zoning district standards and permitting process,
unless otherwise stated in the following standards:
   (1)   Zoning Designation. Self-Storage facilities are only allowed in the M-
1 and M-2 zones with the approval of a Special Use Permit.
   (i)   Distance standards. Self-storage facilities are prohibited to be
located within 1,000 feet of Route 101 Freeway or Route 23 Freeway, and within
500 feet of any arterial roads as measured from the nearest property lines and/
or easement boundaries for roadway purposes, whichever provides the greater
distance. If any portion of a parcel is located within these linear distances,
the whole of the subject lot is prohibited from containing a self-storage
facility.
   (ii)   Minimum lot size. Minimum lot size is 20,000 square feet.
   (iii)   Maximum lot size. Maximum lot size is two (2) acres (87,120 square
feet).
   (iv)   Setbacks. Each facility shall maintain a minimum setback as
prescribed for the zone and lot type provided in Article 25, sections
9-4.2504, 2505, 2508, except as follows:
   aa.   Setbacks, Front: If ground floor office, retail, restaurant, and or
caretaker unit is provided along the entire front of the structure on the
street frontage, then the following standards shall apply:
   i.   M-1: minimum of 100 feet from the centerline of the public street.
   ii.   M-2: Ten (10’) feet. For structures exceeding 30 feet in height, an
additional one (1’) foot for each two (2) feet in height is required.
   bb.   If the above-mentioned ground floor uses are not provided, the
building must be placed behind another building on the same parcel with a
minimum setback of one hundred (100') feet from the property line along the
street frontage.
   (v)   Maximum height. Thirty-five (35’) feet in height.
   (2)   Architectural Standards. Self-storage facilities shall comply with the
following design standards:
   (i)   Single uninterrupted wall panes shall be softened with the use of
staggering vertical walls a minimum of six (6”) inches, roof overhangs designed
for solar shading, and deep reveals at construction joints.
   (ii)   360-degree building architecture is required. The buildings shall
adhere to the City of Thousand Oaks adopted Design Guidelines for Commercial
Development Projects and Industrial Projects, which may be amended from time to
time.
   (iii)   Colors and materials. Contrasting colors, patterns, textures and
finishes shall be used to add variety and interest to structures.
   aa.   Muted earth tone colors (such as off-white, ochre, sienna, umber,
beige, tan, brown, or other similar subdued colors) are required for primary
building surfaces. Richer color accents may be used on limited architectural
elements, such as, covered entries, window awnings and solar shading elements,
and fascia elements, but not tower elements.
   bb.   Materials. A maximum of four exterior building materials are
permitted. Materials such as masonry, brick, concrete, or wood can be combined
to attractively define scale.
   (iv)   Windows and Doors. Window configurations shall be compatible with the
design of the building. Recessed openings shall be used to provide contrast by
varying patterns of shades, sunlight, and depth. Storefront glass systems are
required for the office, retail, and restaurant spaces if they are provided.
Regular intervals of glazing is required on the remainder of the building
fronting the public right-of-way. No spandrel glass to be used on the
building’s exterior façade.
   aa.   Entrances and access.
   i.   Pedestrian friendly elements, such as trellises, pergolas or landscaped
allées in parking areas leading to the main entrance and along the building
fronting the public right-of-way are required.
   ii.   Self-storage facilities shall not have individual entrances to storage
units accessible from the exterior of the building. Access to self-storage
units shall be from enclosed interior corridors, except self-storage units for
the storage of motorcycles, automobiles, or recreation vehicles which are
accessed by a 26-foot-wide drive-aisle with adequate circulation for fire
engines to access each ground level unit. Exterior access for storage units for
motorcycles, automobiles, or recreation vehicles are to be fully screened by
the building from the street.
   (v)   A dedicated covered loading zone located at building entrances
connected to the interior corridors measuring twelve (12’) feet wide by twenty
(20’) feet deep and fourteen (14’) feet clear is required for each 10,000
square feet of gross floor area and must be screened from the public right-of-
way.
   (vi)   Elevators, lifts, or ramps are required for all self-storage
facilities which are two-stories or taller.
   (vii)   Roofs. A variety of roof shapes and forms shall be utilized to add
character and diversity. Appearance of roofs shall be improved with the use of
steeper roof slopes and integrated fascias, darker colors, concealed fasteners,
and other treatments.
   (viii)   Mechanical equipment. Mechanical equipment shall be located on the
rooftop screened with parapet walls, mechanical recesses, or other means.
   (ix)   Landscaping. Landscaping shall minimize the visual dominance and
break the visual continuity of the surface parking areas, shall compliment on-
site pedestrian circulation and amenities, and serve to moderate pavement
temperature.
   (x)   Screening of parking areas. Parking areas shall be screened from the
public right-of-way. Screening may include decorative walls, landscaped berms,
shrubs, trees, and other landscaping or other screening methods as deemed
appropriate by the Community Development Director.
   (3)   Operational Standards. Self-storage facilities shall include the
following operational standards:
   (i)   Individual Rental Storage Unit. No individual rental storage space
shall exceed five hundred (500) square feet.
   (ii)   Climate controlled. All self-storage units shall be individually
climate controlled and maintained at a temperature of 55 to 80 degrees
Fahrenheit, and 50% to 55% humidity.
   (iii)   Lighting. The use of lighting must be integrally designed as part of
the built environment and should reflect a balance of the lighting needs for
the self-storage facility and surrounding nighttime characteristics of the
community.
   aa.   Lighting should be designed to minimize glare and light spillover and
maximize energy conservation.
   bb.   Full cut-off fixtures reduced mounting heights, and the use of
shielding should be utilized to effectively control glare and light trespass.
   cc.   Maximum height of any light standard shall be fourteen (14’) feet.
   dd.   Low pressure sodium and mercury vapor lamps are prohibited.
   ee.   Photometric plans are required with all applications requesting self-
storage facility lighting.
   (iv)   Backup power. Each self-storage facility shall be equipped with a
back-up generator or photovoltaic and battery system capable of powering the
entire facility for a minimum period of 12 hours.
   (v)   Security Features. Prior to commencing the self-storage facility
operation, the facility shall install automatic pedestrian and vehicle gates
with electronic access. Additionally, individual door alarms, surveillance
cameras and monitoring stations shall be installed unless a caretaker unit is
included within the self-storage facility as specified below in subdivision 9-
4.2528(b)(5).
   aa.   Pedestrian and vehicle gates shall be architecturally compatible with
the structure as determined by the Community Development Director. The location
and operation of the gates shall not interfere with the pedestrian and vehicle
movement in the public right-of-way as determined by the Public Works Director.
Access to open the gates must be provided in accordance with emergency services
requirements.
   bb.   Unless a caretaker unit is included within the self-storage facility,
door alarms, surveillance cameras and monitoring station systems shall be
installed and maintained at a reasonable industry standard and shall be
operated 24-hours a day to monitor, at a minimum, the entrances and exits, any
centralized point of sale and areas immediately surrounding the exterior of the
business. Specifics of the systems, and any upgrades to the systems, shall be
developed by the applicant in consultation with and approved by the City’s
Police Department.
   (4)   Mixed Use. For parcels that front onto a public street, mixed uses of
office, retail, restaurant, and or caretaker uses are optional on the ground-
floor along the entire frontage of the building. If street-level nonresidential
uses are provided, they shall occupy the street level floor area for a minimum
depth of twenty (20’) feet.
   (5)   Caretaker Unit. A self-storage facility shall either provide 1) one
on-site caretaker unit for one or more persons employed by and residing at the
self-storage facility, or 2) provide security features as specified above in
subdivision
9-4.2528(b)(3)(v)(bb). If a caretaker unit is provided, the following standards
shall apply:
   (i)   The caretaker unit shall have individual entrances, directly
accessible to the exterior of the self-storage facility structure and placed in
a location nearest the public-right-of-way within the self-storage facility
building. The caretaker unit is not required to have direct access to the
management office.
   (ii)   An annual affidavit shall be submitted to the Community Development
Director, which states that the unit is occupied by one or more persons
employed by the self-storage facility, the number of people living in the unit,
and the annual rental rate of the caretaker unit.
   (iii)   Occupancy of the caretaker unit shall be contingent upon the
continual operation of the self-storage facility; and the caretakers unit use
shall immediately cease if the storage facility ceases its operation.
   (6)   Accessory Uses. Accessory exterior storage within secured
transportable units shall be confined to the area to the rear of the principal
building, or the rear two-thirds of the property, whichever is more
restrictive. The units shall be placed on hardscape material and be screened
from view from any property line by appropriate walls, fencing, earth mounds,
or landscaping. Exterior storage shall not displace required parking or
landscaping.
   (7)   Prohibitions.
   (i)   The following are prohibited in a self-storage unit:
   aa.   Habitation.
   bb.   Storage of toxic or hazardous materials.
   cc.   Sale or distribution of stored goods.
   dd.   Operation of any business.
   (ii)   The following are prohibited from a self-storage operation:
   a.   Truck rental and the exterior storage of recreational vehicles and
boats is prohibited from and on the property.
   (8)   Existing Self-storage Facilities.
   (i)   Existing Uses deemed approved.
   aa.   All permitted legal nonconforming self-storage facilities in existence
and lawfully operating in the city immediately prior to the effective date of
this Section shall be considered a “deemed approved” self-storage facility.
   bb.   A deemed approved facility may continue to lawfully operate consistent
with issued permits.
   cc.   Either a one-time interior expansion or one-time exterior addition to
a deemed approved facility can be processed in conformance with the standards
set forth in Section
9-4.2702 Nonconforming Buildings and Uses; except as specified herein as
identified in this paragraph and below in subdivisions (1) and (2). Any
interior expansion or exterior addition of square footage to a deemed approved
facility shall require the deemed approved facility to provide related parking.
Any interior expansion or exterior addition of square footage to a deemed
approved facility may provide mixed uses as specified above in subdivision 9-
4.2528(b)(4). Any addition of square footage to a deemed approved facility
shall either provide 1) a caretaker unit as specified above in subdivision 9-
4.2528(b)(5) or 2) provide security features as specified above in subdivision
9-4.2528(b)(3)(v)(bb). The onetime interior expansion shall be required to
implement all of the Operational Standards to and within the expansion and may
upgrade the entire deemed approved facility to be in compliance with the
Architectural and Operational standards. The one-time exterior addition shall
be required to implement all of the Architectural and Operational Standards to
and within the addition and may upgrade the entire deemed approved facility to
be in compliance with the Architectural and Operational standards.
   (1)   The one-time interior expansion is not to exceed the existing building
footprint and may not expand beyond the parcel boundaries existing as of the
effective date of this Section; or
   (2)   A one-time exterior addition to the deemed approved facility is not to
exceed the lesser of ten (10%) percent of the existing gross building floor
area, or eight thousand (8,000) square feet. The one-time exterior addition may
not expand beyond the parcel boundaries existing as of the effective date of
this Section.
   dd.   Any discontinuance of a deemed approved facility for six or more
months shall be deemed abandoned and require approval of a new Special Use
Permit and a Development Permit or Minor Modification in compliance with this
Chapter.
   ee.   If any deemed approved facility or use is demolished or destroyed
involuntarily by an explosion, flood, fire, tornado, hurricane or any other
natural occurrence, any new building or structure on the premises for the
deemed approved use may be constructed according to the zoning standards and
requirements existing at the time the demolished structures were originally
constructed if an application for the reconstruction is submitted within twelve
(12) months from the date of the involuntary demolition or destruction. Failure
to submit an application for the reconstruction as specified above shall result
in deemed approved facility to be abandoned, and new development shall conform
to the provisions of Title 9 of this Code.
(§ 1, Ord. 1706-NS, eff. December 2, 2022)
Sec. 9-4.2529 Replacement housing requirements and occupant protections.
   This section shall apply only to housing development projects that: (1) on
or after January 1, 2022, but before January 1, 2030, submit a complete
application or a complete set of building plans for plan check and permit to
the Community Development Department, along with any associated submittal fee;
or (2) on or after the effective date of this section, receive an approval of a
complete application that was submitted to the Community Development Department
on or after January 1, 2020, but before January 1, 2022. This section does not
apply to a housing development project that submitted a complete application to
the Community Development Department before January 1, 2020.
   Replacement requirements and occupant protections:
   (a)   The City shall not approve or issue a building permit for a housing
development project that will require the demolition of one or more residential
dwelling units unless the project will
create at least as many residential dwelling units of equivalent size as will
be demolished.
   (b)   The City shall not approve or issue a building permit for a housing
development project that will require the demolition of occupied or vacant
protected units, unless the housing development project meets all of the
requirements of California Government Code Section 66300(d).
   (c)   The following words and phrases, whenever used in this section, shall
be defined as the following:
   “Complete application” refers to a complete application pursuant to Section
65943 of the California Government Code.
   “Equivalent size” means that the replacement units contain at least the same
total number of bedrooms as the units being replaced.
   “Housing development project” shall have the same meaning as defined in
paragraph (3) of subdivision (b) of Section 65905.5 of the California
Government Code, however, shall not include a housing development project
located within a very high fire hazard severity zone.
   “Protected units” has the same meaning as set forth in California Government
Code Section 66300(d)(2).
   “Very high fire severity zone” has the same meaning as provided in
California Government Code Section 51177.
   (d)   Inclusionary housing or density bonus. Affordable replacement units
required by this section may count toward any affordable housing set-aside
units required in connection with the granting of a density bonus, or the
requirements of the City's inclusionary housing program, if applicable.
   (e)   The affordable replacement units shall be subject to a recorded
affordability housing agreement consistent with Section 9-10.601 of the
Thousand Oaks Municipal Code.
   (f)   This section shall remain effective despite the possible expiration of
Government Code Section 66300.
   (g)   A housing development project that submits a preliminary application
pursuant to Section 65941.1 of the California Government Code before January 1,
2030, remains subject to this section after January 1, 2030.
(§ 6, Ord. 1726-NS, eff. April 26, 2024)
Article 26. Community Park and Recreational Facilities*
*   Sections 9-4.2602 through 9-4.2609, codified from Section 8160.14,
T.O.O.C., as renumbered by Section XIV, Ordinance No. 173-NS, effective
November 5, 1970, repealed by Section III, Ordinance No. 238-NS, effective
November 4, 1971.
Sec. 9-4.2601. Purpose.
   To require subdividers to provide for parks, recreational facilities, and
open space areas for the health, safety, and general welfare of future
residents and owners of their property and to encourage the orderly development
of the City, the Commission shall, in the manner set forth in this chapter and
in Article 6 of Chapter 3 (Subdivisions) of this title, require the dedication
of land, the payment of fees, or both for park and recreational purposes as a
condition of residential development permit (R-P-D, H-P-D, and T-P-D)
approvals.
(§ 8160.14, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5,
1970, as amended by § II, Ord. 238-NS, eff. November 4, 1971, and § II, Ord.
376-NS, eff. May 31, 1973)
Sec. 9-4.2602. Residential developers to provide park recreational facilities.
   Every residential developer who develops land in the R-A, R-E, R-O, R-1, R-
P-D, H-P-D, and T-P-D Zones shall dedicate a portion of such land, pay a fee,
or do both for the purpose of providing park and recreational facilities to
serve the future residents of the project. Residential developments not covered
under the provisions of Article 6 of Chapter 3 (Subdivisions) of this title
shall, as a condition of the development permit, dedicate land, pay a fee, or
both for park and recreational purposes as set forth in Sections
9-4.2603 through
9-4.2611 of this article.
(§ III, Ord. 376-NS, eff. May 31, 1973)
Sec. 9-4.2603. Application of article provisions.
   The provisions of this article shall apply to all residential developments
in the R-P-D, H-P-D, and T-P-D Zones not covered under the provisions of
Article 6 of Chapter 3 (Subdivisions) of this title, except for R-P-D, H-P-D,
and T-P-D permit applications filed on or before June 30, 1973.
(§ III, Ord. 376-NS, eff. May 31, 1973)
Sec. 9-4.2604. Relation of land required to population density.
   It is hereby found and determined:
   (a)   That the public interest, convenience, health, welfare, and safety
require that the following acreage for each one thousand (1,000) persons
residing within the City be devoted to park and recreational purposes:
   (1)   Five (5) acres of neighborhood park lands;
   (2)   Two (2) acres of playfields; and
   (3)   Two (2) acres of community park lands;
   (b)   That one-half (1/2) of such requirements will be satisfied in part by
the City, the Conejo Recreation and Park District, and local school districts;
   (c)   That the remaining one-half (1/2) of such requirements amounting to
two and one-half (21/2) acres of neighborhood park lands, one (1) acre of
playfields, and one (1) acre of community park lands shall be supplied by
developers under the requirements of this article.
( §III, Ord. 376-NS, eff. May 31, 1973)
Sec. 9-4.2605. Determination of population density.
   Population density, for the purposes of this article, shall be determined in
accordance with the following standards, to-wit:
   (a)   Single-family detached dwellings = 3.8 persons per dwelling unit:
   (b)   Single-family attached dwellings less than, or equal to, seven (7)
units per net acre density = 2.8 persons per dwelling unit;
   (c)   Condominiums and other attached dwellings, other than apartments, over
seven (7) units per net acre = 2.4 persons per dwelling unit;
   (d)   Apartments = 2.0 persons per dwelling unit; and
   (e)   Mobile homes = 1.75 persons per dwelling unit.
   The basis for determining the total number of dwelling units shall be the
number of such units permitted by the City on the property included in the
proposed residential development at the time the R-P-D, H-P-D, or T-P-D permit
application is approved by the City.
(§ III, Ord. 376-NS, eff. May 31, 1973)
Sec. 9-4.2606. Amount of land to be dedicated.
   The minimum amount of land to be dedicated by a developer pursuant to the
provisions of this section shall be based on the gross area within the R-P-D,
H-P-D, or T-P-D permit boundaries and determined by the following formula:
 
Density Formula
Net Density Percentage of Gross Area for Park Purposes
            Detached Homes Townhouses and Condominiums Apartments Trailers
Density Formula
Net Density Percentage of Gross Area for Park Purposes
            Detached Homes Townhouses and Condominiums Apartments Trailers
1 du/ac     1.37%          1.00%                       .72%       .63%
2 du/ac     2.74%          2.01%                       1.44%      1.26%
3 du/ac     4.10%          3.02%                       2.16%      1.89%
4 du/ac     5.47%          4.03%                       2.88%      2.52%
5 du/ac     6.84%          5.04%                       3.60%      3.15%
6 du/ac     8.21%          6.04%                       4.32%      3.78%
7 du/ac     9.58%          7.05%                       5.04%      4.41%
8 du/ac     10.94%         7.05%                       5.76%      5.04%
9 du/ac     12.31%         7.77%                       6.48%      5.67%
10 du/ac    13.68%         8.64%                       7.20%      6.30%
11 du/ac    15.04%         9.50%                       7.92%      6.93%
12 du/ac    16.41%         10.36%                      8.64%      7.56%
13 du/ac                   11.23%                      9.36%      8.19%
14 du/ac                   12.09%                      10.08%     8.82%
15 du/ac                   12.96%                      10.80%     9.45%
16 du/ac                   13.82%                      11.52%     10.08%
17 du/ac                   14.68%                      12.24%     10.71%
18 du/ac                   15.55%                      12.96%     11.34%
19 du/ac                   16.41%                      13.68%     11.97%
20 du/ac                   17.28%                      14.40%     12.60%
21 du/ac                   18.14%                      15.12%
22 du/ac                   19.00%                      15.84%
23 du/ac                   19.87%                      16.56%
24 du/ac                   20.73%                      17.28%
25 du/ac                   21.60%                      18.00%
26 du/ac                   22.46%                      18.72%
28 du/ac                   24.19%                      20.16%
29 du/ac                   25.05%                      20.88%
30 du/ac                   25.92%                      21.60%
 
(§ III, Ord. 376-NS, eff. May 31, 1973, as amended by § II, Ord. 403-NS, eff.
August 14, 1973)
Sec. 9-4.2607. Amount of fees in lieu of land dedication.
   Where a fee is required to be paid in lieu of land dedication, the amount of
such fee shall be based upon the fair market value of the amount of land which
would otherwise be required to be dedicated pursuant to the provisions of
Section
9-4.2606 of this article. The amount of such fee shall be a sum equal to the
fair market value of the amount of land, including full street improvements,
either dedicated or to be maintained by a property owner, that would otherwise
be required to be dedicated pursuant to the provisions of Section
9-4.2606 of this article. The fee shall be calculated by multiplying the
applicable percentage from the Density Formula set forth in Section
9-4.2606 of this article by the total gross acreage and, in turn, multiplying
this product by the fair market value per acre and including the actual cost
for the full street improvements; however, where a permit includes a Primary or
controlled access Secondary Highway as designated on the Circulation Element of
the General Plan, the land area and actual costs for street improvements in
excess of the design standards for a collector street shall not be included in
this fee calculation.
   The fair market value shall be determined prior to the issuance of the
building permit for R-P-D and H-P-D projects and the certificate of occupancy
for T-P-D projects in accordance with the following:
   (a)   The fair market value shall be determined by the application of
accepted assessment practices, and the initial determination may be based upon
the current assessed value, modified equal to market value, in accordance with
the standards established by the current practices of the County Assessor; or
   (b)   If either the City or the developer objects to such evaluation, either
party may, at the developer’s expense, obtain an appraisal of the property by a
neutral qualified real estate appraiser approved by the City, which appraisal
shall be considered in addition to the provisions of subsection (a) of this
section by the Council in reaching its decision as to fair market value; or
   (c)   The City and the developer may agree to the fair market value.
(§ III, Ord. 376-NS, eff. May 31, 1973, as amended by § II, Ord. 405-NS, eff.
September 13, 1973)
Sec. 9-4.2608. Credit for private open space.
   Where private open space for park and recreation purposes is provided in a
proposed development and such space is to be privately owned and maintained by
the future residents of the property, such areas may be credited against the
requirement of dedication for park and recreation purposes, as set forth in
Section
9-4.2606 of this article, or the payment of fees in lieu thereof, as set forth
in Section
9-4.2607 of this article, provided the Commission finds it is in the public
interests to do so and the following standards are met:
   (a)   That yards, court areas, setbacks, and other open areas required to be
maintained by the zoning and building provisions of this Code shall not be
included in the computation of such private open space; and
   (b)   That the private ownership and maintenance of the open space is
adequately provided for by written agreement; and
   (c)   That the use of the private open space is restricted for park and
recreational purposes by recorded covenants which run with the land in favor of
the future owners of the property within the development and which cannot be
defeated or eliminated without the consent of the Commission; and
   (d)   That the proposed private open space is reasonably adaptable for use
for park and recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors as
size, shape, topography, geology, access, and the location of the private open
space land; and
   (e)   That facilities proposed for the open space are in substantial
accordance with the provisions of the Recreation Element of the General Plan
and are approved by the Commission.
   The Council, upon a recommendation of the Commission, shall adopt more
specific guidelines and standards to be utilized in determining the actual
percentage of credit that may be given for private park and recreational
facilities in any proposed development. Such guidelines and standards shall be
adopted as a resolution by the Council, upon a recommendation by the
Commission, only after a public hearing, noticed and conducted in the manner
required for zone changes, in accordance with the provisions of Article 29 of
this chapter.
(§ III, Ord. 376-NS, eff. May 31, 1973)
Sec. 9-4.2609. Choice of dedication of land or payment of fees or both.
   (a)   Procedure. The procedure for determining whether the developer is to
dedicate land, pay a fee, or both shall be as follows:
   (1)   Determination by the developer. At the time of filing an R-P-D, H-P-D,
or T-P-D permit application for approval, the owner of the property shall, as a
part of the filing, indicate whether he desires to dedicate property for park
and recreational purposes or whether he desires to pay a fee in lieu thereof.
If he desires to dedicate land for this purpose, he shall designate the area
thereof on the plot plan as submitted.
   (2)   Action of the City. At the time of an R-P-D, H-P-D, or T-P-D permit
approval, the Commission or the Council, upon the advice of the Conejo
Recreation and Park District, shall determine, as a part of such approval,
whether to require a dedication of land within the development, the payment of
a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of both.
   (3)   Prerequisites for the issuance of building permits or certificates of
occupancy for R-P-D, H-P-D, or T-P-D permits. Where dedication or fees are
required, the park property shall be dedicated to, or the fees shall be
deposited with, the Conejo Recreation and Park District, or to the City if the
District does not have any jurisdiction for the property, prior to the issuance
of the building permit, in the case of R-P-D and H-P-D permits, or the
certificate of occupancy, in the case of T-P-D permits. If the Conejo
Recreation and Park District refuses to accept either the park dedication or
the fees, such dedication shall be conveyed to the City or its assignees and/or
the fees will be held by the City in a trust fund for the Conejo Recreation and
Park District. Open space covenants for private park or recreational facilities
shall be submitted to, and approved by, the City Attorney and Community
Development Director and be recorded prior to the issuance of the building
permit, in the case of R-P-D and H-P-D permits, or the certificate of occupancy
in the case of T-P-D permits.
   (b)   Space determination. Whether the Commission or the Council, upon the
advice of the Conejo Recreation and Park District, accepts the land dedication
or elects to require the payment of fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of
both, shall be determined by consideration of the following:
   (1)   The Recreation Element of the General Plan;
   (2)   The topography, geology, access, and location of the land in the
development available for dedication;
   (3)   The size and shape of the development and the land available for
dedication;
   (4)   The location of existing or proposed park sites and trailways; and
   (5)   The desirability of developing the land proposed for dedication for
park and recreational purposes as determined by a schematic site plan submitted
by the subdivider.
   The determination of the Commission as to whether land shall be dedicated,
or whether a fee shall be charged, or a combination thereof shall be final and
conclusive, except in the case of H-P-D permits, unless appealed to the
Council.
(§ III, Ord. 376-NS, eff. May 31, 1973)
Sec. 9-4.2610. Designation of development time.
   At the time park land is dedicated or fees are paid, the Council, upon the
advice of and written agreement with the Conejo Recreation and Park District,
shall designate the probable time when the development of the park and
recreational facilities shall be commenced and where the specific fees wills be
utilized for park purposes. If such agreement has not been consummated at the
time of the issuance of a building permit, the fees will be held in a trust
fund for the District until the agreement has been adopted by the Council.
(§ III, Ord. 376-NS, eff. May 31, 1973)
Sec. 9-4.2611. Limitations on use of land and fees.
   The land and fees received pursuant to the provisions of this article shall
be used only for the purpose of providing park and recreational facilities to
serve the property for which received, and the location of the land and the
amount of the fees shall bear a reasonable relationship to the use of the park
and recreational facilities by the future inhabitants of the property.
(§ III, Ord. 376-NS, eff. May 31, 1973)
Article 27. Nonconforming Buildings and Uses
Sec. 9-4.2701. Nonconforming uses of land.
   (a)   Abatement of use when no main building is involved. Where no main
buildings are used in connection with the nonconforming use of land, or where
the only buildings used are accessory or incidental to such use, the
nonconforming use of such land shall be discontinued not later than three (3)
years after such use becomes nonconforming, and all uses thereafter shall
conform to the regulations of the applicable zone classification and the
provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   Expansion. A nonconforming use of land shall not be expanded of
extended in any way, either on the same or any adjoining land.
   (c)   Discontinuance or change. The discontinuance of a nonconforming use of
land for more than ninety (90) days shall constitute abandonment and
termination of the nonconforming use, and thereafter the use of the land shall
conform to the regulations of the applicable zone classification. The City
shall provide written notice to property owner that the use is abandoned and
terminated and that future use of the property must conform to the applicable
zoning regulations.
   (d)   Nonconforming keeping of animals. The nonconforming housing, keeping,
pasturing or confining of any animal within territory annexed to the City shall
be terminated within ninety (90) days of the effective date of the annexation,
and keeping of animals shall comply with the applicable City zoning standards
from that time forward.
   (e)   Nonconforming fences. Where no main buildings are used in connection
with the nonconforming use of land, and the nonconforming use is the
construction or maintenance of a fence, such nonconforming use shall be
discontinued not later than ninety (90) days after such use becomes
nonconforming.
(§ 8162.1, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 3, Ord. 94, §20, Ord. 95, renumbered by §
XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, and §§ 6 and 7, Ord. 989-NS, eff.
February 23, 1988, as amended by § 4, Ord. 1108-NS, eff. June 20, 1991, and §
4, Ord. 1230-NS, eff. April 18, 1995)
Sec. 9-4.2702. Nonconforming buildings: Nonresidential.
   (a)   Intent and purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish
regulations pertaining to modifications to existing nonresidential buildings
and structures and their associated on-site improvements which are
nonconforming with respect to existing development standards and regulations.
In general, it is the policy of the City to encourage the continued exterior
upgrading and proper maintenance of nonconforming nonresidential buildings, and
their associated parking areas and facilities. When a modification to a
nonconforming nonresidential building is requested, the City shall require
compliance with current development and zoning standards commensurate with the
extent of improvements proposed to upgrade the building and/or property. This
section establishes graduated improvement requirement for these buildings and
properties, which are subject to the Design Review Requirements set forth in
Article 18 of Title 9 of this Code.
   (b)   General. Except in residential zones and as permitted by State law,
nonconforming nonresidential buildings or structures may be maintained subject
to the following conditions:
   (1)   If any nonconforming building or structure is demolished or destroyed
voluntarily, every building or structure occupying the property thereafter, and
any uses of such buildings, structures, or premises shall conform to the
current standards and requirements of the applicable zone.
   (2)   If any nonconforming building or structure is demolished or destroyed
involuntarily by an explosion, flood, fire, tornado, hurricane or any other
natural occurrence, any new building or structure on the premises may be
constructed according to the zoning standards and requirements existing at the
time the demolished structures were originally constructed.
   (3)   Nothing in this section prohibits or is intended to prohibit
maintenance or repair to the exterior walls or roof of any nonconforming
building, which work does not alter the building’s architectural design or
enlarge the size of the structure.
   (c)   Exterior building upqrading. The addition of exterior architectural
design features to existing nonconforming buildings and structures, with no
expansion of the existing floor area of the building, is permitted subject only
to the review and approval by the City of an Administrative Action (AA)
pursuant to Section
9-4.2805 of this Code. To assure compliance with the City’s architectural
design review guidelines, the following conditions shall be met as conditions
of approval of an Administrative Action (AA):
   (1)   Existing nonconforming zoning aspects of the building and site
improvements may be allowed to continue, but the degree of nonconformance shall
not be increased;
   (2)   Any unpaved parking area in the site serving the building shall be
paved and striped in accordance with the specifications of Article 24 of Title
9 of this Code (off-street parking);
   (3)   All corrective work must be undertaken to remove any existing
deficiencies with respect to Title 8 of this Code (Building Regulations) which
the Building Official and/or his/her designee finds may endanger public safety;
   (4)   Relief from full compliance with the provisions of Article 18 of Title
9 of this Code and the Architectural Design Guidelines referenced therein may
be granted by the Community Development Director as determined necessary to
achieve the general purpose of this chapter.
   (d)   Building additions and/or expansions.
   (1)   A one-time addition or expansion to a nonconforming building not to
exceed the lesser of ten (10%) percent of the existing gross building floor
area, or eight thousand (8,000) square feet, may be approved as a minor
modification to the project’s entitlement by the Community Development
Director. In approving said modification, the Director may waive full
compliance with the Architectural Design Guidelines referenced in Article 18 of
Title 9 of this Code. Furthermore, the following modified standards may be
imposed by the Director on the modification request:
   (i)   Parking. The number of on-site parking spaces may be retained at the
current parking ratio found on the property. Reductions to these pre-existing
parking spaces may be made to facilitate new parking spaces for the physically
challenged and to correct safety, landscaping and site visibility requirements.
In addition, up to one hundred (100%) percent of the spaces may be compact
spaces without the submittal of a special use permit.
   (ii)   New parking. The required number of parking spaces for the new
building additions and/or expansions to a nonconforming building, may be
reduced by ten (10%) percent from the parking requirements set forth in Section
9-4.2902 of this Code.
   (iii)   Building setback, yard area, landscaping. The existing building
setback, yard area, and landscaping may be retained to accommodate building
enlargement to the nonconforming building and may be reduced up to fifty (50%)
percent from the applicable standards. If landscaping setback either existing
or created would be three (3') feet in width or less, then a one hundred (100%)
percent setback reduction could be granted, if such landscaping would be
ineffective in the opinion of the Community Development Director.
   (2)   If the proposed addition and/or expansion to an existing nonconforming
building or structure exceeds the lesser of ten (10%) percent of the total
gross building floor area or eight thousand (8,000) square feet, the proposed
addition and/or expansion shall comply with the currently adopted zoning
standards and zoning requirements, by filing the applicable modification
application to the project’s entitlement.
(§ 8162.2, T.O.O.C., renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970,
as amended by § 1, Ord. 887-NS, eff. April 9, 1985, and § 5, Ord. 1230-NS, eff.
April 18, 1995)
Sec. 9-4.2702.5. Nonconforming buildings: Nonresidential buildings in
redevelopment areas.
(§ 2, Ord. 887-NS, eff. April 9, 1985, as amended by §§ 5, 6, Ord. 1177-NS,
eff. April 27, 1993; repealed by § 6, Ord. 1230-NS, eff. April 18, 1995)
Sec. 9-4.2703. Nonconforming buildings: Residential.
   (a)   If any nonconforming building or structure is demolished or destroyed
voluntarily, such demolished or destroyed structure shall be rehabilitated or
reconstructed pursuant to all current zoning standards and zoning requirements
applicable to that zone.
   (b)   In all residential zones, a nonconforming building or structure which
was designed or intended for a nonresidential use shall be completely removed
or converted to conform to the regulations of the applicable residential zone
within a time prescribed by the Planning Commission and the City Council. It
shall be the purpose of the Commission and the Council to determine the
reasonable unamortized value of such nonconforming building or structure and to
make an allowance of not less than two and one-half (21/2%) percent per annum
of the original cost in determining the date by which such nonconforming
building or structure shall be removed or converted to a conforming status.
   (c)   If any nonconforming building or structure is demolished or destroyed
involuntarily by an explosion, flood, fire, tornado, hurricane or any other
natural occurrence, such demolished or destroyed structures may be
rehabilitated or reconstructed according to the zoning standards and
requirements existing at the time the structures were originally constructed.
If the building or structure was originally constructed prior to incorporation
of the City of Thousand Oaks, the zoning standards in effect during the year of
incorporation (1964) shall apply.
(§ 8162.3, T.O.O.C., renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970,
as amended by § 7, Ord. 1230-NS, eff. April 18, 1995)
*Sec. 9-4.2704. Nonconforming uses of conforming buildings.
   A nonconforming use of a conforming building or structure shall not be
expanded or extended into any other portion of such conforming building or
structure. If such nonconforming use, or portion thereof, is discontinued for
ninety (90) days or more, any subsequent use of the building or structure, or
portion thereof, shall conform to the provisions of Title 9 of this Code.
(§ 8162.5, T.O.O.C., renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970,
as amended by § 8, Ord. 989-NS, eff. February 23, 1988, as renumbered and
amended by § 9, Ord. 1230-NS, eff. April 18, 1995)
*   Section 9-4.2704 entitled “Partially destroyed nonconforming buildings,”
recodified from Section 8162.4, T.O.O.C., renumbered by Section XIV, Ord. 173-
NS, eff. November 5, 1970, as amended by Section 1, Ord. 1166-NS, eff. December
15, 1992, repealed by Section 8, Ord. 1230-NS, eff. April 18, 1995.
Sec. 9-4.2705. Nonconforming uses of nonconforming buildings.
   (a)   The nonconforming use of a nonconforming building or structure shall
not be expanded or extended to portions of such building or structure which
were not in use at the time the use became nonconforming.
   (b)   The nonconforming use of a nonconforming building or structure may be
changed to another use of the same zoning classification
provided no exterior structural alterations are made therein.
   (c)   The nonconforming use of any nonconforming building may be changed to
any use which is permitted in a more restrictive zone, except no residential
use shall be permitted to replace nonconforming uses within commercial or
industrial zones. The sequence of such zones, the first being the most
restrictive and the last being the least restrictive, is as follows: R-1, R-O,
R-E, R-A, R-2, H-P-D, R-P-D, R-3, T-P-D, C-O, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, M-1, and M-2.
   When the zoning use of a nonconforming building is changed to a use which is
permitted in a more restrictive zone, such nonconforming building shall not
thereafter be reoccupied by a use which is permitted only in a less restrictive
zone.
(§ 8162.6, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 14, Ord. 89, and §20, Ord. 126, renumbered
by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, as renumbered and amended by §
10, Ord. 1230-NS, eff. April 18, 1995)
Sec. 9-4.2706. Nonconforming uses of land and buildings.
   Except with regards to the keeping of animals, which shall be regulated by
Section
9-4.2701 of this article, a variance or permit is hereby granted automatically
so as to permit the continuation of the particular existing uses of any
building, structure, improvement or premises existing in the respective zones
immediately prior to January 14, 1965, or whenever any amendment to this code
thereafter becomes effective if such existing use was not then in violation of
the law and the zoning amendment does not provide for a specific abatement
period. Whenever the zone classification is changed, any property being used
pursuant to a variance or permit may be used thereafter in the manner
authorized by such variance or permit as a nonconforming use for the duration
of the variance or permit.
(§ 8162.8, T.O.O.C., renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970,
as amended by § 9, Ord. 989-NS, eff. February 23, 1988, renumbered by § 11,
Ord. 1230-NS, eff. April 18, 1995)
Sec. 9-4.2707. Nonconforming lots.
   Any lot of record, prior to the effective date of an applicable zone
classification on the property, may be used as a building site even though the
lot has less lot area or lot width than the zoning requirements. This use is
authorized provided the owner of such lot does not own, in whole or in part,
any contiguous recorded lot as of March 22, 1973. Whenever two (2) or more
nonconforming lots, or a nonconforming and conforming adjoining lot, are held
in common ownership, the lots shall be merged in order to achieve the required
lot width and area requirements of the underlying zoning in accordance with
Article 1.5 of Chapter 3 of the Subdivision Map Act, commencing with California
Government Code Section 66451.10 and Sections
9-3.1210 through
9-3.1216 of the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code unless otherwise waived through a
variance application or other appropriate procedure. This merger clause shall
not apply to lots in common ownership where any portion of the rear lot lines
of each lot are coterminous and each lot has a separate street frontage. In the
case of lots containing less than the required width of the zone, the side yard
of any building may be reduced to not less than ten (10%) percent of the
average lot width or three (3') feet, whichever is greater, and all other yard
requirements shall be met. Furthermore, the minimum lot width and lot area of
any nonconforming lot to be used as a building site shall not be less than
thirty (30') feet in width or three thousand (3,000) square feet in area.
(§ 8162.7, T.O.O.C., renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970,
amended by § I, Ord. 353-NS, eff. March 22, 1973, § 2, Ord. 974-NS, eff.
September 8, 1987, renumbered by § 11, Ord. 1230-NS, eff. April 18, 1995, as
amended by part 28, Ord. 1437-NS, eff. July 7, 2005)
Article 28. Variances and Permits
Sec. 9-4.2801. Variances: Authorized.
   Variances from the provisions of this chapter shall be granted only when,
because of special circumstances applicable to the property, including size,
shape, topography, location, or surroundings, the strict application of the
provisions of this chapter deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by
other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning classifications.
   Any variance granted shall be subject to such conditions as will assure that
the adjustment thereby authorized shall not constitute a grant of special
privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the
vicinity and zone in which such property is situated.
   The applicant shall have the burden of proving the probative facts upon
which he relies to prove the existence of such ultimate facts. No written
findings of such ultimate facts need be made by the Commission unless the
applicant requests such findings before the Commission renders its decision.
   A variance shall not be granted for a parcel of property which authorizes a
use or activity which is not otherwise expressly authorized by the zoning
regulations governing the parcel of property.
(§ 8163.2, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 16, Ord. 89, renumbered by § XIV, Ord.
173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, amended by § 31, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27,
1993)
Sec. 9-4.2802. Permits, filing applications and payment of fees.
   Whenever the provisions of this chapter, or Section
5-14.05 or Section
7-3.07 of this Code, require or authorize a person to obtain a permit,
administrative action, or other approval for use or improvement of land, or a
variance from the standards set forth in this chapter, applications shall be
made and fees paid as follows:
   (a)   Filing applications. The Council shall prescribe the form and scope of
applications for permits, variances, and administrative actions. Such
applications shall be filed with the Community Development Department and shall
contain such information as may be required to evaluate the application and
provide notice of any hearings on it. No application shall be accepted as
complete for filing or processing unless it conforms to the requirements of
this chapter and contains the information, data, documents and exhibits
prescribed for said applications.
   (b)   Standing to file. An application for a permit, variance or
administrative action, or modification thereof, may be only filed by any of the
following:
   (1)   The owner of the property subject to the application;
   (2)   A person with a power of attorney from the owner of the property; or
   (3)   A lessee who holds a written lease, the terms of which authorize the
use for which the permit is sought.
   An application for a modification of any permit, variance, or administrative
action may also be filed by a member of the Commission or an authorized person
in the Community Development Department.
   (c)   Fees. An application for a permit or variance, or modification
thereof, shall be accompanied by the applicable fee as set forth by resolution
of the City Council. No part of said fee shall be refundable. No application
for a permit or variance, or modification thereof, shall be accepted for filing
or processing unless the fee is paid; provided, however, there shall be no fee
charged for an application for an administrative action necessary to correct
zoning violations discovered through reports of residential building records.
   (d)   Unless otherwise authorized in advance by the City Council, no
application for a permit or variance shall be deemed filed and accepted for
filing unless the use of land requested in said application is permitted by the
regulations of the underlying zone, Specific Plan (if any) and General Plan
designation in which the property is located. When the Council deems it to be
in the public’s interest or appropriate for the proper planning of the subject
property, the Council may allow an entitlement application authorized by this
article to be filed and processed concurrently with a proposed change of the
zone classification, Specific Plan, and/or General Plan or amendment thereto,
where such change is necessary to accommodate the proposed use. Where
concurrent processing is permitted, the required public hearings for the
entitlements and associated land use legislative actions shall be combined, and
the Council shall make the final decision on the entitlement application(s).
(§ 8163.3, T.O.O.C., renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970 as
amended by § 31, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, and § 3, Ord. 1331-NS, eff.
March 10, 1999)
Sec. 9-4.2802.5. Conditions on certain special use permits.
   (a)   Dance establishments, night clubs and live entertainment.
   (1)   Any special use permit requested for a dance establishment, nightclub
or live entertainment may be denied or revoked due to:
   (i)   The applicant or person operating the use has, by reason of past
activities, demonstrated a lack of good moral character, as referred to in
Chapter 5 of Title 5 of this Code; or
   (ii)   The Chief of Police has recommended denial based upon information of
fraud in the application or lack of good moral character discovered during
review of the application and subsequent investigation.
   (2)   Any special use permit requested for a dance establishment, nightclub
or live entertainment may be conditioned as follows:
   (i)   Operations/periodic review. Imposing of age limitations on patrons and
age-monitoring step in order to regulate those attending or prohibit teen or
minor’s dances. The City may limit the hours and days of operation. The city
may require the special use permit to be reviewed on periodic basis.
   (ii)   Required security and supervision.
   (aa)    Entertainment/dances. Any dancing or live entertainment use shall
provide sufficient security personnel to maintain order, ensure adequate
traffic control, crowd protection and security and to enforce the rules and the
provisions of the permit and this Code. Security shall also be required inside
and outside the premises, including the parking areas which serve these
establishments. The number of law enforcement officers or licensed security
personnel shall be equal to one per one hundred (100) persons or fraction
thereof of the capacity of the establishment as determined by the fire
department. At any time the Chief of Police determines that the use is
resulting in an increased demand for police services, the Chief may require
additional security be provided.
   (ab)   Minor’s dances. In addition to the required law enforcement officers
or licensed security personnel, minor’s dances shall also require the presence
of adult supervisors. The number of adult supervisors present at a minor’s
dance shall not be less than two supervisors or one supervisor per fifty (50)
minors or fraction thereof in attendance, whichever is greater. Adult
supervisors and licensed security personnel shall not dance or engage in any
activities which will detract from their ability to fulfill the primary
responsibility of supervision, enforcement of rules, monitoring of entrances
and parking lots, and the like.
   A.     Other conditions for minor’s dances.
   1.    Alcohol. It shall be unlawful to bring, sell, consume, or make
available any alcoholic beverage on the premises or parking area in or about
which any minor’s dance is held. Admission to a minor’s dance shall be denied
to any person showing evidence of drinking any alcoholic beverage or who has
any alcoholic beverage on his person.
   2.    Leaving and reentering. No participant admitted to a minor’s dance
shall be permitted to
leave and re-enter without payment of the full admission fee. No pass-out
checks shall be issued, unless required by the physical arrangement of the
premises.
   3.    Posting of rules and permit. At least one copy of the house rules
shall be posted in a conspicuous location inside and outside the place where
the dance is held, so that those attending the dance may read them.
Additionally, at least one copy of the duly issued permit shall be posted in a
conspicuous location inside the place where the dancing or live entertainment
is held.
   4.     Telephones. Dancing establishments, establishments providing live
entertainment and nightclubs shall provide at least one pay telephone for use
by patrons, and shall have at least one private telephone for use by the
operators of the establishment.
   5.    Inspections. Police officers, code enforcement officers, and fire
department personnel shall be admitted to all establishments conducting live
entertainment, nightclubs, dancing establishments and minor’s dances without an
admission charge, for the purposes of inspection, at any time during the
operating hours of such an operation.
   6.    Noise. Require construction of sound attenuation devices or walls or
operation conditions for purpose of noise mitigation measures. No person in
charge of a public or minor’s dance, nightclub, dancing establishment, or any
place where live entertainment may occur shall permit the noise level of the
attendees, music, or entertainment to reach a level which may be heard by
residences, hospitals, convalescent hospitals, hotels, motels, or other noise
sensitive uses.
   7.    Trash. Require applicant or operator to be responsible for immediate
cleanup any trash or litter left on or within a defined radius of the premises
within a specified time period.
   8.    Other conditions. Such other conditions as the City deems necessary
for the safe, quiet, compatible, and nuisance free operation of the use or
establishment.
   9.    Revocation. Should an unusual level of activity involving excessive
noise, unruly or violent behavior, violations of this code restricting
alcoholic beverages, violations of any conditions of the permit or violations
of relevant State codes involving the use or sale of illicit drugs, become
apparent to the police department, a police representative will contact the
Community Development Director who may initiate revocation proceedings or
additional conditions designed to mitigate ongoing problems.
(§ 18, Ord. 1187-NS, eff. October 5, 1993)
Sec. 9-4.2803. Review and action on applications.
   (a)   Except as specifically provided in this chapter, all applications for
permits and variances made pursuant to the requirements of this chapter and
Section
7-3.07 of this Code, and all modifications to said permits and variances, shall
be considered by the Commission at a public hearing, noticed in accordance with
State law and the provisions of Chapter 12 of this title and, except where
otherwise provided by Section
9-4.2806, shall be approved, conditionally approved, recommended for
conditional approval, recommended for denial, or denied by the Commission as
follows:
   (1)   Where the Commission is considering an entitlement application for
which the Council has permitted concurrent processing of the entitlement
application with a change of zone classification or other legislative action
(such as a Specific Plan amendment or General Plan amendment) pursuant to
Section
9-4.2802(d), the City Council shall make the final decision on approving or
denying the entitlement application and the Commission shall only make a
recommendation to the Council of conditional approval or denial of the
application. Where the Commission has recommended denial, the Commission may
forward to the Council proposed conditions of approval for the Council’s
consideration if the Council determines to approve the entitlement application.
Upon receiving such a recommendation from the Commission, the Council shall
conduct its own public hearing on the entitlement application(s) and associated
legislative actions, providing notice thereof in the same manner as was
required for the Commission hearing, and shall render a final decision.
   (2)   In all other cases, the Commission shall render a decision to approve,
conditionally approve, or deny the application.
   (b)   Public hearings shall be conducted by the Commission in accordance
with rules established by resolution by the Commission.
   (c)   Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, the decision-making body
may approve a development permit, as conditioned, based on the following
findings (1) through (4), and may approve a special use permit, as conditioned,
based on findings (1) through (5):
   (1)   The project is consistent with the Thousand Oaks General Plan and any
applicable specific plan or redevelopment plan;
   (2)   The project complies with all applicable laws, regulations and
policies, including the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code;
   (3)   The project will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or
general welfare;
   (4)   The project has been reviewed in conformance with the provisions of
the California Environmental Quality Act;
   (5)   The proposed use at the proposed location will be compatible with land
uses in the vicinity.
   (d)   No variance from the provisions of this chapter shall be granted by
the Planning Commission unless and until the findings required by State law are
first made.
(§ 8163.4, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 1, Ord. 43, § 21, Ord. 126, § 2, Ord. 145,
§ 10, Ord. 142-NS, eff. March 26, 1970, § XV, Ord. 162-NS, eff. August 27,
1970, as renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, as amended by
§ XIV, Ord. 423-NS, eff. February 14, 1974, § XIV, Ord. 581-NS, eff. August 12,
1976, §§ IX and X, Ord. 776-NS, eff. April 16, 1981 and § 31, Ord. 1178-NS,
eff. April 27, 1993, § 4, Ord. 1331-NS, eff. March 10, 1999, and § 24, Ord.
1555-NS, eff. May 13, 2011)
Sec. 9-4.2804. Authority of the Community Development Director to approve
permit applications.
   (a)   The Community Development Director, or the Director’s designee, shall
have decision-making authority over the following permit applications:
      (1)   Development permits and planned development permits, where the
proposed development complies with all of the conditions and limitations set
forth in this chapter, and the guidelines and standards adopted pursuant to
Section
9-4.1806 of this chapter;
      (2)   Residential planned development permits for the approval of
construction plans for four (4) or fewer single-family detached dwellings
within the Residential Planned Development (R-P-D) Zones;
      (3)   Precise plan of design applications filed pursuant to Article 18 of
this chapter, except where Planning Commission review is required by said
Article;
      (4)   Special use permits for the uses indicated in the Permitted Use
Matrices in Section
9-4.2104 and Section
9-4.2105 of this chapter, as allowed by the applicable regulations of the
underlying zone.
      (5)   Minor modifications to approved permits and variances, including
time extensions as authorized by Section
9-4.2812(e) of this article.
      (6)   Residential permits that are subject to and comply with Article 22
Objective Design Standards for Residential Development, unless otherwise
allowed as a ministerial approval by state law.
   Provided, however, that any such application which is considered by the
Director to present a policy or precedent-setting matter shall be referred to
the Commission for determination.
   (b)   Prior to rendering a decision on any application for a permit listed
in subsection (a) of this section, a notice of application shall be provided as
required by Sec.
9-12.202 of this title.
   (c)   Except for applications complying with Section
9-4.2804(6), if a written statement opposing the application or requesting a
public hearing is submitted to the Community Development Department prior to
the proposed decision date as set forth in the notice of application, the
Director shall not proceed with rendering a decision on the date specified in
the notice of application, but shall instead schedule and hold at least one
public hearing on the application in accordance with the provisions of this
article. Notice of the hearing shall be provided in the manner required by
Section
9-12.202 of this title.
   (d)   The term “Director” as used in this article shall mean the Community
Development Director or the Director’s designee, including an administrative
hearing officer designated by the Director.
(§ 8163.5, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 22, Ord. 126, renumbered by § XIV, Ord.
173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, as amended by § 31, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27,
1993, §§ 11, 12, Ord. 1189-NS, eff. November 2, 1993, and §§ 9, 10, Ord. 1210-
NS, eff. May 24, 1994, § 2, Ord. 1227-NS, eff. January 17, 1995, and § 11,
Ord.1292-NS, eff. August 28, 1997, § 2, Ord. 1330-NS, eff. March 3, 1999, and
§§ 7, 22, Ord. 1414-NS, eff. October 2, 2003, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1431-NS,
eff. January 13, 2005, § 7, Ord. 1551-NS, eff. February 10, 2011, §§ 41 and 42,
Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016, and § 5, Ord. 1698-NS, eff. April 29, 2022)
Sec. 9-4.2805. Administrative actions.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of the administrative action procedure is to
provide a method whereby applications for certain minor modifications of the
provisions of this chapter may be considered and acted upon the by the
Director; provided, however, that any such application which is considered by
the Director to present a policy or precedent-setting matter shall be referred
to the Commission for determination.
   (b)   When applicable. The Community Development Director may grant
administrative actions in the following cases:
   (1)   A modification in the yard area provisions in residential zones up to
fifty (50%) percent of the requirements. In R-A, R-E, R-1, R-2, and R-
3 Residential Zones, when the distance between two (2) structures on separate
lots will be or is at least equal to the combined normally required setback
distances for both adjacent yard areas, a reduction of up to seventy-five (75%)
percent of a yard area setback requirement may be granted, provided the
Director finds that:
   (i)   This minimum distance is likely to remain and no other reasonable
design and layout of the proposed structure can be accommodated on the lot and
such a reduced setback is necessary for any viable use of the property, or
   (ii)   This minimum separation distance is likely to remain and, because of
a mistake in the construction of the structure, an encroachment into the
normally required setback area occurred where that owner was not a party to the
mistake and purchased the property without the knowledge of such an illegal
encroachment and an unreasonable hardship will be incurred by the property
owner in removing the encroachment.
   The likelihood of the structure’s separation distance remaining the same may
be established by the adjacent property being burdened with an easement, deed
restriction, zoning restriction or similar development restriction that would
legally prevent the construction of a structure within this separation area;
   (2)   A modification of the structure’s height requirements in residential
zones for up to a fifty (50%) percent increase in the height limits, when the
Director finds that:
   (i)   Because of the topography or separation of buildings, such added
height will not interfere with any view from an adjoining property and not
create an invasion into the privacy expectations of neighbors, or
   (ii)   The height is compatible with the structures in the surrounding
neighborhood;
   (3)   A modification of the park space and loading zone provisions up to ten
(10%) percent of the requirements;
   (4)   A modification to the number of animals or fowl allowed on a parcel up
to fifty (50%) percent of the maximum permitted if all the application conforms
to all the other provisions of this chapter;
   (5)   Underground utility waivers pursuant to Section
7-5.203 of this Code;
   (6)   A modification of area requirements for accessory buildings in the R-
A, R-E, R-O, R-1 and R-2 Zones, not to exceed fifty (50%) percent of the
maximum permitted floor area;
   (7)   A fixed term permit subject to those conditions, locations, standards
and criteria as adopted by the City Council resolution for the following
businesses:
   (i)   Mobile car washing (other than mobile car detailing),
   (ii)   Mobile auto repair and oil change businesses,
   (iii) Food and catering truck businesses.
   (8)   A modification in the height of fences or hedges in a front yard area
of any residential zone for up to fifty (50) percent of the requirements of
subsection
9-4.2509(i) when the Director finds that because of the topography of other
factors associated with the property the added height will not interfere with
the safety and welfare of pedestrians or vehicles entering, leaving or passing
the property or adjacent properties. A permit application requesting an
increase in the height of fences or hedges in any residential zone to exceed
fifty (50%) percent of the requirements of subsection
9-5.2509(i) may be granted by the Planning Commission.
   (c)   Prior to rendering a decision on an administrative action application,
a notice of application shall be provided as required by Sec.
9-12.202 of this title.
   (d)   If a written statement opposing the application or requesting an
administrative public hearing is submitted to the Community Development
Department prior to the proposed decision date as set forth in the notice of
application, the Director shall not proceed with rendering a decision on the
date specified in the notice of application, but shall instead schedule and
hold at least one administrative public hearing on the application in
accordance with the provisions of this article. Notice of the hearing shall be
provided in the manner required by Section
9-12.202 of this title.
(§ 8163.6, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5,
1970, as amended by § 31, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, and § 3, Ord.
1195-NS, eff. January 25, 1994 and §§ 11, 12, Ord. 1210-NS, eff. May 24, 1994,
and § 3, Ord. 1423-NS, eff. January 13, 2004, and § 43, Ord. 1620-NS, eff.
August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.2806. Hearings: Procedure.
   (a)   The authorized City decision-making body or official may prescribe
rules governing the procedure for its hearings.
   (b)   If for any reason testimony on any matter set for hearing pursuant to
this article cannot be completed on the appointed day, the person presiding at
the hearing may authorize a continuance of the hearing and shall publicly
announce the time and place at which said hearing shall be continued. No
further notice thereof shall be required; provided, however, that the person
presiding at the hearing may direct that additional notice of the continued
hearing be given as deemed appropriate.
   (c)   A quorum for a Commission hearing shall consist of three (3) members.
An act or decision of the Commission shall require the concurrence of at least
a majority of those voting, except for an automatic referral of an entitlement
application to the City Council as the result of an unbreakable tie vote as
described in subsection (e) of this section.
   (d)   The person presiding at the hearing, or the Secretary of the Planning
Commission, as applicable, shall enter the decision on the application in the
minutes or records of the meeting, and shall communicate the decision to the
applicant, the appropriate public officials, and other interested parties.
   (e)   Where, due to the absence of a Commissioner(s), a tie vote is cast by
the Commission on a motion to approve, conditionally approve, or deny an
appeal, a permit or entitlement, or on the recommendation to the City Council
for the approval or denial on a permit or entitlement, (in the case of
applications being processed concurrently with legislative actions), and the
Commission is unable to break the tie vote situation through further
deliberation and votes during that meeting and immediately following the tie
vote, then the Commission shall reopen the hearing and continue the matter on
an open hearing basis until the next Commission meeting at which the tie might
be broken through the participation of the Commissioner(s) absent at the
original hearing.
   If the Commission determines that the tie cannot be broken within the next
twenty-one (21) days due to the announced conflict and abstention of a
Commissioner in the matter, a vacancy, or a long term absence, then no
entitlement shall be granted and the matter shall be automatically referred to
the City Council for a decision with no recommendation implied or made by the
Commission.
(§ 8163.7, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5,
1970, as amended by § 31, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, and § 13, Ord.
1210-NS, eff. May 24, 1994, and § 5, Ord. 1331-NS, eff. March 10, 1999)
Sec. 9-4.2807. Appeals of administrative decisions to the Planning Commission.
   (a)   Except where provided otherwise by Section
9-4.1809 of this chapter, the applicant or any aggrieved person, or City
official may appeal a decision of the Community Development Director, or the
Director’s designee, rendered pursuant to Section
9-4.2804 or Section
9-4.2805 of this article to the Planning Commission. The City Council may, on
its own motion, elect to submit a decision by the Community Development
Director, or the Director’s designee, to the Planning Commission for
consideration and decision.
   (b)   Any appeal of an administrative decision made pursuant to this section
shall be filed with the Community Development Director within ten (10) calendar
days after an administrative decision is rendered. A referral by the City
Council of an administrative decision to the Planning Commission may be made by
majority vote of the City Council within ten (10) days after an administrative
decision is rendered. An appeal may be commenced only by filing with the
Community Development Department the required appeal form specifying the action
the appellant requests the Commission to take. A fee prescribed by Council
resolution shall be paid with the filing of the appeal; provided, however, no
filing fee shall be charged or collected for any appeal filed on behalf of the
City by a City officer, employee, board, or commission. An appeal of the
Planning Commission decision shall be filed in accordance with Section
9-4.2808.
   (c)   The Planning Commission shall conduct one public hearing on the appeal
in accordance with the requirements of this article, which hearing shall be
noticed as required by Chapter 12 of this title. The Commission shall consider
the matter de novo and shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the permit,
administrative action, or entitlement for which application was originally
made.
(§ 32, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, as amended by § 14, Ord. 1210-NS,
eff. May 24, 1994, and Part 7, Ord. 1446-NS, eff. October 25, 2005)
Sec. 9-4.2808. Appeals to Council.
   (a)   Filing. After the Commission has rendered a decision, and except as
provided otherwise in Section
9-4.1809 of this chapter, an appeal to the Council may be taken by the
applicant, any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board, or
commission of the City affected by the decision. Notwithstanding the definition
of “aggrieved person” in Section 9-4.203.8, any member of the City Council may
also be considered an aggrieved person affected by such a decision for purposes
of this section. An appeal shall be commenced by filing with the Community
Development Department, a notice of appeal which specifies the grounds of the
appeal and the action which the appellant wants the Council to take, within ten
(10) days of the date of the Commission’s decision. Appeals shall be submitted
on the forms provided for that purpose by the Community Development Department,
and shall be accompanied by the applicable fee set by Council resolution.
   Prior to and as a prerequisite of filing a notice of appeal, the appellant
shall obtain a certification from the department that an appeal is authorized
and that all information, documents, and maps required in connection with the
appeal have been filed with the City. That Department shall note the date and
time such notice was filed and forthwith send a copy to the City Attorney. A
fee, as prescribed by Council resolution, shall be paid to the Community
Development Department with the filing of each appeal. No filing fee shall be
charged for any appeal filed by a City officer, employee, board or Commission
member on behalf of the City.
   In addition, the City Council may, on its own motion within ten (10) days
after the final decision by the Planning Commission, elect to review and
consider any decision of the Planning Commission. No application for an appeal
need be filed by the City Council, or any member representative thereof, when
the City Council elects, by majority vote on its own motion, to review and
consider a decision of the Planning Commission.
   (b)   Hearings. After the City Clerk’s receipt of the Notice of Appeal on
the proper form, the City Clerk shall consider the pending City Council agenda
requests and, except for matters to be heard in connection with a tentative
subdivision map appeal, set the matter for a public hearing at the earliest
reasonable and available date, which shall be within at least ninety (90) days
of receipt of the filing. Hearings on permits connected with any appeal of a
tentative subdivision map decision shall be set for a date within thirty (30)
days of the filing. The City Clerk shall give notice of the hearing in the
manner required by Chapter 12 of this title.
   (c)   Records on appeals. The Community Development Director shall deliver
all papers and files constituting the record of the matter on appeal to the
Council at the time of the hearing unless otherwise directed by the Council.
   (d)   Hearings: Procedure. The Council may prescribe rules governing the
procedure of hearings for appeals conducted by it. A quorum for a hearing shall
consist of at least three (3) members. Any act or decision shall require the
concurrence of a majority of the members of the Council present. The Council
may refer a matter on appeal back to the Commission for further report,
information, or study.
   (e)   Appellate decisions. The Council shall announce its decision not more
than fifteen (15) calendar days following the termination of the hearing.
Whenever a matter has been referred back to the Commission, the Commission
shall report back and the Council shall announce its decision not more than
forty-five (45) calendar days following the day of such referral. The Council’s
decision shall thereafter be set forth in a resolution with any required
findings. In the event of a tie vote and the failure to break the tie vote
within fifteen (15) calendar days, the decision of the Commission shall be
reinstated and deemed rendered, and no further action or proceeding thereon may
be taken by the Council. The Council may sustain, modify, reject, or overrule,
wholly or partly, any decision by the Commission. It may impose such conditions
and limitations it deems necessary to assure that the general purpose and
intent of this chapter will be observed, the public interest, health, safety,
and welfare secured, and substantial justice will be done. The resolution shall
recite the conditions and limitations imposed. It need not recite any findings
for the decision unless the appellant so requests before the Council renders
its decision.
   (f)   Appellate decisions: Notice. Not later than ten (10) calendar days
following the day on which the decision is rendered, the City Clerk shall mail
a copy of the resolution to the appellant, the applicant, the Commission, and
the City official, department, board, or commission whose order, requirement,
permit, decision, or determination is the subject of the appeal.
   (g)   Finality of decisions: Procedural time limits. After rendition, a
decision shall become final and conclusive and shall not thereafter be
considered or modified or vacated. The time limits set forth in this section
are procedural only and do not limit or affect the jurisdiction and power of
the Council to act on any permit or variance.
   (h)   Appeal of certain conditions. Whenever any person appeals only certain
conditions or restrictions on a permit or variance, and the final action of the
Council is to grant the permit or variance, either in its original form or in a
modified form, all conditions and restrictions not appealed from shall be
automatically carried over and shall continue to govern and limit the permit or
variance, unless the action of the Council clearly indicates otherwise.
(§ 8163.8, T.O.O.C., as amended by XVI, Ord. 162-NS, eff. August 27, 1970, as
renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, as amended by § I,
Ord. 525-NS, eff. May 1, 1975, § 1, Ord. 567-NS, eff. May 6, 1976, § XI, Ord
776-NS, eff. April 16, 1981, § 2, Ord. 848-NS, eff. December 13, 1983, § 2,
Ord. 921-NS, eff. May 20, 1986, § 1, Ord. 1160-NS, eff. July 28, 1992, and as
renumbered by § 32 and amended by § 33, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, as
amended by § 15, Ord. 1210-NS, eff. May 24, 1994, Part 8, Ord. 1446-NS, eff.
October 25, 2005
Sec. 9-4.2809. Implementation.
   The Community Development Director shall be responsible for preparing the
resolutions set forth in this article and any other paper or document required
by the Commission or the Council in order to discharge its duties and
responsibilities pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 8163.9, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5,
1970, and § 32, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993)
Sec. 9-4.2810. Former procedures superseded.
   All applications for any variance or permit within the scope of this
chapter, or for the modification or revocation of any variance or permit
heretofore or hereafter granted, shall be processed and reviewed in accordance
with the provisions of this article and chapter, and any section, subsection,
clause, or phrase in any other article of this chapter inconsistent with, or
contrary to, any provision of this article shall be processed and reviewed in
accordance with the provisions of this article and chapter, and any section,
subsection, clause, or phrase in any other article of this chapter inconsistent
with, or contrary to, any provision of this article shall be inapplicable to
such application.
(§ 8163.10, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5,
1970, and § 32, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993)
Sec. 9-4.2811. Revocation.
   A petition for the revocation of any variance or permit may be filed by any
person or political entity aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board, or
commission of the City affected by the decision.
   Any variance or permit heretofore or hereafter granted may be revoked by the
Commission after appropriate proceedings, as provided in this article, for any
of the following causes:
   (a)   That any term or condition of the variance or permit has not been
complied with;
   (b)   That the property subject to the variance or permit, or any portion
thereof, is used or maintained in violation of any statute, law, or regulation;
   (c)   That the use for which the variance or permit was granted has not been
exercised for at least twelve (12) consecutive months, or has ceased to exist,
or has been abandoned; and
   (d)   That the use for which the variance or permit was granted has been so
exercised as to be detrimental to the public health or safety or as to
constitute a nuisance.
   After the revocation of a variance or permit, the property affected thereby
shall be subject to the regulations of the applicable zone classification. The
failure of the Commission or Council to revoke a variance or permit whenever
cause therefor exists or occurs shall not constitute a waiver of such right
with respect to any subsequent cause for revocation.
(§ 8163.11, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5,
1970, and as renumbered by § 32 and amended by § 34, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April
27, 1993)
Sec. 9-4.2812. Expiration.
   (a)   Expiration. Unless otherwise specified below or in the conditions of
the permit or variance, any variance or permit granted shall expire and become
null and void if not exercised or the use has not been inaugurated or the
construction of the structure has not been commenced and the use has not been
diligently pursued, within thirty-six (36) months after the date of issuance.
Residential planned development and hillside planned development permits
approved for land subject to a tentative tract shall expire on the date of the
expiration of that tentative tract. The date of issuance of a permit or
variance shall be defined as the date of the final approval of such permit or
variance by the Community Development Director, the Planning Commission, or
City Council, whichever is applicable. If the permit or variance is denied by
the Community Development Director or the Commission, and subsequently approved
on an appeal by the City Council, then the date of issuance shall be the date
such appeal was granted. After the expiration of a variance or permit, the
property affected thereby shall be subject to the regulations of the applicable
zone classification.
   (b)   Phased construction. The time periods for phased projects shall be
stated in the conditions of the permit so as to avoid a lapse of progressive
development following the completion of the preceding phase. If no condition is
imposed, the construction of the succeeding phase shall commence within twelve
(12) months after the completion of the previous phase, or the permit will
expire.
   (c)   Use inauguration. The inauguration of a permit or variance involving a
building or buildings shall be deemed to have occurred when the construction of
the structure’s foundation has been undertaken by the actual placing of the
construction materials in their permanent position and fastened in their
permanent manner. Inauguration may be otherwise defined by the Commission, the
Council or by the Community Development Director by a condition imposed on the
permit at the time of approval, issuance or prior to inauguration. Such
condition(s) may specify that other or further acts in the preparation for on-
site construction may constitute inauguration of the use, consisting of, but
not limited to: heavy on-site grading involving the substantial alteration of
the natural terrain; the significant installation of public improvements beyond
those normally required; the release of building permits authorizing at least
twenty (20%) percent of the total value of the work to be performed; or any
other major preparatory act prior to construction which is substantial in
nature.
   (d)   Diligent pursual required after inauguration. Following the
inauguration of the permit or variance as constituted by a condition or as
defined in this section, the completion of the project shall be diligently
pursued with continuous construction activity on the subject property. If, in
the judgment of the Community Development Director, the project is not being
diligently pursued to completion, the applicant shall be notified that the
permit or variance shall expire within thirty (30) days after the cessation of
activity on the site, and a time extension shall be obtained through the
appropriate procedures in order to allow further pursuit of the project.
   (e)   Time extensions.
   i.   A time extension may be approved as a minor modification to the
approved permit or variance for a period not to exceed twenty-four (24) months.
   ii.   A maximum of two (2) time extensions, not to exceed forty-eight (48)
months, may be approved by the Community Development Director. The applicant
may appeal the decision of the Director to the Planning Commission within
fifteen (15) days after the decision.
   iii.   Any time extension for a permit approved in conjunction with a
tentative tract map or land division which has not yet been recorded shall be
considered in conjunction with the time extension for the underlying tentative
map or land division.
   iv.   Any permit that has not expired and was approved in conjunction with a
tentative map or land division that receives an automatic extension of time
pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act shall receive an equivalent automatic
extension of time.
(§ 8163.12. T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5,
1970, as amended by § I, Ord. 404-NS, eff. September 13, 1973, §§ I and II,
Ord. 607-NS, eff. January 6, 1977, § 5, Ord. 899-NS, eff. October 22, 1985, §
21, Ord. 907-NS, eff. February 11, 1986, § 1, Ord. 981-NS, eff. November 3,
1987, § 1, Ord. 1122-NS, eff. October 1, 1991 and as renumbered by § 32 and
amended by § 35, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, as amended by Ord. 1386-NS,
eff. October 18, 2001, and § 26, Ord. 1555-NS, eff. May 13, 2011)
Sec. 9-4.2813. Reapplications.
   After the denial of a permit or variance has become final, no further
application for the same permit or variance shall be filed for the same
property for the ensuing six (6) months unless the permit or variance was
denied without prejudice or unless otherwise specified at the time of the
denial.
(§ 8163.14, T.O.O.C., as amended by § II, Ord. 223, as renumbered by § XIV,
Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970 and § 32, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993)
Sec. 9-4.2814. Granting for certain land and uses.
   In granting any variance or permit, the Commissioner or the Council, as the
case may be, need not grant such variance or permit for all the land, property,
or uses requested in the application. In the absence of any provisions in a
variance or permit designating the land, property, or uses for which the
variance or permit is granted, the variance or permit shall be granted for the
land, property, and uses set forth in the application.
(§ 8163.13, T.O.O.C., as amended by § I, Ord. 233, as renumbered by § XIV, Ord.
173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, and § 32, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993)
Sec. 9-4.2815. Oil and gas permits: Conditions.
   It is hereby declared to be in the interests of the public health, safety,
and welfare and the purpose and intent of this chapter that the following
conditions shall be, and they are hereby automatically imposed and made, a part
of any permit for oil and gas drilling and extraction hereafter issued and as
to any permit issued prior to November 30, 1961, shall apply to any drilling or
other activity commenced after November 30, 1961:
   (a)   Whenever the drilling or redrilling of any oil or gas well commenced
after November 30, 1961, is situated within five hundred (500') feet of any
dwelling not owned by the permittee, or if applicable, the lessor of the
permittee, the derrick, portable drilling rig, and machinery or equipment used
to operate in connection with drilling shall be enclosed with fire-resistant
and soundproofing material.
   (b)   The exercise of any right granted by the permit shall conform in all
respects to the regulations and requirements of the Regional Water Pollution
Control Board No. 4 of the State, and all water, mud, oil, or any other
substances removed as waste material from the land for which the permit is
issued shall be deposited in a disposal site approved by the Commission and the
Regional Water Pollution Control Board of the State.
   (c)   No earthen sump shall be constructed or maintained within five hundred
(500') feet, and no drilling shall be permitted within one hundred (100') feet,
of any natural channel in which there is or may be flowing water.
   (d)   Within ninety (90) days after a well is producing, the derrick, all
boilers, and all other drilling equipment shall be removed from the premises
unless permission to store them on the premises is obtained from the
Commission.
   (e)   All sumps, debris basins, or depressions, ravines, gullies, barrancas,
or the like which are used for the impounding or depositing of water, mud, oil,
or any other fluid, semifluid, or any combination thereof, shall be fenced.
When any such place is located more than one-half (1/2) mile away from any
school, playground, or dwelling, such place shall be enclosed by a cattle fence
with wood or steel posts not less than four (4') feet above the ground with not
less than three (3) strands of barbed wire secured horizontally to posts. When
any such place is located within one-half (1/2) mile of any school, playground,
or dwelling, such place shall be enclosed by a wire fence of a wire mesh type
with a maximum of two (2") inches by four (4") inches opening, and such fence
shall be secured to steel posts not less than five (5') feet in height above
the ground, and such posts shall have forty-five (45) degree arms attached to
the top of the posts with three (3) strands of barbed wire attached thereto.
   (f)   No permanent buildings or structures shall be erected within one
hundred (100') feet of the boundaries or the right-of-way of any public street
or highway.
   (g)   The permittee shall at all times comply with the provisions of the
Public Resources Code of the State relating to the protection of underground
water supply and in connection with oil and gas extraction.
   (h)   Upon the abandonment of any well or the cessation of drilling
operations, all earthen sumps or other depressions containing drilling mud,
oil, or other waste products from the drilling operation shall be cleaned up by
removing such waste products or by consolidating all mud, oil, or other waste
products into the land by disking, harrowing, and leveling to restore the land
to the condition existing prior to the issuance of the permit as nearly as
practicable so to do.
   (i)   Unless otherwise provided in the terms of a permit, the permit shall
expire no later than when the permittee’s ownership, lease, or other right to
develop the property in the manner described in the application is terminated.
A permit may be transferred to another person only with the approval of the
Commission. A transfer shall be null and void unless and until:
   (1)   The Commission has approved the transfer;
   (2)   The Commission has been furnished satisfactory evidence of the
transfer;
   (3)   The transferee files with the Commission a writing wherein he
obligates himself to comply with every term and condition of the permit; and
   (4)   The transferee has filed an approved bond.
   (j)   No drilling or other uses for which the permit is granted shall be
commenced or continued unless and until the permittee has filed, and the
Commission has accepted, a bond in the penal amount of Two Thousand Five
Hundred and no/100ths ($2,500.00) Dollars for each well which is drilled or to
be drilled. Any operator may, in lieu of filing such bond for each well
drilled, redrilled, produced, or maintained, file a bond in the penal amount of
Ten Thousand and no/100ths ($10,000.00) Dollars to cover all operations
conducted in the City, conditioned upon the permittee well and truly obeying,
fulfilling, and performing each and every term and provision in the permit. In
the event of any failure by the permittee to perform or comply with any term or
provision thereof, the Commission may, by resolution, declare the bond
forfeited, and the sureties and principal shall be jointly and severally
obligated to pay forthwith the full amount of the bond to the City. The
forfeiture of any bond shall not insulate the permittee from liability in
excess of the sum of the bond for damages for injuries, expenses, or liability
suffered by the City from any breach by the permittee of any term or condition
of such permit or of any applicable law or of the bond. The transfer of the
permit, as provided in subsection (i) of this section, shall not be effective
unless and until the transferee has also complied with such condition for
posting an approved bond.
   (k)   All drilling and production operations shall be conducted in such a
manner as to eliminate, as far as practicable, dust, noise, vibration, or
noxious odors, and shall be in accordance with the best accepted practices
incident to drilling for, and the production of, oil, gas, and other
hydrocarbon substances. Where economically feasible, generally accepted and
used technological improvement for reducing factors of nuisance and annoyance
shall be employed by the permittee.
(§ 8163.15, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 1, Ord. 233, as renumbered by § XIV, Ord.
173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970 and § 32, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993)
Sec. 9-4.2816. Exempt housing projects.
   The following housing projects are exempt from all discretionary land use
entitlement review process required by Article 21 “Uses Allowed by Zone” and
are only required to obtain building permits, grading permits, landscape plan
checks and other ministerial associated permits, after a zoning clearance has
been issued by the Community Development Department:
   (a)    Housing projects with at least twenty (20%) percent of the units
affordable to lower income households if the projects are located on Regional
Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) sites that are either reuse sites from the
previous housing element cycle or required rezoning to accommodate the lower
income RHNA shortfall as detailed in the City of Thousand Oaks’ 2021-2029
Housing Element Appendix C.
   (b)   Housing projects with at least fifty (50%) percent of base units deed
restricted as affordable to lower income households that meets the requirements
and process as further detailed in California Government Code Section 65913.4.
   (c)   These housing projects exempt from discretionary land use entitled
review process are subject to ministerial review to confirm exempt status
including compliance with the applicable standards of the zoning regulations
and appropriate operational conditions. Ministerial actions are not appealable.
(§ II, Ord. 219-NS, eff. August 19, 1971, as amended by § XV, Ord. 581-NS, eff.
August 12, 1976, § III, Ord. 607-NS, eff. January 6, 1977, §§ II and III, Ord.
626-NS, eff. April 21, 1977, §§ XII and XIII, Ord. 776-NS, eff. April 16, 1981,
§ II, Ord. 779-NS, eff. June 11, 1981, § 6, Ord. 899-NS, eff. October 22, 1985,
§ 1, Ord. 917-NS, eff. April 15, 1986, § 11, Ord. 980-NS, eff. November 3,
1987, § 7, Ord. 997-NS, eff. May 17, 1988, § 2, Ord. 1122-NS, eff. October 1,
1991, §§ 1 and 2, Ord. 1136-NS, eff. February 18, 1992, and as renumbered by §
32 and repealed by § 36, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, § 5, Ord. 1726-NS,
eff. April 26, 2024, § 2, Ord. 1734-NS, eff. January 10, 2025)
Sec. 9-4.2817 Inactive planning applications.
   (a)   Applications incomplete for processing.
   (1)   An application shall be considered inactive, if the applicant, for a
period of 60 consecutive days, fails to submit all information or fees
requested in order for the application to be considered complete for
processing.
   (2)   The Community Development Director shall have the authority to deem an
inactive application that is incomplete for processing to have been withdrawn.
The Community Development Director or his or her designee shall notify the
applicant/property owner of his or her decision to deem the application to be
withdrawn. The applicant may appeal the Director's decision to the Planning
Commission within 10 days after the decision.
   (b)   Applications complete for processing.
   (1)   An application considered complete for processing shall be considered
inactive if the applicant, for a period of 180 consecutive days, fails to
pursue a decision on the application or submit all supplemental information or
fees requested for processing the application, including, but not limited to,
items required to comply with the California Environmental Quality Act.
   (2)   The Community Development Director shall have the authority to deem an
inactive application that is complete for processing to have been withdrawn.
The Community Development Director or his or her designee shall notify the
applicant/property owner of his or her decision to deem the application to be
withdrawn. The applicant may appeal the Director's decision to the Planning
Commission within 10 days after the decision.
   (c)   This section shall apply to new applications and retroactively to any
application that was pending on the effective date of this section.
(§ 25, Ord. 1555-NS, eff. May 13, 2011)
Article 29. Amendments
Sec. 9-4.2901. Scope.
   An amendment to the provisions of this chapter, which amendment changes any
property from one zone to another, or which imposes any regulation set forth in
Section 65850 of the Government Code of the State not theretofore imposed, or
which removes or modifies any such regulation theretofore imposed, shall be
adopted in the manner set forth in this article. Any other amendment to the
provisions of this chapter may be adopted as other ordinances are adopted.
(§ 8164, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 1, Ord. 145, renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-
NS, eff. November 5, 1970)
Sec. 9-4.2902. Initiation.
   A proposed change of the boundaries of a zoned area, or a proposed change of
zone classification, or a proposed amendment to the provisions of this chapter
may be initiated as follows:
   (a)   By the adoption of a resolution by the Council requesting the
Commission to set the matter for hearing, report, and recommendation;
   (b)   By the adoption of a resolution by the Commission setting the matter
for hearing and study; and
   (c)   By filing with the Community Development Director a verified
application of a change of zone classification by the owner of the property, by
a person with a power of attorney from the owner, or by the attorney-at-law of
the owner. If the applicant complies with all the provisions of this article,
the Community Development Director shall set the matter for public hearing. An
application submitted to the Community Development Department after 5:00 p.m.
on Monday shall not be considered filed until the following Monday.
   The Community Development Director shall not accept for processing a zone
change application which proposes zoning inconsistent with the adopted Elements
of the General Plan. If a zone change application is presented for filing with
the Community Development Director which is inconsistent with the General Plan,
the following procedures shall apply:
   (d)   The Community Development Director shall notify the applicant of his
determination of the inconsistency of the proposed zoning with the General Plan
and his reasons therefor. The Community Development Director shall also advise
the applicant of his right to appeal this determination and, alternatively, the
procedure for initiating an amendment to the General Plan.
   (e)   Within twenty (20) calendar days after such notification by the
Community Development Director, an appeal of this determination may be taken by
the applicant. An appeal may be commenced only by filing with the Community
Development Department a notice of appeal which specifies the grounds of
appeal.
   (f)   Upon the receipt of a notice of appeal, the Community Development
Director shall schedule the matter for Commission consideration and shall
notify the applicant of the hearing date. Such consideration shall only deal
with the decision of the Community Development Director as to the consistency
of the proposed zoning with the General Plan and shall not include a discussion
of the merits of the proposed zone change application itself.
   (g)   If the Commission approves the appeal and reverses the decision of the
Community Development Director, and if all other aspects of the application are
in order, the Community
Development Director shall accept the zone change application for processing in
the manner specified in this article.
   (h)   If the Commission denies the appeal of the applicant, this decision
shall become final upon the expiration of ten (10) days following such denial
unless the applicant files, within ten (10) days after such denial, a written
application with the Commission requesting that the matter be forwarded to the
Council for further consideration and final appeal.
   (i)   Upon the receipt of the proper notice of appeal within ten (10) days
after a denial, the Commission shall forward to the Council the resolution
denying the appeal and all reports relating thereto. Upon the receipt of such
resolution and reports, the City Clerk shall set the matter for hearing by the
Council.
   (j)   If the Council denies the appeal, the zone change application shall
not be processed by the Community Development Department. If the Council
approves the appeal and reverses the decision of the Commission, and if all
other aspects of the application are in order, the Community Development
Director shall accept the zone change application for processing in the manner
specified in this article.
(§ 8164.1, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 11, Ord. 142-NS, eff. March 26, 1970,
renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, as amended by § II,
Ord. 436-NS, eff. April 25, 1974)
Sec. 9-4.2903. Applications: Form.
   The Commission may prescribe the form and scope of applications for changes
in zone boundaries or zone classifications. Applications shall be filed in the
office of the Commission. The Commission may supply blank forms for such
purposes and may prescribe the type of information, data, and papers to be
filed and the number of copies thereof. No application shall be accepted for
filing or shall be processed unless it complies with such requirements.
(§ 8164.2, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5,
1970)
Sec. 9-4.2904. Applications: Filing fees.
   To cover the expenses of postage, posting, advertising, printing, and other
items incidental to proceedings, a fee prescribed by Council resolution shall
be paid upon the filing of a zone change. No application shall be accepted for
filing or processing unless such fee is paid.
(§ 8164.3, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 2, Ord. 43, § XVII, Ord. 162-NS, eff.
August 27, 1970, as renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, as
amended by § XVI, Ord. 581-NS, eff. August 12, 1976, and § XIV, Ord. 776-NS,
eff. April 16, 1981)
Sec. 9-4.2905. Applications: Acceptability and effect of signatures.
   If signatures of persons, other than the owner or lessee of the property
making the application, are offered in support of, or in opposition to, an
application, such signatures may be received the Council or Commission as
evidence of notices having been served upon them of the pending application or
as evidence of their opinion on the pending issue, but they shall in no case
infringe upon the free exercise of zoning powers vested in the Council and
Commission.
(§ 8164.4, T.O.O.C., renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970)
Sec. 9-4.2906. Applications: Permanent records.
   Applications filed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be
numbered systematically and shall become a part of the permanent official
records of the Commission. There shall be attached thereto, and permanently
filed therewith, copies of all notices and actions with certificates and
affidavits of posting, mailing, and publication pertaining thereto.
(§ 8164.5, T.O.O.C., renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970)
Sec. 9-4.2907. Additional area.
   When a resolution or application for a change of zone boundaries or zone
reclassification is received by the Commission, it may elect, by formal
resolution of intention, to include a larger area or additional land in its
determination of a proper amendment to the provisions of this chapter, and,
upon adoption of such resolution of intention, the property designated by the
resolution or application shall be considered as a part of the larger or more
extended area involved. The Community Development Director may also elect to
include a larger area or additional land which, in his determination, is a
proper amendment to the provisions of this chapter when such is done by the
filing of an application for a change of zone boundary. The hearings authorized
by the provisions of this article, or continuations of hearings scheduled on
the original resolution or application, shall be merged with the hearings
authorized by the resolution of intention.
(§ 8164.6, T.O.O.C., renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970)
Sec. 9-4.2908. Commission hearings.
   Upon the filing of a verified application or the adoption of a resolution
pursuant to the provisions of Section
9-4.2902 of this article, the Commission shall hold at least one public hearing
thereon.
(§ 8164.7, T.O.O.C., renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970,
and as amended by § 37, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993)
Sec. 9-4.2909. Commission hearings: Time.
(§ 8164.8, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5,
1970; repealed by § 38, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993)
Sec. 9-4.2910. Commission hearings: Notices.
   Notice of a required public hearing before the Commission on a proposed zone
change of the boundaries of a zoned area, or of the zone classification of any
property, or an application for prezoning, or on a proposed amendment to the
provisions of this chapter, shall be given in the manner required by Chapter 12
of this title.
(§ 8164.9, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 17, Ord. 89, as renumbered by § XIV, Ord.
173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, as amended by § I, Ord. 510-NS, eff. January 9,
1975, and § 39, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993)
Sec. 9-4.2911. Commission hearings: Investigations.
   The Commission shall cause to be made by its members, or members of its
staff, such investigations of facts bearing upon the matter set for hearing as
will assure action on each case consistent with the purposes of this chapter.
(§ 8164.10, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5,
1970)
Sec. 9-4.2912. Commission hearings: Continuance.
   If for any reason testimony on any matter set for public hearing pursuant to
this article cannot be completed on the appointed day, the Commission may
authorize a continuance of the public hearing, and at such time as the
continuance is authorized by the Commission, the Chair of the Commission shall
announce the time and place at which said hearing shall be continued. No
further notice thereof shall be required; provided, however, that the
Commission may direct that additional notice of the continued hearing be given
as it deems appropriate.
(§ 8164.11, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5,
1970 and as amended by § 40, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993)
Sec. 9-4.2913. Commission hearings: Rules of conduct.
   The Commission and the Council may adopt such rules and procedures as may be
necessary or convenient for the conduct of hearings and other business under
this chapter.
(§ 8164.12, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 18, Ord. 86, as renumbered by § XIV, Ord.
173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970)
Sec. 9-4.2914. Commission recommendations.
   (a)   In all cases of proposed changes and amendments initiated by the
Council, the Commission shall submit a report thereon which indicates the
Commission’s approval or disapproval to the Council by a resolution within
forty (4) days following the close of the hearing thereon or, whenever
applicable, within such period designated by the Council. Such period may be
waived by the Council.
   (b)   In all cases of proposed zone changes and amendments initiated by
verified applications, the Commission shall forward to the Council by
resolution, those applications for which the Commission recommends the adoption
of an ordinance by the Council. In the case of applications for which the
Commission recommends a denial and which the Commission does not recommend the
adoption of an ordinance, a resolution setting forth such determination shall
be forwarded to the City Council. The action of the Commission shall become
final following such denial, unless:
   (1)   The applicant files, no later than five (5) days after the Planning
Commission files its resolution with the City Council, a written application
with the City Clerk requesting that the matter be set for a public hearing
before the Council; and
   (2)   The party filing such application submits a filing fee in an amount
prescribed by Council resolution.
   Filing of the Planning Commission resolution with the City Council for the
purposes of subsection (b)(1) shall be accomplished at the next regularly
scheduled City Council meeting following ten (10) days after the Commission
action on the zoning change application. “Filing” for this purpose shall be
accomplished by the inclusion of the resolution as a report of the Community
Development Department on the City Council agenda.
   Upon receipt of the proper application fee, the City Clerk shall set the
matter for a public hearing in the manner set forth in Section
9-4.2916 of this article.
   (c)   Whenever action is initiated by the Commission, further action on the
matter may be deferred by the Commission indefinitely. In the event the Council
requests a report, the Commission shall forward a report thereon which
indicates its approval or disapproval within forty (40) days after the date of
the request or such other period designated by the Council. The failure of the
Commission to make a report within such prescribed period shall be deemed to be
an approval of the proposed change, plan, or amendment.
   (d)   In any case where a recommendation by the Commission is required, a
copy of any specific plan, regulation, or amendment to the provisions of this
chapter shall be submitted to the Council and shall be accompanied by a written
recommendation which shall include the reasons for the recommendation. Such
recommendation shall be forwarded to the applicant, if any, within fifteen (15)
days after the Commission has rendered its decision.
(§ 8164.13, T.O.O.C., as amended by § 18, Ord. 89, § XVIII, Ord. 162-NS, eff.
August 27, 1970, as renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5,1970, as
amended by § XVII, Ord. 581-NS, eff. August 12, 1976, § II, Ord. 603-NS, eff.
December 16, 1976, § XV, Ord. 776-NS, eff. April 16, 1981, and Ord. 1107-NS,
eff. June 20, 1991)
Sec. 9-4.2915. Commission recommendations: Majority vote required: Finality.
   A recommendation by the Commission relative to an amendment to the
provisions of this chapter or a change of zone boundaries or zone
classification of property shall be by a resolution carried by the affirmative
vote of not less than a majority of the total voting members of the Commission.
Whenever any of such matters is not so carried, it shall be deemed to have been
disapproved and shall be so reported to the applicant, if any. A recommendation
of the Commission shall be final and conclusive and may not be reconsidered by
the Commission, except upon a referral by the council.
(§ 8164.14, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5,
1970)
Sec. 9-4.2916. Council hearings.
   After the City Clerk’s receipt of the decision of the Commission, the City
Clerk shall consider the pending City Council agenda requests and, except for
zoning decisions connected with a corresponding tentative subdivision map
appeal, set the matter for a public hearing at the earliest reasonable and
available date which shall be no later than ninety (90) days from receipt of
the filing. Hearings on zoning decisions connected with any appeal of a
tentative subdivision may decision shall be set for date within thirty (30)
days of the filing. The City Clerk shall give the notice of the hearing in the
manner required by Chapter 12 of this title.
(§ 8164.15, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5,
1970, as amended by § 3, Ord. 921-NS, eff. May 20, 1986 and § 41, Ord. 1178-NS,
eff. April 27, 1993)
Sec. 9-4.2917. Council hearings: Modification of Commission recommendations.
   The City Council may approve, modify or disapprove the recommendation of the
Planning Commission, provided that any modification was previously considered
by the Planning Commission during its hearing. Any modification not previously
considered shall be referred to the Planning Commission for report and
recommendation, but the Planning Commission shall not be required to hold a
public hearing thereon. Failure of the Planning Commission to report within
forty (40) days after the reference, or such longer period than specifically
designated by the City Council, shall be deemed to be an approval of the
proposed modification.
(§ 8164.16, T.O.O.C., renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970,
amended by § 1, Ord. 959-NS, eff. April 28, 1987)
Sec. 9-4.2918. Council hearings: Decisions.
   The Council shall make and announce its decision by the adoption of an
ordinance amendment or by resolution when an appeal or proposed amendment is
denied or denied without prejudice and shall take whatever other action is
necessary to execute its decision within thirty (30) days after the day upon
which its hearing is concluded, except that in any case when the provisions of
Section
9-4.2917 of this article are applicable, the decision shall be made and
announced as early as possible. The ordinance amendment or resolution need not
contain a recital of findings upon which the decision is predicated. The
Council may predicate its decision upon the report of findings, summaries or
hearings, and the recommendations of the Commission and may incorporate by
reference in its decision such matters.
   A decision by the Council shall be final and conclusive.
   Not later than ten (10) days after the decision of the Council, the City
Clerk shall forward a copy of the ordinance amendment or resolution thereon and
all papers and documents in the matter to the Secretary for filing and a copy
of the ordinance amendment or resolution to the applicant or appellant, if any.
(§ 8164.17, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5,
1970, as amended by § I, Ord. 406-NS, eff. September 27, 1973)
Sec. 9-4.2919. Reapplications.
   After the denial of a zone change has become final, no further application
for a zone change shall be filed for the same property for the ensuing six (6)
months unless the zone change was denied without prejudice or unless otherwise
specified at the time of the denial.
(§ 8163.20, as added by § III, Ord. 233, renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff.
November 5, 1970)
Sec. 9-4.2920. Urgency interim ordinances.
   Without following the procedures otherwise required preliminary to the
adoption of a zoning ordinance, the Council, to protect the public safety,
health, and welfare, may adopt as an urgency measure an interim ordinance
prohibiting any uses which may be in conflict with a contemplated zoning
proposal which the Council, Commission, or the Community Development Department
is considering or studying or intends to study within a reasonable time. Such
urgency measure shall require a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the Council for
adoption. Such interim ordinance shall be of no further force and effect one
hundred (120) days from the date of adoption thereof; provided, however, after
notice pursuant to the provisions of Section
9-4.2910 of this article and a public hearing, the Council may, by a four-
fifths (4/5) vote, extend such interim ordinance for one year. Not more than
two (2) such extensions shall be adopted. When such interim ordinance has been
adopted, every subsequent ordinance adopted pursuant to the provisions of this
section, covering the whole or a part of the same property, shall automatically
terminate and be of no further force or effect upon the termination of the
first such ordinance, or any extension thereof.
(§ 8164.18, T.O.O.C., as added by § 19, Ord. 89, as amended by § III, Ord. 233,
renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970, as amended by § II,
Ord. 406-NS, eff. September 27, 1973)
Sec. 9-4.2921. Prezoning unincorporated territory.
   Unincorporated territory adjoining the City may be prezoned for the purpose
of determining the zoning which will apply to such property in the event of
subsequent annexation to the City. The method of accomplishing such prezoning
shall be as provided for zoning territory within the City. Such zoning shall
become effective at the same time the annexation becomes effective.
   If territory which is annexed has not been prezoned, an urgency interim
ordinance may be adopted in accordance with the provisions of Section
9-4.2920 of this article. If neither a prezoning nor an urgency interim
ordinance has been adopted, the territory shall retain its County zoning
classification upon annexation to the City.
(§ 8164.19, T.O.O.C., as added by § 20, Ord. 89, as amended by § III, Ord. 233,
renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970)
Article 30. Enforcement, Violations, and Penalties
Sec. 9-4.3001. Conflicting licenses, permits, and certificates.
   All departments, officials and public employees vested with the duty or
authority to issue permits, licenses, or certificates shall conform to the
provisions of this chapter. No such license, certificate, or permit, or the
renewal or extension thereof, for uses, buildings, or purposes shall be issued
where the same would be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter. Any
such license, permit, or certificate issued in conflict herewith shall be null
and void.
   Whenever an ordinance which changes the zone classification of any property
is adopted, no building permit shall be issued or renewed for any construction
or improvement or other work which is not permitted by the new zone
classification. If for any reason the ordinance does not become effective
within the time prescribed by law, such restriction shall become null and void
as to the subject property.
   Notwithstanding anything in this Code to the contrary, if the applicable
use, height, area, or other zoning regulations are changed after the owner of
property or a party of interest has lawfully started construction of a building
or structure and has incurred obligations for work and material relating to
such construction before the date of adoption of the zoning ordinance, and, as
a result, such building or structure or use does not conform to the new zoning
regulations, work on such building or structure or use may proceed as
authorized in the building permit at any time within one year after the
effective date of the change of zoning, but after that year such permit shall
be null and void. However, if substantial work on a building or structure above
the foundations is done before the expiration of such one-year period, the
proposed building or structure may be completed as authorized in the building
permit within two (2) years after the effective date of the change of zoning,
but after that time such permit shall be null and void.
(§ 8165, T.O.O.C., renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970)
Sec. 9-4.3002. Annexed property.
   Notwithstanding anything in this Code to the contrary, upon the adoption by
the City of an ordinance annexing property, including a proposed subdivision
for which a tentative map has been approved by the City advisory agency or
governing body, the Building Inspector may, during the period before the
ordinance becomes effective, issue a building permit for construction on such
property upon receipt of a notice in writing by the Community Development
Director or other responsible City official stating that such construction
conforms to the City zoning, subdivision, and other regulations, and, secondly,
that issuance of the permit is approved.
(§ 8165.4, T.O.O.C., renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5, 1970)
Sec. 9-4.3003. Nonconforming buildings and uses.
   Except as provided in Article 28 of this chapter:
   (a)   No building shall be moved into an area, erected, reconstructed, added
to, enlarged, structurally altered, or maintained, and no building or land
shall be used for any purpose except as specifically provided and allowed by
the provisions of this chapter with respect to land uses, building heights,
yards, area coverage, and lot width, and with respect to all other regulations,
conditions, and limitations prescribed by this chapter as applicable to the
same zone or sub-zone in which such use, building, or land is located.
   (b)   While a nonconforming use exists on any lot, no other use of a more
restricted classification shall be permitted even though such other use would
otherwise be a conforming use.
(§ 8165.1, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5,
1970)
Sec. 9-4.3004. Enforcement: Appeals.
   The Community Development Director, or his duly appointed representative, is
hereby designated as the enforcing agent of the provisions of this chapter.
Appeals from the decisions of the enforcing agent in the administration of this
chapter shall be made to the Commission, whose decision shall be final and
conclusive in such matters unless otherwise provided in specific cases in this
chapter.
(§ 8165.2, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5,
1970)
Sec. 9-4.3005. Violations.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use or maintain any building,
structure, or land, or to erect, structurally alter, or enlarge any building or
structure, except for the uses permitted by this chapter and in accordance with
the provisions of this code. The violation of any term or condition of, or
applicable to, any variance or permit shall constitute a violation of the
provisions of this chapter.
(§ 8165.3, T.O.O.C., as renumbered by § XIV, Ord. 173-NS, eff. November 5.
1970, as amended by § XLII, Ord. 770-NS, eff. February 16, 1981, and § 22, Ord.
907-NS, eff. February 11, 1986)
Sec. 9-4.3006. Abatement of nuisances.
   (a)   Declaration of nuisances: Abatement. Any building or structure
constructed, erected, altered, moved, or maintained contrary to the provisions
of this chapter, and any property used contrary to the provisions of this
chapter, or any failure to comply with any condition attached to the granting
of any development permit, special use permit, or variance shall be, and the
same is hereby declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance. Upon the
discovery of facts constituting a nuisance, the duly constituted authorities of
the City shall immediately commence actions or proceedings for the abatement,
removal, and enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. Such authorities
shall take such other steps or may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction
to grant such relief as will abate and remove such buildings, structures, or
uses and restrain and enjoin any person, firm, or corporation from
constructing, erecting, altering, moving, maintaining, or using any property
contrary to the provisions of this chapter or failing to comply with any
condition attached to the granting of any development permit, special use
permit, or variance.
   (b)   Service stations. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this
chapter to the contrary, gasoline service stations are hereby declared to be a
special class of land use.
   (1)   Any change from a service station use shall only be permitted through
the issuance of a special use permit, even though the proposed new use is
otherwise permitted in the zone without such a permit. No special use permit
may be issued for any use not otherwise, conditionally or unconditionally,
allowed by the zoning. Any change from a service station use without the prior
issuance of a special use permit shall be unlawful, and the buildings and
structures which are the subject of such a change in use are hereby declared to
be a public nuisance.
   (2)   When the service station use of any service station structure and
building is discontinued and such use is not reestablished for a period of
ninety (90) days or a special use permit for a new use has not been applied for
within the same ninety (90) day period, any existing special use permit or
variance shall immediately become null and void, and the service station’s
buildings and structures shall be, and are hereby declared to be, a public
nuisance and shall be abated following notice and a hearing by the Commission.
If, after notice and a hearing as herein provided, the Commission declares that
the buildings and structures are public nuisances, the burden of proof shall be
upon the applicant to show that the ninety (90) day abatement requirement will
cause irreparable and unnecessary hardship. If the owner submits facts
sufficient to convince the Commission that a hardship as described in this
section exists, then the Commission, at its discretion, may grant one ninety
(90) day period in which a special use permit for a change in use or to
reestablish the service station use may be applied for.
   (c)   Remedies nonexclusive. The procedure provided in this section shall be
in addition to any other remedy provided elsewhere by law.
(§ 1, Ord. 196-NS, eff. April 8, 1971, as amended by § I, Ord. 631-NS, eff. May
26, 1977)
Sec. 9-4.3007. Noncompliance with permits or zone clearance: Stop orders.
   Whenever any building work, construction, grading, encroachment or other
development activity is being done contrary to the provisions of this title or
contrary to or without securing a permit, zone clearance or other entitlement,
the Community Development Director, after consultation with the City Attorney,
may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged
in doing or causing such work to be done or on any owner, developer or
permittee, and any such person or persons shall forthwith stop such work until
notified in writing by the Community Development Director that the work may
again proceed.
(§ 23, Ord. 907-NS, eff. February 11, 1986)
Article 31. Hillside Planned Development Zones (H-P-D)
Sec. 9-4.3100. Purpose and policy (H-P-D).
   The Council hereby finds that the terrain of certain areas of the City
provides a unique and substantial character to the area and forms an integral
part of the City’s total environment. Due to their physical dominance on the
City’s landscape, development of the hillside areas will definitely affect the
visual and environmental character of the community. The City’s primary
objective regarding hillside development is to preserve the natural terrain,
quality environment, and aesthetic character of the City while encouraging
creative, innovative, and safe residential development with a variety of
housing types. Such characteristics will only be achieved when special
consideration is given to those developments, subdivisions, and lot splits
within hillside areas on an individual basis and proper consideration of the
variations in conditions, design criteria, and other requirements which must be
flexible in order to achieve a development that meets the foregoing purpose
consistent with the policies set forth in this section.
   Subdivisions and other developments in hillside areas shall be subject to
the provisions of this article where the H-P-D Zone has been assigned to
specific hillside areas as a result of public hearings held pursuant to the
provisions of Article 29 of this title.
   In enacting the provisions of this article, it is the intention and policy
of the City to:
   (a)   Encourage only minimal grading which relates to the natural contour of
the land, and which will round off, in a natural manner, sharp angles at the
top and ends of cut and fill slopes, and which does not result in a “staircase”
or “padding” effect;
   (b)   Require the retention of trees and other vegetation which stabilize
steep hillsides, retain moisture, prevent erosion, and enhance the natural
scenic beauty and, where necessary, require additional landscaping to enhance
the scenic and safety qualities of the hillsides,
   (c)   Encourage a variety of building types and design, when appropriate, to
materially reduce grading and disturbance of the natural character of the area;
   (d)   Require immediate planting wherever appropriate to maintain necessary
cut and fill slopes, to stabilize them by plant roots, and to conceal the raw
soil from view;
   (e)   Require the retention of natural landmarks and prominent natural
features which enhance the character of a specific area, for example, the
natural skyline; and
   (f)   Impose appropriate conditions on the development of all slopes to
obtain conformity with the approved development policies of the Thousand Oaks
Development Plan and the policies set forth in this section.
(§ 1, Ord. 224-NS, eff. September 9, 1971)
Sec. 9-4.3101. Hillside areas defined: Application of article provisions (H-P-
D).
   “Hillside areas” shall mean those areas so designated on the Hillside
Development District Map which areas, in general, have an average slope before
grading of ten (10%) percent or more. Such map shall be proposed to the Council
for adoption by a resolution by the Commission only after a public hearing,
noticed and conducted in the same manner required for zone changes in
accordance with the provisions of Article 29 of this chapter. All properties
located within such district shall be considered for possible H-P-D zoning, and
the development thereof shall be subject to the criteria set forth in this
article.
(§ 1, Ord. 224-NS, eff. September 9, 1971)
Sec. 9-4.3102. Permitted uses (H-P-D).
   Only the uses identified in Article 21 of this chapter as being permitted in
the Hillside Planned Development (H-P-D) Zone shall be established or
maintained on property located therein, subject to the permitting requirements
and limitations set forth in said Article 21.
(§ 1, Ord. 224-NS, eff. September 9, 1971, as amended by § I, Ord. 383-NS, eff.
July 12, 1973, § 3, Ord. 989-NS, eff. February 23, 1988, § 32, Ord. 1392-NS,
eff. June 7, 2002, § 12, Ord. 1412-NS, eff. August 14, 2003, and § 44, Ord.
1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.3103. Hillside Planned Development Single-Family Detached sub-zone (H-
P-D–S-F-D).
   Only the uses identified in Article 21 of this chapter as being permitted in
the Hillside Planned Development Single-Family Detached (H-P-D–S-F-D) sub-zone
shall be established or maintained on property located therein, subject to the
permitting requirements and limitations set forth in said Article 21. All other
provisions of this article shall apply in the H-P-D–S-F-D sub-zone.
(§ III, Ord. 383-NS, eff. July 12, 1973, as amended by § 45, Ord. 1620-NS, eff.
August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.3104. Reserved.
(§ IV, Ord. 383-NS, eff. July 12, 1973, as amended by § V, Ord. 779-NS, eff.
June 11, 1981, § VIII, Ord. 815-NS, eff. September 7, 1982, § 13, Ord. 1189-NS,
eff. November 2, 1993, § 16, Ord. 1273-NS, eff. January 8, 1997, § 8, Ord.
1306-NS, eff. November 20, 1997, § 19, Ord. 1555-NS, eff. May 13, 2011; Part
14, Ord. 1614-NS, eff. April 22, 2016, and repealed by § 46, Ord. 1620-NS, eff.
August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.3105. Density (H-P-D).
   No more than seven (7) units shall be permitted on any one net acre through
a density transfer in the H-P-D Zone. The density for property within an H-P-
D Zone shall depend on the average slope of the natural terrain of the area
within the proposed development and a consideration of all requirements of this
Code.
   “Average slope” of a parcel or any portion thereof shall be computed by
applying the formula:
   S = 0.00229 I L
    A
to the natural slope of the land before any grading is commenced, as determined
from a topographic map conforming to national mapping standards and having a
scale not less than one (1") inch equals two hundred (200') feet and a contour
interval not less than five (5') feet. The formula letters represent the
following:
   S   =   Average percent slope;
   I   =   Contour interval, in feet;
   L   =   Summation of length of contours, in feet; and
   A   =   Area in acres of the parcel being considered.
   The density for property within this zone shall be computed in accordance
with the following scale:
 
Average Percent of Slopes Maximum Density (D/U per Gross Acre)
10 – 14.9%              2.0
15 – 19.9%              1.6
20 – 24.9%              1.2
25 – 29.9%              .8
30 – 34.9%              .4
35 and over               .1
 
   For certain unique properties within this zone, where the average slope
percentage is less than ten (10%) percent, the Council may allow the maximum
density of four (4.0) units per gross acre for the entire development.
   All parcels of record which have been recorded prior to September 9, 1971,
and which subsequently are placed in the H-P-D Zone, shall be subject to all
the provisions of this article except, when such parcels are located in natural
slope areas of twenty-four and nine-tenths (24.9%) percent and above, all
parcels shall be permitted at least one dwelling unit.
(§ 1, Ord. 224-NS, eff. September 9, 1971, renumbered by § II, Ord. 383-NS,
eff. July 12, 1973, and amended by § 7, Ord. 899-NS, eff. October 22, 1985)
Sec. 9-4.3106. Grading control (H-P-D).
   (a)   Land with twenty-five (25%) percent or greater slope shall not be
graded except pursuant to an H-P-D permit only where it can be shown that a
minimum amount of development is in the spirit of, and compatible with, the
purposes and policies set forth in this article.
   (b)   The following table is the minimum percentages of the site’s ground
surface which shall remain in a natural state (no cut or fill) or be developed
solely for recreational purposes based on the average percent slope of a
parcel:
                              Minimum percent of Site to Remain in Natural
Average Percent Slope of Site State (No Cut or Fill) or Be Developed Solely for
                              Recreational Purposes
                              Minimum percent of Site to Remain in Natural
Average Percent Slope of Site State (No Cut or Fill) or Be Developed Solely for
                              Recreational Purposes
0.0–14.9%                   32.5%
15.0–17.4%                  40.0%
17.5–19.9%                  47.5%
20.0–22.4%                  55.0%
22.5–24.9%                  62.5%
25.0–27.4%                  70.0%
27.5–29.9%                  77.5%
30.0–32.4%                  85.0%
32.5–34.9%                  92.5%
35.0 and above %              100.00% (except minimum grading for dwelling and
                              driveway areas)
 
   (c)   In order to keep all graded areas and cuts and fills to a minimum, to
eliminate unsightly grading, to preserve the property’s natural appearance and
beauty as far as possible, and serve the other purposes of this article,
specific conditions and requirements shall be placed on the size of the areas
to be graded, the size of building footprint, the shape, size, height, and
angles of cut and fill slopes. Retaining walls may also be required.
   (d)   Land remaining undeveloped in a natural state or open space or land
developed solely for recreational purposes shall be owned and maintained in
accordance with the provisions of Section
9-4.3107 of this article.
(§ 1, Ord. 224-NS, eff. September 9, 1971, renumbered by § 11, Ord. 383-NS,
eff. July 12, 1973, and amended by § 7, Ord. 899-NS, eff. October 22, 1985)
Sec. 9-4.3107. Open space ownership and maintenance (H-P-D).
   Those areas covered by a hillside development permit which are to remain as
undeveloped open spaces, such as undevelopable slopes and natural landmarks,
etc., or which are to be used for recreational purposes may be offered, through
dedication, to a governmental jurisdiction as part of an open space and park
system. If, however, the district or City does not accept such an offer, the
developer shall make provisions for the ownership and care of the open space in
such a manner that there can be necessary maintenance thereof. Such area shall
be provided with appropriate access and shall be designated as separate parcels
which may be maintained through special fees charged to the residents of the
subject development or through an appropriate homeowners’ association. All cuts
and fills above or below the height of the first terrace would have to be
maintained in perpetuity and guaranteed through the bond of the developer.
(§ 1, Ord. 224-NS, eff. September 9, 1971, renumbered by § 11, Ord. 383-NS,
eff. July 12, 1973)
Sec. 9-4.3108. Development standards (H-P-D).
   The following development standards are established as the minimum deemed
necessary to insure the public health, safety, and welfare within the H-P-
D Zone and to accomplish the intent and purposes of this article:
   (a)   Circulation.
   (1)   Hillside street standards should reflect a rural, rather than urban,
character. Street alignments, where possible, should be parallel to contours in
valleys or on ridges. Where a location between a valley and ridge is
unavoidable, directional pavements should be split, with the principal of
grading being half cut and half fill versus all fill or all cut. The detailed
design characteristics for each type of street shall be very carefully
considered within the framework of requiring absolute minimum geometric
standards. The following schedule and diagrams are suggested as being
consistent with this premises:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5db25de1c73418e6f4353e3c90932c315a871cae/
IMAGES/0-0-0-15.gif]
Above fourteen (14%) percent grade, concrete pavement shall be required. Public
utility easements may be required outside the street right-of-way if necessary.
The Public Works Director and the County Fire Department may modify the above
street standards as necessary to meet the purposes and policies set forth in
this article.
   (2)   Sidewalks and walkways shall be provided in accordance with a
carefully conceived total pedestrian circulation plan and not rigidly appended
onto every street.
   (3)   Bicycle and equestrian trails should be integrated into the overall
circulation plan for any project in this zone.
   (4)   Street lighting in hillside areas should be of low profile design,
unobtrusive, and designed to enhance a rural character.
   (b)   Parking.
   (1)   Parking should be provided off the street, and parking lanes may be
omitted. The intermittent widening of streets for parking and turnarounds shall
be encouraged at appropriate places.
   (2)   The following on-site parking standards are suggested as being the
minimum desirable and acceptable for residential units within this zone. In
cases where half spaces occur with single units, the standard would be
increased to the next whole figure, notwithstanding the fact that adjoining
properties might share common parking areas. Each required parking space shall
be accessible at all times and shall be accessible at all times and shall not
include driveway or turnaround areas:
 
Use                        Parking Spaces
Studio units               1 covered space, plus 0.5 open space
One-bedroom units          1 covered space, plus 1 open space
Two-bedroom units          1.5 covered spaces, plus 1 open space
Three-bedroom units        2 covered spaces, plus 1.5 open spaces
Four-bedroom units or more 2 covered spaces, plus 2 open spaces
 
   Modifications of the above standards may be permitted by the Council if such
modifications will better meet the purposes and policies set forth in this
article.
   (c)   Building design. Building design and architectural features shall be
compatible with the specific parcel to be developed and with the purposes and
policies set forth in this article. Lot sizes, building types, height limits,
and setbacks shall be flexible in order to achieve this end; however, safety
considerations shall be of foremost concern.
   (d)   Fire protection.
   (1)   The lot size and the placement of buildings thereon shall be such that
adequate clearance of hazardous, flammable vegetative cover may be performed
within the limits of the development.
   (2)   The roofs and exteriors of buildings shall be of fire retardant
materials as provided by the Building Code.
   (3)   The buildings shall be spaced in such a manner as to minimize the
exposure risk, from an adjacent structural fire, from structure to structure as
approved by the County Fire Department.
   (4)   All easements for firebreaks for the fire safety of built-up areas
shall encompass access for fire-fighting personnel and equipment which may mean
motorized travel in some cases; such easements shall be dedicated to this
specific purpose by being recorded.
   (5)   Where parking lanes are not provided, a lane eight (8') feet wide and
fifteen (15') feet on each side of fire hydrants shall be provided and posted
“No Parking.”
   (6)   All brush, as determined by the County Fire Department, shall be
removed and cleared within twenty (20') feet of each side of every roadway.
This includes all flammable vegetation or other combustible growth. This should
not apply, however, to single specimen trees, ornamental shrubbery, and
cultivated ground cover, such as green grass, ivy, succulents, or similar
plants used as ground covers, provided they do not form a means of readily
transmitting tire where brush is removed by the requirements of the County Fire
Department.
   (7)   That portion of any tree which extends within ten (10') feet of the
top of the chimney shall be removed or trimmed.
   (8)   All combustible vegetation cover or other combustible growth shall be
removed prior to the construction of buildings a distance of one hundred (100')
feet, as specified in the Fire Code.
   (9)   Grass and other vegetation located more than thirty (30') feet from
the structure and less than eighteen (18") inches in height above the ground
may be maintained where necessary to stabilize soil erosion.
   (e)   Erosion control.
   (1)   All manufactured slopes, other than those constructed in rock, shall
be planted or otherwise protected from the effects of storm runoff erosion
within thirty (30) days after the completion of the grading. Planting shall be
designed to blend the slope with the surrounding terrain and development.
Manufactured slopes in rock should be provided with soil pockets to contain
landscaping. Irrigation facilities shall be required to provide for the proper
maintenance of the planted areas.
   (2)   Landscaping and irrigation plans shall be submitted and approved in
accordance with the established provisions of this Code and the policies for
all manufactured slopes and public areas. The Council may require additional
landscaping where the Council deems necessary.
   (f)   Parks and recreation. The provisions of Article 26 of this chapter
relating to the dedication of land, payment of fees, or both for park and
recreational purposes shall be applicable to land for which H-P-D permits are
required.
(§ 1, Ord. 224-NS, eff. September 9, 1971, as amended by § VII, Ord. 376-NS,
eff. May 31, 1973, as renumbered by § II, Ord. 383-NS, eff. July 12, 1973)
Sec. 9-4.3109. Permits (H-P-D).
   No permit shall be issued for the grading of land, for the construction,
erection, or moving of any building or structure, or for the use of any land
subject to the provisions of this article unless an H-P-D permit has been
issued in accordance with this article. Provisions of Articles 24 and 25 of
this chapter shall not apply to this article. An H-P-D permit shall be approved
prior to the filing of a grading plan.
(§ 1, Ord. 224-NS, eff. September 9, 1971, as renumbered by § II, Ord. 383-NS,
eff. July 12, 1973, and as amended by § 8, Ord. 899-NS, eff. October 22, 1985)
Sec. 9-4.3110. Application for hillside plan development permit.
   (a)   The applicant shall submit to the Community Development Department an
application for a hillside plan development permit with the appropriate fee as
prescribed by City Council resolution.
   (b)   The applicant shall submit statistical information and a complete
development plan showing the proposed use(s) for the property, including the
dimensions and locations of all proposed structures, parking spaces, streets,
recreation areas, open spaces, a site-grading plan, and plotting of all trees
and vegetation, and such additional information as may be requested by the
Community Development Director. The application shall also include grading,
phasing, the sequence of construction, and a certified soil report and
geological report from a civil engineer or geologist registered with the State.
A three-dimensional scale model displaying the site before and after grading,
or on-site mock-ups outlining structures shall be required when deemed
necessary by the Director, Commission, or Council. A certified and current
topographic survey shall be submitted to verify average slopes of the entire
property, and shall identify the location and area in slope categories of
0–10%, 10%–25%, and over 25%.
(§ 1, Ord. 224-NS, eff. September 9, 1971, as renumbered by § II, Ord. 383-NS,
eff. July 11-1 1973, as amended by § XVIII, Ord. 581-NS, eff. August 12, 1976,
§ XVI, Ord. 766-NS, eff. April 16, 1981, and § 8, Ord. 899-NS, eff. October 22,
1985)
Sec. 9-4.3111. Permit hearing process.
   (a)   The issuance of an H-P-D permit shall be approved by the Commission,
and any decision of the Commission shall be appealable to the City Council. The
procedures for notices, hearings, appeals, the effect of any decision and other
permit processing steps shall be the same as those set forth in Article 28 of
this chapter.
   (b)   The Commission or, if on appeal, the Council shall grant an H-P-
D permit if the applicant produces sufficient proof that the development will
not be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, and
is in compliance with the policies and intent set forth in this article. The
Commission or Council may require the modification of the proposed hillside
development and impose conditions to assure that the development is consistent
with the policies set forth in Section
9-4.3100, and open space and conservation elements of the City’s General Plan.
(§ 1, Ord. 224-NS, eff. September 9, 1971, as renumbered by § II, Ord. 383-NS,
eff. July 12, 1973, and as amended by § 8, Ord. 899-NS, eff. October 22, 1985)
Sec. 9-4.3112. Development allotment or reservation of allotment required (H-P-
D).
(§ III, Ord. 757-NS, eff. September 4, 1980, as amended by § 5, Ord. 867-NS,
eff. September 4, 1984 and repealed by § 36, Ord. 1555-NS, eff. May 13, 2011)
Article 32. Public, Quasi-Public, and Institutional Lands and Facilities Zone
(P-L)*
*   The title of Article 32, formerly entitled “Public Lands and Facilities
Zones (P-L),” amended by Section I, Ord. 506-NS, effective December 12, 1974.
Sec. 9-4.3200. Purposes (P-L).
   The Public, Quasi-Public, and Institutional Lands and Facilities Zone (P-L)
is established for the following purposes:
   (a)   To ensure that the public, quasi-public, and institutional use of
property is related to the purposes and policies of the land use element of the
General Plan;
   (b)   To recognize the public, quasi-public, and institutional nature of
particular parcels of land and provide standards and guidelines for their
continued use and future development; and
   (c)   To ensure that proposed public, quasi-public, and institutional
structures and developments in the zone will be compatible with surrounding
zones and uses with respect to adequate vehicular access and circulation, off-
street parking, architectural and site design, landscaping, and other features.
   The requirements of the P-L Zone are intended to apply to publicly owned
property, property owned by quasi-public or public service entities, such as
utility companies, property used or planned to be used for certain
institutional facilities, such as hospitals and private schools and colleges,
and certain private recreational facilities developed within the P-L Zone. It
is explicitly not intended by this article to imply present or future public
ownership of land within the Public, Quasi-Public, and Institutional Lands and
Facilities Zone.
(§ I, Ord. 220-NS, eff. August 19, 1971, as amended by § II, Ord. 506-NS, eff.
December 12, 1974)
Sec. 9-4.3201. Permitted uses (P-L).
   Only the uses identified in Article 21 of this chapter as being permitted in
the Public, Quasi-Public, and Institutional Lands and Facilities (P-L) Zone
shall be established or maintained on property located therein, subject to the
permitting requirements and limitations set forth in said Article 21.
(§ I, Ord. 220-NS, eff. August 19, 1971, as amended by § III, Ord. 506-NS, eff.
December 12, 1974, § 10, Ord. 980-NS, eff. November 3, 1987, § 16, Ord. 1379-
NS, eff. August 9, 2001, and § 47, Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.3202. Reserved.
(§ I, Ord. 220-NS, eff. August 19, 1971, as amended by § 1, Ord. 242-NS, eff.
November 25, 1971, § XVII, Ord. 312-NS, eff. November 2, 1972, § I, Ord. 390-
NS, eff. July 19, 1973, § 3, Ord. 1219-NS, eff. October 11, 1994, § 3, Ord.
1243-NS, eff. October 3, 1995, § 9, Ord. 1306-NS, eff. November 20, 1997, § 20,
Ord. 1547-NS, eff. January 12, 2011, § 20, Ord. 1555-NS, eff. May 13, 2011; §
16, Ord. 1614-NS, eff. April 22, 2016, and repealed by § 48, Ord. 1620-NS, eff.
August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.3203. Development permits: Conditions and limitations (P-L).
   Unless otherwise stated in the development permit, such permit shall be
subject to all the following conditions and limitations:
   (a)   Buildings and other structures shall not occupy more than twenty-five
(25%) percent of the area for which the development permit is issued.
   (b)   Whenever the property on which a building or structure will be erected
abuts an R Zone, there shall be erected along the property line abutting the R
Zone a solid wall six (6') feet in height which substantially bars the view and
light. Such requirement may be waived or conditionally modified, including
appropriately irrigated landscaping, by the Commission where substantial
topographic variations exist.
   (c)   No structure shall exceed a height of thirty-five (35') feet unless
approved by the Commission as meeting the intent of this article.
   (d)   Each building shall have a landscaped front and corner side yard of
not less than twenty (20') feet, exclusive of vehicular paving turnaround
areas, and drives other than drives providing access from a street to a parking
area located on other portions of the parcel.
   (e)   The side yard setbacks for structures adjoining R Zones shall be five
(5') feet for one-story structures and ten (10') feet for two (2) story
structures. Side yards viewable from public streets shall be screened or
landscaped.
   (f)   Rear yards of not less than twenty (20') feet shall be provided for
each building erected and shall be screened or landscaped if viewable from a
public street or walk.
   (g)   Signs only as set forth in Article 23 of this chapter and as follows:
   (1)   Attached: One and one half (1-1/2) square foot of sign area for each
lineal foot of building frontage; and
   (2)   Freestanding. One monument sign with an area of one square foot for
each foot of property frontage on the principal street (maximum six (6') feet
in height and fifty (50) square feet in area).
(§ I, Ord. 220-NS, eff. August 19, 1971, as amended by § 2, Ord. 242-NS, eff.
November 25, 1971, and § 49, Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.3204. City projects reviewed by Planning Commission (P-L).
   (a)   City Permit and Planning Commission Review for City Projects. A City
permit or entitlement, with a Planning Commission decision, shall be required
for all City public works, City uses, City improvements or projects, except as
those qualifying projects under subsection (b). The Planning Commission shall
conduct a noticed public hearing on its consideration of such City projects.
For such City projects or uses the Planning Commission may apply any standard,
impact analysis and criteria it otherwise applies when considering City land
use entitlements or development permits for private projects or uses.
   (b)   Exceptions to Planning Commission Review and Permit. Planning
Commission decision under subsection (a) above shall not be required for any
City proposed or funded project, City public building, City use, or other City
owned or leased structure, facility, improvement, equipment installation or
real property use that:
   (1)   Had a Planning Commission review or final approval by the City Council
prior to the effective date of this section;
   (2)   A construction contract had been awarded regarding such, or on-site
City staff work had been implemented prior to the effective date of this
section;
   (3)   Is used for or with regard to:
   i.    the collection, transporting, pumping, storage, handling or treatment
of waste water;
   ii.     the supplying, transporting, pumping, storage, handling or treatment
of water;
   iii.     a City facility security, exterior lights or law enforcement
function;
   iv.     a street, median, sound walls, lights, sidewalk, utility lines or
undergrounding thereof or any landscaping;
   v.    a traffic signal, traffic sign or traffic control or enforcement
device;
   vii.     a site or building that is not to be open to the general public; or
   viii.     the collection, conveyance, pumping, retention, handling or
discharge of storm water.
   (4)   Any one time use, irregularly scheduled use or infrequent special
event using City property.
   No City permit or entitlement approval shall be required for qualifying City
work, uses, improvements or projects described or listed under this subsection.
(§ I, Ord. 220-NS, eff. August 19, 1971; repealed by § 43, Ord. 1178-NS, eff.
April 27, 1993, as added by § 4, Ord. 1219-NS, eff. October 11, 1994, as
amended by § 4, Ord. 1243-NS, eff. October 3, 1995, and § 2, Ord. 1419-NS, eff.
December 17, 2003)
Article 33. Height Limit Overlay Zone (H)
Sec. 9-4.3300. Purpose (H).
   The H or Height Limit Overlay Zone is intended to be applied as an overlay
zone of the C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1, and M-2 Zones on properties where it may be
appropriate to consider a waiver of the building height limit specified by the
underlying commercial or industrial zone to a maximum of seventy-five (75')
feet. The application of the Height Limit Overlay Zone (H) shall be in the
manner specified for all rezoning applications by the provisions of Article 29
of this chapter. When property has been rezoned to the Height Limit Overlay
Zone (H), all the regulations of the underlying commercial or manufacturing
zone shall apply, except as set forth in this article. Property in the Height
Overlay Zone (H) shall be so designated by the appropriate zoning symbol on the
zoning maps. For example, property zoned C-3, with a Height Limit Overlay Zone
(H), shall be designated C-3-H on the zoning maps.
(§ XI, Ord. 495-NS, eff. October 10, 1974)
Sec. 9-4.3301. Height limits (H).
   Within the Height Limit Overlay Zone (H), the height limit of the underlying
zone may be waived by the Commission or Council upon the review of an
individual application. In no case, however, shall a building or structure
exceed seventy-five (75') feet in the Height Limit Overlay Zone (H).
(§ XI, Ord. 495-NS, eff. October 10, 1974)
Sec. 9-4.3302. Front yards (H).
   (a)   Commercial zones.
   (1)   In the C-2 Zone, lots in the Height Limit Overlay Zone (H) shall have
a front yard of twenty (20') feet, or the average setback of adjacent
buildings, plus one foot for each one foot of building height excess of thirty-
five (35') feet. Such front setback area shall not be used for vehicular
parking.
   (2)   In the C-1 and C-3 Zones, lots in the Height Limit Overlay Zone (H)
shall comply with the front yard setback specified by the underlying zone.
   (b)   Manufacturing zones.
   (1)   In the M-2 Zone, lots in the Height Limit Overlay Zone (H) shall have
a front yard setback of ten (10') feet, plus one foot for each one foot of
building height in excess of thirty-five (35') feet.
   (2)   In the M-1 Zone, lots in the Height Limit Overlay Zone (H) shall
comply with the front yard setback specified by the underlying zone.
(§ XI, Ord. 495-NS, eff. October 10, 1974)
Sec. 9-4.3303. Side yards (H).
   (a)   Commercial zones.
   (1)   In the C-2 Zone, lots in the Height Limit Overlay Zone (H) which have
buildings in excess of thirty-five (35') feet in height shall have side yards
equal to or greater than one-half (1/2) the front yard setback set forth in
subsection (1) of subsection (a) of Section
9-4.3302 of this article.
   (2)   In the C-1 and C-3 Zones, lots in the Height Limit Overlay Zone (H)
shall comply with the side yard setbacks specified by the underlying zone.
   (b)   Manufacturing zones.
   (1)   In the M-2 Zone, lots in the Height Limit Overlay Zone (H) which have
buildings in excess of thirty-five (35') feet in height shall have side yards
equal to or greater than ten (10') feet or one-half (1/2) the front yard
setback set forth in subsection (1) of subsection (b) of Section
9-4.3302 of this article, whichever is greater.
   (2)   In the M-1 Zone, lots in the Height Limit Overlay Zone (H) shall
comply with the side yard setbacks specified by the underlying zone.
(§ XI, Ord. 495-NS, eff. October 10, 1974)
Sec. 9-4.3304. Rear yards (H).
   (a)   Commercial zones.
   (1)   In the C-2 Zone, lots in the Height Limit Overlay Zone (H) which have
buildings in excess of thirty-five (35') feet in height shall have rear yards
equal to or greater than one-half (1/2) the front yard setback set forth in
subsection (1) of subsection (a) of Section
9-4.3302 of this article.
   (2)   In the C-1 and C-3 Zones, lots in the Height Limit Overlay Zone (H)
shall comply with the rear yard setbacks specified by the underlying zone.
   (b)   Manufacturing Zones.
   (1)   In the M-2 Zone, lots in the Height Limit Overlay Zone (H) which have
buildings in excess of thirty-five (35') feet in height shall have rear yards
equal to or greater than ten (10') feet in height shall have rear yards equal
to or greater than ten (10') feet or one-half (1/2) the front yard setback set
forth in subsection (1) of subsection (b) of Section
9-4.3302 of this article, whichever is greater.
   (2)   In the M-1 Zone, lots in the Height Limit Overlay Zone (H) shall
comply with the rear yard setbacks specified by the underlying zone.
(§ XI, Ord. 495-NS, eff. October 10, 1974)
Sec. 9-4.3305. Area requirements (H).
   Within the Height Limit Overlay Zone (H), buildings or structures in excess
of thirty-five (35') feet in height shall have a minimum parcel size of two
(2.0) acres. All parcels within the Height Limit Overlay Zone (H) having a
building or structure in excess of thirty-five (35') feet in height shall have
a minimum width of one hundred fifty (150') feet, except that corner lots may
have a minimum lot width of one hundred twenty (120') feet.
(§ XI, Ord. 495-NS, eff. October 10, 1974)
Article 34. Historic Landmark Overlay Zone (HL)
Sec. 9-4.3400. Purpose (HL).
   The HL or Historic Landmark Overlay Zone is established to promote the
economic and general welfare of the City by identifying and regulating real
property of special historic or cultural significance, as defined in Section
1-9.205 of Article 2 of Chapter 9 of Title 1 of this Code, in order to protect
and preserve the rich cultural and natural heritage of the City and the Conejo
Valley. The application of the HL Zone shall be in the manner specified for all
rezoning applications by the provisions of Article 29 of this chapter. When
property has been rezoned to the HL Zone, all the regulations of the underlying
zone shall apply, except as set forth in this article. Property in the HL Zone
shall be so designated by the appropriate zoning symbol on the zoning maps.
(§ I, Ord. 632-NS, eff. June 2, 1977)
Sec. 9-4.3401. Delineation of historic landmarks or sites (HL).
   The historic landmarks and sites to which this article applies shall be
defined and delineated by the Thousand Oaks Cultural Heritage Board in the
manner provided in Section 2-2.2.04 of Article 2 of Chapter 2 of Title 2 of
this Code. A map and corresponding description of each landmark or site so
delineated shall be presented to the Council for adoption by resolution and
shall be kept on file with the Community Development Department for review.
(§ I Ord. 632-NS, eff. June 2, 1977)
Sec. 9-4.3402. Archaeological sites: Special provisions (HL).
   Due to the sensitive nature of archaeological sites and resources and the
potential for the abuse thereof resulting from public knowledge of their
location, landmark sites defined under Section
1-9.205 of Article 2 of Chapter 9 of Title 1 of this Code relating to the
habitation, activity, or culture of prehistoric man or historic native American
culture shall not be designated on zoning maps. However, the development of
properties containing archaeological resources of such nature shall be subject
to all the other provisions of this article.
(§ I, Ord. 632-NS, eff. June 2, 1977)
Sec. 9-4.3403. Regulations (HL).
   The tentative tract maps, special use permits, and any and all other
entitlements or permits for the development of real property located within the
Historic Landmark Overlay Zone may be conditioned by the Commission or
Community Development Department in such a manner as to:
   (a)   Ensure the preservation of the historic landmark or site;
   (b)   Minimize adverse impacts on the historic landmark or site;
   (c)   Allow reasonable time for qualified professionals to perform
investigations of the landmark or site; or
   (d)   Preserve for posterity, in such other manner as is necessary or
appropriate in the public interest, the valuable aspects of the cultural or
historical landmark or site involved.
(§ I, Ord. 632-NS, eff. June 2, 1977)
Sec. 9-4.3404. Appeals (HL).
   Any condition imposed pursuant to the provisions of this article may be
appealed to the Council in the manner prescribed in this Code, and the
determination of the Council of such appeal shall be final.
(§ I, Ord. 632-NS, eff. June 2, 1977)
Article 35. Protected Ridgeline Overlay Zone Regulations (PR)
Sec. 9-4.3500. Purpose (PR).
   The City of Thousand Oaks is bounded by significant and prominent natural
land forms and dotted with prominent knolls including, but not limited to, the
Santa Monica Mountains, the Conejo Mountain, the Mt. Clef Ridge, and the Conejo
Ridge. The visitors to and residents of the City and benefitted by the
preservation of these scenic vistas and their natural features. The
preservation of these natural views and open space areas by the overlay zone
described in this article will enhance the public health, safety, and welfare
of such visitors and residents by promoting a rural sense of openness,
protecting natural and visual assets of the community, preserving areas of
native vegetation and wildlife, preventing soil erosion resulting from grading
in such steep areas, promoting a less urban feeling and maintaining the
identity of this community. The ridgeline preservation overlay zone and
regulations of this article are also enacted to implement those policies of the
City’s General Plan for the preservation of significant natural land forms, the
maintenance and preservation of open space, and the protection of the scenic
backdrop to the City’s major roadways.
(§ 1, Ord. 1099-Ns, eff. April 25, 1991)
Sec. 9-4.3501. Protected ridgeline zone (PR).
   The development, vegetation clearance, and grading standards contained in
this article shall apply to all development, grading and other activities on
properties which include those ridgelines identified in the “Ridgeline Study”
adopted by the City Council in 1978, and an updated on October 11, 1988. The
term “protected ridgeline” when used in this article shall mean those
ridgelines depicted on the maps in that Ridgeline Study, and any other
ridgeline identified by the City Council from time to time. Such ridgelines
shall be protected by the application of the (PR) overlay zone or specific plan
described in this article, applied pursuant to zoning procedures of Article 29
of this chapter. In considering the application of the (PR) overlay zone to a
particular property, the Planning Commission shall consider and advise the
Council, as part of its recommendation to the Council, whether public interest
would best be served by the public acquisition of the property.
(§ 1, Ord. 1099-NS, eff. April 25, 1991)
Sec. 9-4.3502. Protected ridgeline development standards.
   (a)   Within the Protected Ridgeline Overlay Zone, no new structure or
addition to an existing structure shall be placed or constructed, no grading
shall occur and, except as to meet fire clearance requirements, no native
vegetation shall be removed within three hundred (300') feet horizontally or
one hundred (100') feet vertically of the crest of a protected ridgeline.
However, if because of the limited size of a parcel, the topography or other
physical site constraints there is no suitable location for the addition to an
existing structure or the development of one single family detached home on
residential zoned parcel or a viable use on a commercial or industrial zoned
parcel, minor encroachments into this area or development on the parcel may be
authorized by the Planning Commission consistent with subsection (b) of this
section. No subdivision map shall be approved creating a parcel or a lot within
three hundred (300') feet horizontally or one hundred (100') feet vertically of
the crest of a protected ridgeline, unless all development and grading activity
on said parcel(s) or lot(s) is prohibited, or limited to antennae, open space
uses, water reservoirs or similar uses of benefit to the general public.
   (b)   If, because of the parcel’s limited size or other physical or
topographic constraints, development, grading or clearance of native vegetation
can only occur within the restricted area of a Protected Ridgeline Overlay Zone
the following development standards shall apply:
   (1)   Any structure shall be located on the portions of the parcel which are
least visible from roadways depicted on the Circulation Element of the General
Plan and existing developed areas.
   (2)   No structure shall be placed or constructed in such a way that it
silhouettes against the skyline above the ridgeline when viewed from any
roadway depicted on the Circulation Element of the General Plan.
   (3)   No grading or berming shall occur which alters the natural contours or
changes the elevation of the crest of the ridgeline in order to create a pad.
   (4)   All buildings shall be low profile. No residential structure shall be
higher than seventeen (17') feet measured from the finished grade at the center
of the building wall to the highest roof elevation and any new dwelling unit,
including any garage and accessory structures, shall not exceed, in total, two
thousand (2,000) square feet. For existing structures, no alteration or
addition to that structure shall raise the height or the elevation of the
existing roof.
   (5)   All buildings shall be setback at least fifty (50') feet from the edge
of the finished pad.
   (6)   Berms, rounded contour grading and landscaping shall be used when
necessary to soften the visual impacts created by structures and grading.
   (7)   The grading, design, construction, vegetation clearance, landscaping
and development shall sensitively conform to and fit into the natural terrain
through creative development techniques, such as, but not limited to, split-
level designs, terracing, use of native plant types, and natural blending
architectural features (such as the angle of the roof line appearing as an
extension of the adjacent downslope).
   (8)   Only low profile shaded street lighting, if needed, shall be used to
reduce down slope light spillover and night glare.
   (c)   An applicant may request modification of the provisions of subsection
(a) of this section pertaining to subdivision maps, and modification of the
standards set forth in subsections (b) (4) and (b) (5) of this section through
the filing of a Special Use Permit application. The Planning Commission shall
evaluate such requests on a case-by-case basis in conjunction with their
consideration of other entitlement applications for a project, if any. The
Commission may approve, deny, or conditionally approve such permits. The
decision whether to grant modifications in conjunction with approval of a
project shall be based upon the extent to which the project meets the intent
and purpose set forth in Section
9-4.3500, above. A permit modifying the standards of this section may be
granted, if the findings set forth in subsection (d) are made. Any decision of
the Commission may be appealed to the City Council pursuant to the provisions
of Article 28 of chapter 4 of Title 9 of this Code.
   (d)   Required findings.
   (1)   Where subdivision of land within the Protected Ridgeline Overlay Zone
is permitted, that the project, as approved, complies with the intent of the
Protected Ridgeline Overlay Zone in that it protects the scenic quality of
identified ridgeline areas by preserving in a natural state the significant and
prominent natural landforms which bound the Conejo Valley and the prominent
knolls within it.
   (2)   Where the limitation on size of a residential structure set forth in
subsection (b) (4) is modified, that the project complies with the intent of
the Protected Ridgeline Overlay Zone in that the permitted structure does not
increase the project’s effect on ridgeline viewsheds, and that the size of
structure permitted is compatible with other residential structures in the same
general area.
   (3)   Where the required setback from edge of pad set forth in subsection
(b) (5) is modified, that the project complies with the intent of the Protected
Ridgeline Overlay Zone in that the setback reduction does not increase the
structure’s visual impact on ridgeline viewsheds.
(§1, Ord. 1099-NS, eff. April 25, 1991; as amended by §1, Ord. 1273-NS, eff.
January 8, 1997, as amended by Part 9, Ord. 1446-NS, eff. October 25, 2005)
Sec. 9-4.3503. Commercial/industrial zone specific plan alternative.
   Commercial or industrial zoned parcels, any portion of which is within the
PR Overlay Zone, shall be subject to the development standards of Section
9-4.3502, or those standards as established pursuant to a specific plan adopted
by the City Council.
(§ 1, Ord. 1099-NS, eff. April 25, 1991)
Sec. 9-4.3504. Site planning/information submitted.
   Applications for any development entitlement required pursuant to this
title, in which any part of, or all of the parcel for which the entitlement is
sought lies within a Protected Ridgeline Overlay Zone, shall include a site
plan depicting the existing topography, key rock formations, oak trees, view
shed analyses, proposed construction, proposed grading, proposed removal of
native vegetation, proposed access, and related development activities.
(§ 1, Ord. 1099-NS, eff. April 25, 1991)
Article 36. Open Space Zone (OS)
Sec. 9-4.3600. Purposes (OS).
   The open Space Zone (OS) is established for the following purposes and in
order to comply with Government Code Sections 65560–65570, 65910 and 65911:
   (a)   To ensure that the use of property as natural open space is related to
the purposes and policies of the Land Use Element, Conservation Element and
Open Space Element of the General Plan; and
   (b)   To recognize and identify the intrinsic ecological value, scenic and/
or undisturbed nature of particular private parcels of land; and
   (c)   Adopt an action plan as required by Government Code 65564 to provide
standards and guidelines for their continued use and preservation; and
   (d)   To ensure that any proposed structures and improvements in the zone
will be compatible with surrounding zones and uses and will have minimal impact
on the natural, undisturbed character of the land.
   The requirements of the OS Zone are intended to apply to publicly owned
property, property planned for public ownership, and certain private property
within the OS Zone. It is not intended to imply present or future public
ownership of land within the Open Space Zone.
(§ I, Ord. 1108-NS, eff. June 20, 1991)
Sec. 9-4.3601. Permitted uses (OS).
   Only the uses identified in Article 21 of this chapter as being permitted in
the Open Space (OS) Zone shall be established or maintained on property located
therein, subject to the permitting requirements and limitations set forth in
said Article 21.
(§ I, Ord. 1108-NS, eff. June 20, 1991 as amended by § 44, Ord. 1178-NS, eff.
April 27, 1993, and § 50, Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.3602. Reserved.
(§ I, Ord. 1108-NS, eff. June 20, 1991, § 10, Ord. 1306-NS, eff. November 20,
1997, § 21, Ord. 1555-NS, eff. May 13, 2011, and repealed by § 51, Ord. 1620-
NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Article 37. Urban Lot Splits and Two-Unit Housing Developments
Sec. 9-4.3701. Intent and Purpose.
   The intent and purpose of this Article is to provide procedural requirements
and objective development standards for Urban Lot Splits and Two-Unit Housing
Developments as required by State law.
(§ 5, Ord. 1704-NS, eff. November 25, 2022)
Sec. 9-4.3702. Applicability.
   Pursuant to California Government Code Sections 66452.6, 65852.21 and
66411.7, the division of land by Urban Lot Split and provisions for Two-Unit
Housing Development shall be subject to the standards set forth in this
Article.
   If a conflict occurs between this Article and other provisions of the City
of Thousand Oaks Municipal Code Title 9, Chapter 4, the standards within this
Article will supersede the standards provided in other Articles of this
Chapter.
   Terms defined within this Article govern the application of these standards
and the underlying zoning requirements for qualifying projects. Terms used in
this Article have the same meaning as those terms which are used in Title 9-
Planning and Zoning, Chapter 4-Zoning, except for those terms specifically
defined within this Article.
(§ 5, Ord. 1704-NS, eff. November 25, 2022)
Sec. 9-4.3703. Definition of Terms.
   The following definitions apply to terms used in this Article.
   “Acting in Concert” shall mean taking action in agreement or partnership
with another person or entity and shall include, but not be limited to, where
the owner of a property proposed for an Urban Lot Split is the same, related
to, or connected by partnership to the owner, buyer, or seller (if transferred
within the previous three (3) years) of an adjacent lot.
   “Demolition” means the deliberate removal, removal and replacement,
relocation, or destruction of the frame, including window and door headers, or
foundation of any portion of a building or structure.    “Protected Tree” shall
mean an oak tree, as defined by Sec.
9-4.4202 and a landmark tree, as defined by Sec.
9-4.4302.
   “Two-Unit Housing Development” shall mean a housing development consisting
of no more than two dwelling units which are developed using the provisions of
this Article or the provisions set forth in California Government Code Sections
65852.21 and/or 66411.7.
   “Unit” shall mean any single dwelling unit, including but not limited to a
primary dwelling unit, an accessory dwelling unit (ADU), a junior dwelling unit
(JADU), or any unit created pursuant to this Article.
   “Urban Lot Split” means a lot split of an existing, legally created single-
family residential lot into two lots that meets the requirements of this
Article.
   “Usable Open Space” shall mean outdoor or unenclosed area on the ground, or
on a roof, balcony, deck, porch or terrace designed and accessible for outdoor
living and recreation, but excluding parking facilities, driveways, sidewalks,
pedestrian paths, utility or service areas, required front or street side
yards, any landscaped area not usable for outdoor living or recreation, or
areas with slopes greater than five percent (5%).
(§ 5, Ord. 1704-NS, eff. November 25, 2022, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1739-NS,
eff. October 10, 2025)
Sec. 9-4.3704. Eligibility.
   The City shall ministerially process an application for an Urban Lot Split
or Two-Unit Housing Development if all of the following qualifications are met:
   (a)   Applicable Zone: The lot is in a single-family residential zone. For
purposes of this section, a single-family residential zone is a zone where the
only residential use that is allowed as a primary use is a single-residential
dwelling on a lot.
   (b)   Affordable Housing or Rental Property Protection. The Urban Lot Split
must not require or include the demolition or alteration of any of the
following types of housing:
      (1)   Affordable Units. Housing that is subject to a recorded covenant,
ordinance or law that restricts rents to levels affordable to persons and
families of moderate, low, or very low income.
      (2)   Ellis Act Units. The parcel subject to the proposed project is not
a parcel on which an owner of residential real property has exercised the
owner’s rights under Chapter 12.75 (commencing with Section 7060) of Division 7
of Title 1 to withdraw accommodations from rent or lease within 15 years before
the date that the development proponent submits an application.
      (3)   Rent Controlled Units. Housing that is subject to any form of rent
or price control through a public entity’s valid exercise of its police power.
      (4)   Rental Units. Housing that has been occupied by a tenant in the
last three (3) years.
   (c)   Restricted Land. The property shall not be located, in full or in
part, in any of the following areas and shall not fall within any of the
following categories:
      (1)   Historic. A historic district or property included on the State
Historic Resources Inventory, as defined in Section 5020.1 of the Public
Resources Code, or within a site that is designated or listed as a city or
county landmark or historic property or district pursuant to a city or county
ordinance, respectively.
      (2)   Farmland. Prime farmland or farmland of statewide importance as
further defined in Government Code Section 65913.4(a)(6)(B).
      (3)   Wetlands. Wetlands as defined in the United States Fish and
Wildlife Service Manual, Part 660 FW 2 (June 21, 1993).
      (4)   Fire Zone. A very high fire hazard severity zone as further defined
in Government Code Section 65913.4(a)(6)(D). This shall not apply to sites
excluded from the specified hazard zones by a local agency, pursuant to
subdivision (b) of Section 51179, or sites that have adopted fire hazard
mitigation measures pursuant to existing building standards or state fire
mitigation measures applicable to the development.
      (5)   Hazardous Waste Site. A hazardous waste site that is listed
pursuant to Section 65962.5 or a hazardous waste site designated by the
Department of Toxic Substances Control pursuant to Section 25356 of the Health
and Safety Code, unless the State Department of Public Health, State Water
Resources Control Board, or Department of Toxic Substances Control has cleared
the site for residential use or residential mixed uses.
      (6)   Flood Zone. A special flood hazard area subject to inundation by
the 1 percent annual chance flood (100-year flood) as determined by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in any official maps published by FEMA. If
an applicant is able to satisfy all applicable federal qualifying criteria in
order to provide that the site satisfies this subparagraph and is otherwise
eligible for streamlined approval under this Section, the city shall not deny
the application on the basis that the applicant did not comply with any
additional permit requirement, standard, or action adopted by the city that is
applicable to that site. A development may be located on a site described in
this subparagraph if either of the following are met:
         (i)   The site has been subject to a Letter of Map Revision prepared
by FEMA and issued to the city; or
         (ii)   The site meets FEMA requirements necessary to meet minimum
flood plain management criteria of the National Flood Insurance Program as
further spelled out in Government Code Section 65913.4(a)(6)(G)(ii).
      (7)   Earthquake Fault Zone. A delineated earthquake fault zone as
determined by the State Geologist in any official maps published by the State
Geologist, unless the development complies with applicable seismic protection
building code standards adopted by the California Buildings Standards
Commission under the California Building Standards Law and by the city’s
Building Division.
      (8)   Floodway. A regulatory floodway as determined by FEMA in any of its
official maps, published by FEMA unless the development has received a no-rise
certification in accordance with Section 60.3(d)(3) of Title 44 of the Code of
Federal Regulations. If an applicant is able to satisfy all applicable federal
qualifying criteria in order to provide that the site satisfies this
subparagraph and is otherwise eligible for streamlined approval under this
Section, the city shall not deny the application on the basis that the
applicant did not comply with any additional permit requirement, standard, or
action adopted by the city that is applicable to that site.
      (9)   Planned for Habitat Conservation. Lands identified for conservation
in an adopted natural community conservation plan, habitat conservation plan,
or other adopted natural resource protection plan as further spelled out in
Government Code Section 65913.4(a)(6)(I).
      (10)   Habitat for Protected Species. Habitat for protected species
identified as candidate, sensitive, or species of special status by state or
federal agencies, fully protected species, or species protected by the federal
Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. Sec. 1531 et seq.), the California
Endangered Species Act [Chapter 1.5 (commencing with Section 2050) of Division
3 of the Fish and Game Code], or the Native Plant Protection Act [Chapter 10
(commencing with Section 1900) of Division 2 of the Fish and Game Code].
      (11)   Conservation Easement. Lands under a conservation easement.
(§ 5, Ord. 1704-NS, eff. November 25, 2022, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1739-NS,
eff. October 10, 2025)
Sec. 9-4.3705. Urban Lot Split - Planning Permit and Application Requirements.
   An application for development of an Urban Lot Split created pursuant to
this Article will be reviewed ministerially, without discretionary review or a
hearing, if it meets all the requirements set forth in this Section and those
set forth under Government Code Section 65852.21. If any portion of this
Section conflicts with Government Code Section 65852.21, then Government Code
Section 65852.21 will govern.
   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this code, the
Community Development Director or designee’s action to grant or deny a parcel
map application for an Urban Lot Split is final and not subject to appeal.
   The Community Development Director is authorized to develop the forms and
procedures for such applications pursuant to the following requirements:
   (a)   Concurrent Submittal. An Urban Lot Split application may not be
accepted except in conjunction with a concurrently submitted application for
residential development on the newly created parcel (if the property has an
existing residence) or on both parcels (if the property is vacant) unless a
Two-Unit Housing Development project has already been approved on the subject
property. In instances where both applications have been submitted, a Building
Permit shall not be issued for a Two-Unit Housing Development until the Urban
Lot Split tentative parcel map is recorded, unless the Two-Unit Housing
Development is permissible without the Urban Lot Split and the number of units
will not exceed the number of overall units allowed according to Government
Code section 66411.7, subd. (j).
   (b)   Application. The applicant must submit an application for a tentative
parcel map in compliance with Title 9, Chapter 3, Article 5. An application for
an Urban Lot Split must be submitted on the City’s approved form. Only a
complete application will be considered. The City will inform the applicant in
writing of any ways in which the application remains incomplete within 30 days
after the application is submitted.
      (1)   An application for an Urban Lot Split shall be considered and
approved or denied within 60 days from the date the City receives a completed
application. If the City has not approved or denied the completed application
within 60 days, the application shall be deemed approved.
      (2)   If the City denies an application for an Urban Lot Split pursuant
to subparagraph (1), the City shall, within the time period described in
subparagraph (1), return in writing a full set of comments to the applicant
with a list of items that are defective or deficient and a description of how
the application can be remedied by the applicant.
   (c)   Expiration of Approval. An Urban Lot Split approved pursuant to this
Section that is not recorded within three (3) years of the date of approval
shall expire and become void, except where an extension of time application is
submitted by the property owner and approved by the Community Development
Director or designee. A maximum extension of two 24-month periods may be
approved by the Community Development Director or designee.
   (d)   Public Works Impact & Connection Fees (e.g.: Traffic, Water,
Wastewater, Map, Encroachment, Improvements, etc). The newly subdivided lots
are separate parcels and therefore shall pay all applicable fees for impacts
and connections, as is required with every other residential unit/home.
   (e)   Required Documentation. In addition to the materials determined
necessary to complete a full review of the application by the Community
Development Director or designee, the application must include the following:
      (1)   Indemnification. The individual property owner must agree, as part
of the application, to hold the city harmless from all claims and damages
related to the approval of a subdivision under this Title and its subject
matter and reimburse the City for all costs of enforcement, including
attorneys’ fees and costs associated with enforcing the requirements of this
Title.
      (2)   Legal lot. Applicant must submit verification that the existing
property is a legal lot at time of filing application.
      (3)   Homeowners’ Association Notification. If the lot is within the
boundaries of a homeowners’ association, the applicant must provide evidence
that the homeowners’ association has been notified of the proposed project.
      (4)   Protected Tree Report. A written statement affirming that there are
no protected trees within the vicinity of the project property shall be
prepared by a qualified biologist, landscape architect, or certified arborist
and provided at the time of submittal. If there are protected trees on or
within the vicinity of the project property, a site plan and memorandum
prepared by a certified arborist must be provided at the time of submittal.
         (i)   The site plan shall include the location of all protected trees
on or within 15 feet of the property including the common name, size, and an
indication as to the protected tree(s) retention or removal, the location of
all existing and proposed structures and/or other improvements, distances of
structures/improvements to the protected zone of any protected tree (as defined
by Sec.
9-4.4202 “Landmark Tree Preservation and Protection Definitions” and
9-4.4302 “Oak Tree Preservation and Protection Definitions”).
         (ii)   The memo must include a project description, table of any trees
proposed to be encroached upon or removed, as well as any measures recommended
by the arborist for the preservation of as many trees as possible. If
replacement trees are required for pursuant to Sec.
9-4.3708(h), a planting plan must also be included in the site plan.
      (5)   Biologist Statement of No Protected Habitat. A written statement
affirming that there is no habitat for protected species identified as
candidate, sensitive, or species of special status by state or federal
agencies, fully protected species, or species protected by the federal
Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. Sec. 1531 et seq.), the California
Endangered Species Act [Chapter 1.5 (commencing with Section 2050) of Division
3 of the Fish and Game Code], or the Native Plant Protection Act [Chapter 10
(commencing with Section 1900) of Division 2 of the Fish and Game Code] within
the vicinity of the project property shall be prepared by a qualified
biologist, landscape architect, or other resource expert and provided at the
time of submittal. If the presence of any species or habitat for protected
species described above is detected on site, the property is not eligible for
an Urban Lot Split, pursuant to Sec.
9-4.3704(d)(10).
   (f)   Affidavit of Compliance. The owner of a lot approved to be split as
specified herein shall sign an affidavit in a form approved by the City
Attorney to be recorded against the property prior to the issuance of a Final
Building Inspection Approval, Temporary Certificate of Occupancy, or
Certificate of Occupancy stating the following:
      (1)   That the property is eligible for the Urban Lot Split pursuant to
Sec.
9-4.3704-Eligibility.
      (2)   That the individual property owner (or the beneficiary of a trust
that is an individual property owner) intends to occupy one of the housing
units on either of the lots created by the Urban Lot Split as their principal
residence and legal domicile for a minimum of three (3) years from the date of
approval of the Urban Lot Split. This requirement shall not apply when the
owner is a “community land trust” or a “qualified nonprofit corporation” as the
same are defined in the Revenue and Taxation Code.
      (3)   That the primary uses shall be limited to residential uses.
      (4)   That the rental of any unit created pursuant to Article 37 shall be
for a minimum of thirty-one (31) days.
      (5)   That the maximum number of units to be allowed on the lots is two
(2), including, but not limited to, units otherwise allowed pursuant to density
bonus provisions, ADUs, and JADUs.
      (6)   That the property is formed by an Urban Lot Split and is therefore
subject to the City’s Urban Lot Split and zoning regulations, including all
applicable limits on dwelling size and development found in Title 9, Chapter 4,
Article 37.
      (7)   That the restrictions shall be binding upon any successor in
ownership of the property, and this Covenant and Deed Restriction and the
applicable provisions of the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code may be enforced by
the City of Thousand Oaks.
(§ 5, Ord. 1704-NS, eff. November 25, 2022, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1739-NS,
eff. October 10, 2025)
Sec. 9-4.3706. Urban Lot Split - Standards and Requirements.
   An Urban Lot Split created pursuant to this Article shall comply with the
following standards and requirements so long as such standards do not preclude
a land division that allows for two units of at least 800 square feet per unit
on each resulting lot. However, if the application of an objective standard
would have the effect of physically precluding either or both units from being
at least 800 square feet in floor area, such standard shall be waived but only
to the extent necessary to allow construction of the affected unit(s) of a size
no greater than 800 square feet in floor area:
   (a)   Exceptions. No Urban Lot Split shall be approved if any of the
following apply:
      (1)   Prior Urban Lot Split. The lot subject to the proposed Urban Lot
Split was established through prior exercise of an Urban Lot Split under the
provisions of this Section or the provisions set forth in California Government
Code Section 66411.7;
      (2)   Adjacent Division. Any adjacent lot to the proposed Urban Lot Split
was previously subdivided under the provisions of this Section or the
provisions set forth in California Government Code Sections 66411.7 by the
owner of the subject lot or any person acting in concert with the owner of the
subject lot; or
      (3)   Adverse Impact. The Building Official makes a written finding,
based upon a preponderance of the evidence, that the proposed housing
development project would have a specific, adverse impact, as defined and
determined in paragraph (2) of subdivision (d) of Government Code Section
65589.5, upon public health and safety for which there is no feasible method to
satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact.
   (b)   Map Compliance. The Urban Lot Split shall conform to all applicable
objective requirements of the California Subdivision Map Act and Title 9,
Chapter 3-Subdivisions, of the Municipal Code, except as modified by this
Article.
   (c)   Lot Area Minimum. The gross lot area of each newly created lot shall
be no smaller than 1,200 square feet.
   (d)   Two Lots Maximum. The Urban Lot Split may divide a lot of record to
create no more than two new lots of approximately equal lot area, provided that
one lot shall not be smaller than 40 percent of the lot area of the original
lot.
   (e)   Two Units Maximum. A maximum of two units will be allowed on each lot
created pursuant to this Section or the provisions set forth in California
Government Code Section 66411.7, inclusive of ADUs and JADUs.
   (f)   Lot Dimensions. An Urban Lot Split is not subject to minimum lot width
requirements as set forth in this Title.
   (g)   Lot Lines. The resulting lots shall have lot lines of regular geometry
which run generally parallel to each other. New lot lines must be straight
lines, unless there is a conflict with existing improvements or the natural
environment.
   (h)   Required Yards. No setback shall be required for an existing
structure, or a structure constructed in the same location and to the same
dimensions as an existing structure.
   (i)   Grading. No person shall commence or perform any grading or relocation
of earth, and no person shall import or export any earth materials to or from
any grading site without first having obtained a grading permit. No person
shall commence or perform any grading or relocation of earth on land having a
natural slope greater than twenty-five (25%) percent.
   (j)   Hillside Development. Grading on properties within the Hillside
Planned Development (H-P-D) H-P-D zone shall be subject to Sec. 9-4.3106(b)-
Grading Control (H-P-D).
   (k)   Development within a Protected Ridgeline Area. Urban lot splits
proposed on properties that are located within the Protected Ridgeline Overlay
Zone, are subject to the following objective standards:
      (1)   No new structure or addition to an existing structure shall be
placed or constructed, no grading shall occur and, except as to meet fire
clearance requirements, no native vegetation shall be removed within three
hundred (300') feet horizontally or one hundred (100') feet vertically of the
crest of a protected ridgeline unless the construction of the minimum allowed
two units of 800 square feet or less is precluded, in which case the
development must be sited at the lowest possible elevation.
      (2)   All buildings shall be setback at least fifty (50') feet from the
edge of the finished pad.
   (l)   Off-site Improvements. The City shall not impose regulations that
require dedications of rights-of-way or the construction of offsite
improvements for the parcels being created as a condition of issuing a parcel
map for an Urban Lot Split pursuant to this Article.
   (m)   Easements.
      (1)   The applicant shall provide easements for the provision of public
services and facilities as required.
      (2)   Each easement must be shown on the tentative parcel map.
   (n)   Vehicular Access. When an Urban Lot Split is recorded under the
provisions of this Section, automobile parking is required, unless the property
meets the exceptions listed in Section
9-4.3708(l)(5).
      (1)   Each lot containing dwelling units created pursuant to this Article
shall have existing access, provide new access, or adjoin the public/private
residential street right-of-way via the existing or a consolidated vehicular
connection.
      (2)   Vehicular access to a public street or alley or private residential
street shall be provided by a driveway that complies with the minimum width,
length, slope, materials, and other standards consistent with Public Works
Department and Ventura County Fire Department standards. Parked vehicles on a
driveway shall not encroach into the Public Right-of-Way.
      (3)   No new access from an arterial street is permitted in connection
with a dwelling unit created pursuant to this Article.
      (4)   In addition to the standards set forth in this Section, driveways
and parking areas must comply with Sec.
9-4.2404 "General installation requirements of parking areas” unless where in
conflict with this section.
   (o)   Development.
      (1)   Residential units developed on a lot created pursuant to this
Section shall be subject to the provisions of Sections
9-4.3707-Two-Unit Housing Development–Planning Permit and Application
Requirements and
9-4.3708-Two-Unit Housing Development–Standards and Requirements.
      (2)   Owner Occupancy. An owner must occupy one lot as their primary
residence for a minimum of three (3) years from the date of approval of the
final map for the Urban Lot Split. A dwelling unit must exist on the property
at time of approval.
   (p)   Maintenance of Non-Conformities. The City shall not require the
correction of nonconforming zoning provisions as a condition of approval for
the Urban Lot Split. However, the project may not exacerbate an existing
nonconforming building or condition. Unpermitted structures may be required to
be permitted or removed as a part of the Urban Lot Split process.
   (q)   Separate Conveyance Between Resulting Lots. Separate conveyance of the
resulting lots is permitted. If dwellings or other structures (such as garages)
on different lots are adjacent or attached to each other, the Urban Lot Split
boundary may separate them for conveyance purposes if the structures meet
building code safety standards and are sufficient to allow separate conveyance.
If any attached structures span or will span the new lot line, the owner must
record all documentation necessary to allocate rights and responsibility
between the owners of the two lots.
(§ 5, Ord. 1704-NS, eff. November 25, 2022, as amended by § 4, Ord. 1739-NS,
eff. October 10, 2025)
Sec. 9-4.3707. Two-Unit Housing Development - Planning Permit and Application
Requirements.
   An application for development of a Two-Unit Housing Development created
pursuant to this Article will be reviewed ministerially, without discretionary
review or a hearing, if it meets all the requirements set forth in this Section
and those set forth under Government Code Section 65852.21. If any portion of
this Section conflicts with Government Code Section 65852.21, then Government
Code Section 65852.21 will govern.
   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this code, the
Community Development Director or designee’s action to grant or deny a parcel
map application for a Two-Unit Housing Development is final and not subject to
appeal.
   The Community Development Director is authorized to develop the forms and
procedures for such applications pursuant to the following requirements:
   (a)   Application. Whenever a Two-Unit Housing Development is proposed as a
project, an application shall be submitted to the Community Development
Department on a form provided by said department along with supporting
information as required by said department. Only a complete application will be
considered. The City will inform the applicant in writing of any ways in which
the application remains incomplete within 30 days after the application is
submitted.
      (1)   An application for a proposed housing development pursuant to this
section shall be considered and approved or denied within 60 days from the date
the City receives a completed application. If the City has not approved or
denied the completed application within 60 days, the application shall be
deemed approved.
      (2)   If the City denies an application for a proposed housing
development pursuant to paragraph (1), the City shall, within the time period
described in paragraph (1), return in writing a full set of comments to the
applicant with a list of items that are defective or deficient and a
description of how the application can be remedied by the applicant.
   (b)   Expiration of Approval. A Two-Unit Housing Development permit approved
pursuant to this Section that allows construction which has not commenced or is
not diligently pursued within three (3) years from the date of approval shall
expire and become void, unless a time extension application is submitted by the
property owner and approved by the Community Development Director or designee.
A maximum extension of two 24 month periods may be approved by the Community
Development Director or designee.
   (c)   Impact fees. Two-Unit Housing Developments shall be subject to paying
all applicable development impact fees.
   (d)   Required Documentation: In addition to the materials determined
necessary to complete a full review of the project by the Community Development
Director or designee, the application must include the following:
      (1)   Indemnification. The individual property owner must agree, as part
of the application, to hold the city harmless from all claims and damages
related to the approval of a project under this Title and its subject matter
and reimburse the City for all costs of enforcement, including attorneys’ fees
and costs associated with enforcing the requirements of this Title.
      (2)   Legal Lot. The proposed development must be located on a legally
created lot or a proposed Urban Lot Split.
      (3)   Homeowners’ Association Notification. If the lot is within the
boundaries of an active homeowners’ association, the applicant must provide
evidence that the homeowners’ association has been notified of the proposed
project.
      (4)   Protected Tree Report. A written statement affirming that there are
no protected trees within the vicinity of the project property shall be
prepared by a qualified biologist, landscape architect, or certified arborist
and provided at the time of submittal. If there are protected trees on or
within the vicinity of the project property a site plan and memorandum prepared
by a certified arborist must be provided at the time of submittal.
         (i)   The site plan shall include the location of all protected trees
on or within 15 feet of the property including the common name, size, and an
indication as to the protected tree(s) retention or removal, the location of
all existing and proposed structures and/or other improvements, distances of
structures/improvements to the protected zone of any protected tree (as defined
by Sec.
9-4.4202 “Landmark Tree Preservation and Protection Definitions” and
9-4.4302 “Oak Tree Preservation and Protection Definitions”).
         (ii)   The memo must include a project description, table of any trees
proposed to be encroached upon or removed, as well as any measures recommended
by the arborist for the preservation of as many trees as possible. If
replacement trees are required for pursuant to Sec.
9-4.3708(h), a planting plan must also be included in the site plan.
      (5)   Biologist Statement of No Protected Habitat. A written statement
affirming that there is no habitat for protected species identified as
candidate, sensitive, or species of special status by state or federal
agencies, fully protected species, or species protected by the federal
Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. Sec. 1531 et seq.), the California
Endangered Species Act [Chapter 1.5 (commencing with Section 2050) of Division
3 of the Fish and Game Code], or the Native Plant Protection Act [Chapter 10
(commencing with Section 1900) of Division 2 of the Fish and Game Code] within
the vicinity of the project property shall be prepared by a qualified
biologist, landscape architect, or other resource expert and provided at the
time of submittal. If the presence of any species or habitat for protected
species described above is detected on site, the property is not eligible for a
Two-Unit Housing Development, pursuant to Sec.
9-4.3704(d)(10).
   (e)   Affidavit of Compliance. An applicant for a Two-Unit Housing
Development, as specified herein shall sign an affidavit in a form approved by
the City Attorney to be recorded against the property prior to the issuance of
a Final Building Inspection Approval, Temporary Certificate of Occupancy, or
Certificate of Occupancy stating the following:
      (1)   That the property is eligible for the Two-Unit Housing Development
pursuant to Sec.
9-4.3704-Eligibility.
      (2)   Unless the lot was formed by an Urban Lot Split, the individual
property owner (or the beneficiary of a trust that is an individual property
owner) of a lot with a proposed project must occupy one of the dwellings on the
lot as the owners’ principal residence and legal domicile for a minimum of
three (3) years from the date of approval, if a dwelling unit exists on the
lot, or from the date of issuance of a Final Building Inspection Approval,
Temporary Certificate of Occupancy, or Certificate of Occupancy, if dwelling
units are not habitable at the time of approval. This requirement shall not
apply when the owner is a “community land trust” or a “qualified nonprofit
corporation” as the same are defined in the Revenue and Taxation Code.
      (3)   That the primary uses shall be limited to residential uses.
      (4)   That the rental of any unit created pursuant to Article 37 shall be
for a minimum of thirty-one (31) days.
      (5)   That the restrictions shall be binding upon any successor in
ownership of the property, and this Covenant and Deed Restriction and the
applicable provisions of the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code may be enforced by
the City of Thousand Oaks.
      (6)   That, in the event that potentially important cultural resources
are found in the course of geologic testing or during construction, the event
shall be immediately reported to the Community Development Director, and work
shall immediately cease until a qualified archaeologist can provide an
evaluation of the nature and significance of the resources and until the
Community Development Department can review this information.
      (7)   That, if human bone is discovered during geologic testing or during
construction, the event shall be immediately reported to the Community
Development Director, work shall immediately cease, and the procedures
described in Section 7050.5 of the California Health and Safety Code shall be
followed. Section 7050.5 requires notification of the coroner. If the coroner
determines that the remains are those of a Native American, the applicant shall
notify the Native American Heritage Commission by telephone within 24 hours.
Following notification of the Native American Heritage Commission, the
procedures described in Section 5097.94 and Section 5097.98 of the California
Public Resources Code shall be followed.
(§ 5, Ord. 1704-NS, eff. November 25, 2022, as amended by § 5, Ord. 1739-NS,
eff. October 10, 2025)
Sec. 9-4.3708. Two-Unit Housing Development - Standards and Requirements.
   Two-Unit Housing Development projects shall conform to all objective zoning,
subdivision, and design standards applicable to the respective residential
zoning district in which the project is located, except as expressly provided
in this Article. In the event that any such standard conflicts with this
Section, this Section shall apply.
   (a)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Adverse Impact. No two-unit housing development shall be approved
if the Building Official makes a written finding, based upon a preponderance of
the evidence, that the proposed housing development project would have a
specific, adverse impact, as defined and determined in paragraph (2) of
subdivision (d) of Government Code Section 65589.5, upon public health and
safety for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or
avoid the specific, adverse impact.
      (2)   Preclusion of Minimum Units.
         (i)   A Two-Unit Housing Development created pursuant to this Article
shall comply with the following standards and requirements so long as the
application of such standards would not have the effect of physically
precluding the construction of up to two units (each possessing no greater than
800 square feet of floor area) on a single lot.
         (ii)   If the application of an objective standard would have the
effect of physically precluding either or both units from being at least 800
square feet in floor area, such standard shall be waived only to the extent
necessary to allow construction of the affected unit(s) of a size no greater
than 800 square feet in floor area.
         (iii)   If there is a question about the buildability of an 800 square
foot unit in a location that meets objective standards, the applicant shall be
required to provide evidence of such determination including obtaining
concurrence from any other department, division, agency, or professional, as
necessary.
   (b)   Maximum Number of Units.
      (1)   Lots Created by Urban Lot Split. A maximum of two (2) units will be
allowed on each lot created by an Urban Lot Split or the provisions set forth
in California Government Code Section 66411.7, inclusive of ADUs and JADUs.
      (2)   Lots Not Created by Urban Lot Split. No more than four units shall
be allowed on a lot not subject to an Urban Lot Split, inclusive of ADUs and
JADUs.
   (c)   Unit Configuration. The new units in a Two-Unit Housing Development
may be permitted in the following configurations, not including the development
of new or existing ADUs or JADUs:
      (1)   One (1) new unit incorporated entirely within an existing
residential unit.
      (2)   One (1) new unit incorporated entirely within an existing accessory
building, including garages.
      (3)   One (1) new unit attached to, and increasing the size of, an
existing residential unit or an existing accessory building.
      (4)   One (1) new unit detached from and located on the same lot as an
existing unit. A unit that is attached to another detached accessory building,
but not another residential unit, is considered detached.
      (5)   Two (2) newly constructed attached units (duplex) or up to two
detached residential units on a vacant lot.
   (d)   Height.
      (1)   No structure containing a dwelling unit may exceed 25 feet in
height and be more than two stories, except for those circumstances described
in Sec.
9-4.3708(d)(2), below.
      (2)   The maximum height of a structure containing a dwelling unit may be
increased by not more than ten (10') feet provided that the property has two
(2) side yards of not less than fifteen (15') feet each and a rear yard of 20
feet. In no event shall such structures exceed three (3) stories or 35 feet.
   (e)   Required Yards.
      (1)   Existing Structures. No setback shall be required for an existing
structure, or a structure constructed in the same location and to the same
dimensions as an existing structure.
      (2)   Side and Rear Yards. Except for those circumstances described in
Section Sec. 9-4.3708(d)(2), above, the setback for side and rear lot lines
shall be four (4) feet.
      (3)   Front Yards.
         (i)   The front setback of a property that fronts on a street shall be
as set forth by the base district, specific plan, or overlay district
regulations. For new flag lots, as defined in Section
9-3.206, created pursuant to this article, the front yard setback shall be four
(4) feet.
         (ii)   On lots fronting and gaining vehicular access from a public or
private street, the single-family or duplex residential building entry must
face the street or be oriented to within 45 degrees of parallel to the street
from which direct vehicular or pedestrian access is gained.
      (4)   Sight Distance. Intersection and driveway sight distance shall be
provided per the applicable City Road Standard Plate. Side and rear yard
development, including fencing shall not exceed a height of three (3) feet
within the sight distance triangle.
   (f)   Architectural Design.
      (1)   Architectural Design Review. A Two-Unit Housing Development is not
subject to architectural design review as set forth in Article 18 of this
Chapter.
      (2)   Storage Area. Private storage area for each dwelling unit must be
provided with a minimum of one hundred sixty (160) cubic feet of enclosed
storage area, which must be provided in garages, carports or patio areas and in
which one dimension must be at least six feet (6').
      (3)   Entry Area and Cover. Exterior entrances for new units must have a
roofed projection or recess with a minimum depth of at least five feet (5') and
a minimum horizontal width of six feet (6').
   (g)   Outdoor/Common Space. Each lot must contain usable, outdoor space of
no less than fifteen percent (15%) of the area of each lot and of a regular
geometry (e.g., rectangular) intended for common use by all property occupants.
   (h)   Preservation of Protected Trees. No dwelling unit created pursuant to
this Article shall be constructed, or require grading at the time of
construction, within the protected zone (as defined by Sec. 9-4.4202 and 9-
4.4302) of a protected tree unless the construction of the minimum allowed two
units of 800 square feet or less is precluded, in which case the protected tree
may be encroached upon or removed if replaced onsite per the recommendations of
a City Arborist, on a 1:1 basis, with a thirty-six (36') inch box Quercus
agrifolia Live Oak or Quercus lobata Valley Oak. If the replacement tree(s) is
unable to be successfully sited onsite, an in-lieu fee will be required per
Resolution 2010-014.
   (i)   Lighting. Exterior lighting shall be designed and installed in such a
manner that the direct light source is shielded from off-site view.
   (j)   Vehicular Access.
      (1)   Each lot containing dwelling units created pursuant to this Article
shall have existing access, provide new access, or adjoin the public/private
residential street right-of-way via the existing or a consolidated vehicular
connection.
      (2)   Vehicular access to a public street or alley or private residential
street shall be provided by a driveway that complies with the minimum width,
length, slope, materials, and other standards consistent with Public Works
Department and Ventura County Fire Department standards.
      (3)   No new access from an arterial street is permitted in connection
with a dwelling unit created pursuant to this Article.
      (4)   In addition to the standards set forth in this Section, driveways
and parking areas must comply with Sec. 9-4.2404 “General installation
requirements of parking areas” unless where in conflict with this section.
   (k)   Pedestrian Access. Direct pedestrian access must be provided between
the public sidewalk and such primary building entry.
   (l)   Parking.
      (1)   Off-street Parking Required. A minimum of one enclosed parking
space with an unencumbered interior width of nine (9') feet and an unencumbered
interior depth of twenty (20') feet per primary dwelling unit to remain or be
constructed shall be provided, unless the construction of such a structure
precludes the construction of the minimum allowed two units of 800 square feet
or less, in which case the required parking may be unenclosed.
         (i)   Detached garages constructed for the purpose of fulfilling this
requirement must comply with standards required under Title 9, Chapter 4,
Article 25. Height, Yard, Area, and Building Conditions and Exceptions.
         (ii)   Street-facing garages must not accommodate more than two (2)
vehicles side by side and may consist of either one (1) or two (2) garage
doors.
         (iii)   If the garages are attached and provide the one required
parking space per primary dwelling unit, they would be considered part of the
structure and subject to the setbacks required under Sec. 9-4.3708(e).
      (2)   Replacement Parking Required. When an existing garage, carport, or
other covered parking structure is converted or demolished in order to
construct a new dwelling unit created pursuant to this Article, at least one
replacement parking space, which shall be enclosed, must be provided for each
primary dwelling unit on the property, unless the project is exempt from
parking.
      (3)   Multi-Unit Parking. An enclosed parking structure may serve
multiple units on the same lot. Tandem parking within an enclosed parking
structure is allowed.
      (4)   Location. Required parking must be on the same lot as the
residential unit served.
      (5)   Exceptions. No parking requirements shall be imposed in either of
the following circumstances:
         (i)   The property is located within one-half mile walking distance of
either a high-quality transit corridor as defined by Public Resources Code
Section 21155(b) or a major transit stop as defined in Public Resources Code
Section 21064.3; or
         (ii)   There is a car share vehicle station located within one block
of the property.
   (m)   Grading. No person shall commence or perform any grading or relocation
of earth, and no person shall import or export any earth materials to or from
any grading site without first having obtained a grading permit. No person
shall commence or perform any grading or relocation of earth on land having a
natural slope greater than twenty-five (25%) percent.
   (n)   Hillside Development. Grading on properties within the H-P-D zone
shall be subject to Sec. 9-4.3106(b).
   (o)   Development within a Protected Ridgeline Area. Urban lot splits
proposed on properties that are located within the Protected Ridgeline Overlay
Zone, are subject to the following objective standards:
      (1)   No new structure or addition to an existing structure shall be
placed or constructed, no grading shall occur and, except as to meet fire
clearance requirements, no native vegetation shall be removed within three
hundred (300') feet horizontally or one hundred (100') feet vertically of the
crest of a protected ridgeline unless the construction of the minimum allowed
two units of 800 square feet or less is precluded, in which case the
development must be sited at the lowest possible elevation.
      (2)   No residential structure shall be higher than seventeen (17') feet
measured from the finished grade at the center of the building wall to the
highest roof elevation and any new dwelling unit, including any garage and
accessory structures, shall not exceed, in total, two thousand (2,000) square
feet. For existing structures, no alteration or addition to that structure
shall raise the height or the elevation of the existing roof.
      (3)   All buildings shall be setback at least fifty (50') feet from the
edge of the finished pad.
   (p)   Utilities.
      (1)   Each dwelling unit must have its own direct utility connection to
all utility service providers.
      (2)   Private underground utility services, including municipally
supplied water, sewer, gas, electricity, cable TV and telephone, shall be
available for extension to and connection with all units in a Two-Unit Housing
Development. All dwelling units in a Two-Unit Housing Development must be able
to connect and shall connect to water, sewer, gas, or electricity services, as
needed.
      (3)   All existing and proposed utility distribution facilities
(including electric, telecommunications and cable television lines) installed
in and for the purpose of supplying service to any dwelling unit(s) proposed as
part of a Two-Unit Housing Development project shall be installed underground.
   (q)   Onsite Wastewater Treatment. Where a residential development proposes
to add one or more dwelling units on a parcel currently served by an onsite
wastewater treatment system, a written determination from the County Health
Department shall be submitted verifying that the existing or proposed system
has adequate capacity to support the additional unit. The letter shall have
been issued within a maximum of 12 months prior to application submittal. For
any development proposed on a vacant parcel that is not connected to a public
sewer, a letter from the County Health Department at the time of application
shall be submitted confirming that the parcel is eligible for onsite wastewater
treatment installation, including percolation testing, system design, minimum
lot area, and setbacks, have been met or can feasibly met, and adequate area
for size of dwelling units, and reserve leach field system in accordance with
County health standards.
   (r)   Connected Structures. The City shall not reject an application solely
because it proposes an adjacent or connected structure provided that the
structure meets building code safety standards and is sufficient to allow a
separate conveyance as required by all state and local laws.
   (s)   All Other Development. Except as modified by this Article, all other
nonresidential development on a lot created through the approval of an Urban
Lot Split or which contains a Two-Unit Housing Development shall be subject to
those regulations required by the base zoning district or overlay district.
(§ 5, Ord. 1704-NS, eff. November 25, 2022, as amended by § 6, Ord. 1739-NS,
eff. October 10, 2025)
Article 38. Special Use Permit For Rental of Dwelling
Sec. 9-4.3800. Special use permit to rent dwelling.
(§ 5, Ord. 1139-NS, eff. March 17, 1992, as amended by § 48, Ord. 1178-NS, eff.
April 27, 1993; repealed by Ord. 1413-NS, eff. August 14, 2003)
Article 39. Highway and Arterial Business/Auto Mall Zone (C-2/AM)
Sec. 9-4.3900. Purpose (C-2/AM).
   The purpose of this article is to establish a zone referred to as the “C-2/
AM” or “Highway and Arterial Business/Auto Mall Zone,” in order to encourage
the grouping of dealerships, automotive sales and leasing uses, and also allow
automotive support services such as automotive equipment installation, parts
sales, auto body and mechanical repair to operate within the designated C-2/AM
Zone. The C-2/AM Zone is to be applied at those locations in the City in which
a grouping of automobile sales and services may be developed and operated in a
manner which is compatible with adjacent land uses, that displays visual
characteristics that enhances the appearance of this area to promote trade and
commerce, and accommodates the convenience of motorists with adequate vehicular
access and circulation. The City’s intent is to recognize the special needs
associated with auto dealerships and automobile uses within an auto mall area
and to develop appropriate development and performance standards to facilitate
their growth and prosperity in a manner that is harmonious and sensitive to the
surrounding community.
(§ 1, Ord. 1168-NS, eff. January 5, 1993)
Sec. 9-4.3901. Permitted uses (C-2/AM).
   Only the uses identified in Article 21 of this chapter as being permitted in
the Highway and Arterial Business/Auto Mall (C-2/AM) Zone shall be established
or maintained on property located therein, subject to the permitting
requirements and limitations set forth in said Article 21.
(§ 1, Ord. 1168-NS, eff. January 5, 1993, as amended by § 8, Ord. 1292-NS, eff.
August 28, 1997, § 6, Ord. 1304-NS, eff. October 23, 1997, § 18, Ord. 1379-NS,
eff. August 9, 2001, § 5, Ord. 1401-NS, eff. February 6, 2003, and § 53, Ord.
1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.3902. Reserved.
(§ 1, Ord. 1168-NS, eff. January 5, 1993 and amended by § 23, Ord. 1555-NS,
eff. May 13, 2011, and repealed by § 54, Ord. 1620-NS, eff. August 12, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.3903. Development permits: Standards, conditions and limitations (C-2/
AM).
   All development standards that are applicable to the Highway and Arterial
Business (C-2) Zone shall apply to the Highway and Arterial Business/Auto Mall
(C-2/AM) Zone except that, in the case of a conflict between said standards and
those set forth in this article, the provisions of this article shall apply.
The following development standards are established within the C-2/AM Zone for
auto repair and auto body repair uses, and all development permits issued for
uses in the C-2/AM zone shall be conditioned to ensure compliance with said
standards:
   (a)   All repair work shall be conducted in an enclosed building;
   (b)   All damaged and dismantled vehicles and parts shall be kept inside a
building or shall or completely screened from adjacent streets, highways, and
freeways by a minimum six (6') foot high solid decorative wall or fence;
   (c)   Entrances to service bays shall not be open to the street but shall
face the rear or interior property lines unless obscured by an intervening
structure, solid wall or fence; and
   (d)   The operation shall not unreasonably emit noise, dust, smoke, odor,
vibration, or other harmful or annoying substances.
(§ 1, Ord. 1168-NS, eff. January 5, 1993)
Article 40. Transportation Demand Management (TDM) Standards for New
Development
Sec. 9-4.4001. Purpose, authorization and intent.
   Transportation demand management (TDM) programs are designed to reduce the
need, or demand, for automobile trips, especially during congested commute
times. TDM strategies include a wide range of activities to encourage transit
use, ridesharing and making trips at less congested times or not making trips
at all. Successful TDM programs reduce the number of cars driven which
generally results in less congestion and improved air quality.
   State law requires each City and the County to adopt their own
transportation demand management or trip reduction ordinance. The Ventura
County Transportation Commission (VCTC) is responsible for the preparation of
the Congestion Management Program (CMP) in Ventura County. Among the state-
mandated elements of the CMP is a Trip Reduction and Travel Demand Management
Element that promotes alternative transportation methods, such as carpools,
vanpools, transit, bicycles, walking and park-and-ride lots, improvement in the
balance between jobs and housing, and other strategies, including flexible work
hours, telecommuting and parking management programs (California Government
Code Section 65089(b)(3)). The goals and policies of the CMP also support the
increased use of low- and no-emission vehicles. The VCTC must determine
biennially whether the County and cities within the county are conforming to
the CMP. (California Government Code Section 65089.3.)
   This article is intended to promote trip reduction and travel demand
measures in the City of Thousand Oaks and meet the TDM facilities ordinance
adoption requirement as set out in the Ventura County Congestion Management
Program. The requirements of Ventura County Air Pollution Control District
(VCAPCD) Rule 210 are separate from this article which sets forth the minimum
requirements for meeting CMP. Employers are encouraged to offer or provide
additional inducements to use alternatives to single- occupant vehicles to
their employees necessary to meet Rule 210 requirements.
(§ 1, Ord. 1199-NS, eff. March 1, 1994, as amended by § 27, Ord. 1374-NS, eff.
April 26, 2001)
Sec. 9-4.4002. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this article are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Alternate transportation” shall mean the use of modes of
transportation other than the single-passenger motor vehicle, including but not
limited to carpools, vanpools, buspools, public transit, walking and bicycling.
   (b)   “Applicable development” means any development project that is
determined to meet or exceed the project size threshold criteria contained in
Section
9-4.4003 and the provisions of Section
9-4.4004 of this article.
   (c)   “Buspool” shall mean a vehicle (bus) with more than sixteen (16)
seating positions used and maintained primarily for carrying commuters to and
from work.
   (d)   “Carpool” shall mean a vehicle (passenger automobile) occupied by two
(2) or more persons aged sixteen (16) years or older commuting to or from work
and/or school.
   (e)   “Dwelling unit” shall be per the definition in Section 9-4.230 of this
title.
   (f)   “The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)” shall mean Sections
21000 et seq. of the California Public Resource Code.
   (g)   “Developer” shall mean the builder who is responsible for the
planning, design and construction on an applicable development project. A
developer may be responsible for implementing the provisions of this article as
determined by the property owner.
   (h)   “Development” and “development project” means the construction or
addition of new building square footage. Additions to buildings which existed
prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this article and which
exceed the thresholds defined in Section
9-4.4003 shall comply with the applicable requirements but shall not be added
cumulatively with existing square footage; existing square footage shall be
exempt from these requirements. All calculations shall be based on gross square
footage.
   (i)   “Employee parking area” shall mean the portion of total required
parking at a development project used by on-site employees. Based upon
information developed by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), broad
employee parking needs shall be calculated as follows:
 
Type of Use                  Percentage of Total Required Parking Devoted to
                             Employees
Commercial and retail sales  30%
Medical and dental office    55%
Office and professional      85%
Industrial and manufacturing 95%
 
The Public Works and Community Development Departments shall determine the land
use category for proposed development projects and shall determine based on ITE
information, any appropriate percentage factors for special land uses not
listed. Total development project required parking shall be determined per the
requirements of Section
9-4.2402 of this chapter.
   (j)   “Preferential parking” shall mean parking spaces designated or
assigned, through use of a sign or painted space markings, for carpool and
vanpool vehicles carrying commute passengers on a regular basis that are
provided in a location more convenient to a place of employment than parking
spaces provided for single-occupant vehicles.
   (k)   “Public transit” shall mean transit services provided for the general
public on a regular basis by buses usually on a fare-paying basis.
   (l)   “Neighborhood work center” means a location in a community where
facilities are provided either by public or private means for shared employees
work activities.
   (m)    “Transportation demand management (TDM)” shall mean the alteration of
travel behavior, usually on the part of commuter, through programs of
incentives, services and policies. TDM addresses alternatives to single-
occupant vehicles such as carpooling and vanpooling, and changes in work
schedules that move trips out of the peak period or eliminate them altogether
(as is the case in telecommuting or compressed workweeks).
   (n)   “Trip reduction” shall mean reduction in the number of work-related
trips made by single-occupant vehicles.
   (o)   “Property owner” means the legal owner of a development project who
serves as the lessor to a tenant. The property owner shall be responsible for
complying with the provisions of this article either directly or by delegating
such responsibility as appropriate to a tenant and/or his agent.
   (p)   “Vanpool” shall mean a group of at least seven (7) commuters traveling
to work in a vehicle designed for carrying more than six (6) but less than
sixteen (16) persons, including the driver, which is maintained and used
primarily for work-related transportation of adults for the purpose of
ridesharing.
   (q)   “Vehicle” shall mean a device by which any person or property may be
propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, excepting a device moved exclusively
by human power, or a device used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks,
or buses used for public or private transit. Examples include, but are not
limited to, passenger cars, motorcycles, vans, recreational vehicles and pickup
trucks.
   (r)    “Tenant” means the lessee of facility space at an applicable
development project.
   (s)   “Ventura County Air Pollution Control District” (VCAPCD) is the
authority created by the California State Legislature to meet federal standards
and otherwise improve air quality in the Ventura County portion of the South
Central Coast Air Basin.
(§ 1, Ord. 1199-NS, eff. March 1, 1994)
Sec. 9-4.4003. Transportation demand and trip reduction standards and measures.
   Prior to City approval of an entitlement for any development project or
entitlement issued pursuant to this title, the applicant shall make provision
for, as a minimum, all the following applicable transportation demand
management and trip reduction measures:
   (a)   Nonresidential development standards. The developer shall provide
calculations or information for determining the number of employees expected to
work at the proposed development project site or work center on the development
entitlement application submitted to the City. If the developer is unable to
provide sufficient information to accurately determine the expected number of
employees, then an estimate shall be made which may be subject to verification
by the City at a later date. A typical calculation to estimate the number of
employees shall be based on: the number of parking spaces required as
determined in Section
9-4.2402 of this title entitled, Parking Space Required; assume one employee
per parking space; and the “employee parking area” factors listed under Section
9-4.4002(i) of this article.
   Compliance with this criteria shall be provided on the site or floor plans
for each entitlement request.
   (1)   Nonresidential development projects capable of holding fifty (50)
employees or more shall provide a bulletin board, display case or kiosk
displaying transportation information located where the greatest number of
employees are likely to see it. Information displayed shall include, but is not
limited to, the following: current map routes and schedules for public transit
routes serving the site; ridesharing promotional material supplied by commuter-
oriented organizations; telephone numbers for referrals on transportation
information including numbers for the regional ridesharing agency; Dial-A-Route
and local transit operators; bicycle route and facility information, including
regional and local bicycle maps and bicycle safety information; and a listing
of facilities and services available for carpoolers, vanpoolers, bicyclists,
transit riders and pedestrians at the site. All proposed public, private
streets or driveways that serve as the main access from project buildings to
the exterior street system shall include sidewalk facilities per City standards
for pedestrians and bike routes as feasible. In cases involving multiple
tenants, a bulletin board/display case shall be provided by each tenant, or it
shall be provided at a common area acceptable to the Public Works and Community
Development Departments.
   (2)   Nonresidential development projects capable of holding one hundred
(100) employees or more shall comply with subsection (a)(1) of this section and
shall provide all of the following measures:
   (i)   Not less than ten (10%) percent of “employee parking area” (employee
parking area shall be calculated from Section
9-4.4002(i) of this article and Section
9-4.2402 of this chapter) shall be located as close as is practical to the
employee entrance(s), and shall be reserved for use by carpool/vanpool
vehicles, without displacing handicapped and customer parking needs. This
preferential carpool/vanpool parking area shall be identified on the site plan
upon application for development permit or other applicable entitlement. A
statement that preferential carpool/vanpool spaces for employees is available
and a description of the method for obtaining such spaces must be included on
the required transportation information board. Spaces will be signed and
striped. Additional carpool/vanpool spaces shall be provided as demand
warrants. The following minimum spaces shall be provided in any case: at least
one space for projects of fifty thousand (50,000) gross square feet to one
hundred thousand (100,000) gross square feet and two (2) spaces for projects
over one hundred thousand (100,000) gross square feet will be signed and/or
striped for carpool and/or vanpool vehicles.
   (ii)   Preferential parking spaces reserved for vanpools must be accessible
to vanpool vehicles. When located within a parking structure, a minimum
vertical interior clearance of seven (7') feet two (2") inches shall be
provided for those parking spaces and access ways to be used by such vehicles.
Adequate turning radii for vanpool vehicles shall be provided. Parking space
dimensions in vanpool parking areas shall be a minimum nine (9') feet by twenty
(20') feet.
   (iii)    Bicycle racks or other secure bicycle parking shall be provided
near building entrances to accommodate four (4) bicycles per the first fifty
thousand (50,000) gross square feet of nonresidential development and one
bicycle per each additional fifty thousand (50,000) gross square feet of
nonresidential development. Calculations which result in a fraction of 0.5 or
higher shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. A bicycle parking
facility may also be a fully enclosed space or locker accessible only to the
owner or operator of the bicycle, which protects the bike from inclement
weather. Specific facilities and location (e.g., provision of racks, lockers or
locked bike room) shall be per the requirements of the Public Works and
Community Development Departments imposed as conditions on each entitlement
request.
   (iv)   Safe and convenient bicycle access shall be provided from the
external circulation system (e.g., from public access bike paths, bike lanes,
and/ or bike routes) to bicycle parking facilities on-site. Safe access shall
be provided so as to minimize conflicts with other vehicles and pedestrians as
determined by the Public Works Department.
   (3)   Nonresidential development projects capable of holding one hundred
fifty (150) employees or more shall comply with subsections (a)(1) and (2) of
this section, and shall provide all of the following:
   (i)   A safe and convenient zone if feasible and appropriate as determined
by the Public Works and Community Development Departments in which vanpool and
carpool vehicles may deliver or board their passengers. Passenger loading areas
should be located as close as possible to the building entrance and should be
designated in a manner that does not impede vehicular circulation in the
parking area. A passenger loading zone or van turn-out area may be required to
accomplish this. In the case of multiple-tenant developments, more than one
passenger loading zone may be required and the location and number of vanpool/
carpool passenger loading zones shall be distributed in a manner acceptable to
the Public Works and Community Development Departments.
   (ii)   Sidewalks or other designated pathways following, to the greatest
extent feasible, direct and safe routes from the external (public or private)
pedestrian circulation system to each, and between each building in the
development.
   (iii)    If determined necessary by the Public Works and Community
Development Departments to mitigate project impacts, bus stop improvements
shall be provided. Appropriate bus service improvements as determined by the
Public Works Director include bus turnouts, bus pads (thickened pavement
structural section where bus travels or stops), bus shelters, bus benches, bus
stops, bus lighting, etc. When locating bus stops and or planning building
entrances, entrances should be designed to provide safe and efficient access to
nearby transit stations and/ or stops as determined by the Public Works
Director and the Community Development Director.
   (iv)   Development design shall incorporate, to the extent feasible as
determined by the Public Works Director and the Community Development Director,
showers, changing rooms, lockers, etc., for employees who bicycle, jog or walk
to work.
   (v)   Development design shall incorporate an eating area and shall
incorporate to the extent feasible as determined by the Departments of Public
Works and Community Development cafeterias, eating establishments, ATMs, day
care facilities, gyms, and other facilities which will reduce the need for mid
day driving. The requirement of this subparagraph will be deemed to be
satisfied if the developer enters into a written agreement with a neighboring
project to mutually share approved TDM facility or facilities such as eating
areas, cafeterias, eating establishments, ATMs, day care facilities, and gyms.
   (b)   Residential development standards.
   (1)   Residential development projects of one hundred (100) dwelling units
or more shall provide the following which shall be provided on the site plans
for each entitlement request:
   (i)   Safe, convenient and direct pedestrian and bicycle access from the
internal circulation system to collector and/or arterial roadways. The project
residential street system shall include sidewalks per City standards. The
project residential street system may also serve as bicycle routes to connect
to the collector and/or arterial roadways. These types of standard facilities
should satisfy this requirement; however, development projects may be required
to provide additional off-street pedestrian and or bicycle facilities as
determined by the Public Works and Community Development Departments.
   (ii)   If determined necessary by the Public Works Department, bus stop
improvements including but not limited to bus turnouts, shelters, benches,
lighting, etc. shall be provided.
   (2)   Residential development projects of five hundred (500) dwelling units
or more shall comply with subsection (b)(i) of this section, and shall:
incorporate development project design to the greatest extent possible and as
appropriate based on adjacent land use and market services such as dry
cleaners, eating establishments, child care facilities, grocery markets,
neighborhood work centers, ATMs, gyms, and other facilities which will reduce
home-based vehicle trips and vehicle miles traveled. This requirement could be
satisfied if the proposed development project is to be located in proximity to
existing or planned services as determined by the Community Development
Department.
   All facilities and improvements constructed or otherwise required by this
section shall be maintained in a state of good repair.
   A reduction in the number of project-required parking spaces and/or parking
space size (i.e., compact parking space size in lieu of standard space size)
may be allowed in certain cases, as determined by the Public Works and
Community Development Departments. To be considered for a parking reduction,
the developer, by imposed conditions, shall agree to provide and guarantee
approved TDM measures and/or TDM program enhancements that exceed the
requirements of this article for the development project. The extent of the
credit for TDM measures in lieu required parking spaces shall be consistent
with requirements of this chapter and shall be approved by the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 1199-NS, eff. March 1, 1994)
Sec. 9-4.4004. Applicability of TDM development standards.
   The provisions of this article shall not apply to projects for which a
development application has been deemed “complete” by the City pursuant to
Government Code Section 65943, prior to the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this article. Phased development projects, development projects
subject to a development agreement, or development projects requiring
subsequent approvals, need not repeat this process as long as no significant
changes are made to the project. It shall remain the discretion of the City of
Thousand Oaks to make this determination.
(§ 1, Ord. 1199-NS, eff. March 1, 1994)
Sec. 9-4.4005. Review of transit impacts.
   Prior to approval of any development project for which an environmental
impact report (EIR) will be prepared pursuant to the requirements of the
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) or based on a local determination,
regional and municipal fixed-route transit operators providing service to the
project shall be identified and consulted with to provide input. Projects for
which a notice of preparation (NOP) for a draft EIR has been circulated
pursuant to CEQA prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
article shall be exempted from the provisions of this section. Transit
operators shall be sent a NOP for all contemplated EIRs and shall, as part of
the NOP process, be given opportunity to comment on the impacts of the project,
to identify recommended transit service or capital improvements which may be
required as a result of the project, and to recommend mitigation measures which
minimize automobile trips on the CMP network. Impacts and recommended
mitigation measures identified by the transit operator shall be evaluated in
the environmental impact report prepared for the project. Related mitigation
measures adopted shall be monitored through the mitigation monitoring
requirements of CEQA.
(§ 1, Ord. 1199-NS, eff. March 1, 1994)
Sec. 9-4.4006. Monitoring.
   All provisions of this article and the requirements imposed by the approved
conditions of development imposed on a project shall be complied with and
inspected by the City prior to the release of final occupancy permits.
(§ 1, Ord. 1199-NS, eff. March 1, 1994)
Article 41. Temporary Uses
Sec. 9-4.4100. Purpose.
   The temporary use permit is established because certain activities may be
appropriate at specific locations on a temporary basis, but would be
inappropriate on a permanent basis. It is further the intent to avoid
incompatibility between such temporary uses and the surrounding area by
regulating such short term land use activities to prevent or mitigate adverse
effects associated with or resulting from such temporary uses.
(§ 19, Ord. 1379-NS, eff. August 9, 2001)
Sec. 9-4.4101. Uses permitted subject to a temporary use permit.
   The following temporary uses are permitted subject to approval of a
temporary use permit application.
   (a)   Temporary stands established or maintained for the sale of
agricultural or horticultural products grown on the premises, as permitted by
this article, subject to the following conditions and limitations (permitted in
R-A, R-E, R-O, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-P-D, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, M-1 and M-2 zones):
   (1)   The floor area of such stands shall not exceed four hundred (400)
square feet each,
   (2)   Such stands shall not be located or maintained within twenty (20')
feet of any public road, street, or highway,
   (3)   The construction of such stands shall be wood frame exclusively, and
   (4)   The owners thereof shall remove such stands when not in use for a
period of thirty (30) days;
   (b)   Christmas tree sales lots for not more than thirty (30) consecutive
days and pumpkin sales lots and other similar activities for not more than
forty-five (45) consecutive days for each activity within one calendar year
(permitted in C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-2/CC, C-2/AM, M-1, and M-2 zones);
   (c)   Temporary storage of new passenger vehicles on properties for not more
than eighteen (18) months (permitted in C-2, C-3, C-4, C-2/AM, M-1 and M-
2 zones). For the purpose of this section, the definition of new vehicle shall
be as defined in the State of California Vehicle Code Section 430 and as
amended, as follows:
   a new vehicle is a vehicle constructed entirely from new parts that has
never been the subject of a retail sale, or registered with the appropriate
agency or authority of any other state, District of Columbia, territory or
possession of the United States, or foreign state, province, or country.
   (d)   Such other uses as the Community Development Director may consider to
be within the intent and purpose of this article.
   (e)   Temporary storage of new passenger vehicles on properties within the
C-2/CC zone. The definitions of new vehicle as stated in subsection 9-4.4101(c)
is applicable to this subsection. This subsection shall automatically expire
July 31, 2009, unless extended by the City Council.
(§19, Ord. 1379-NS, eff. August 9, 2001; as amended by § 1, Ord. 1468-NS,
effective August 18, 2006)
Sec. 9-4.4102. Application.
   (a)   Applications for a temporary use permit shall conform to the filing
requirements of Section
9-4.2804 of this chapter.
   (b)   Findings. The Community Development Department may approve a temporary
use permit only when all of the following findings can be made:
   (1)   The operation of the requested temporary use at the location proposed
and within the time period specified will not jeopardize, endanger, or
otherwise constitute a menace to the public health, safety, or general welfare;
   (2)   The proposed site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the
temporary use without material detriment to the use and enjoyment of other
properties located adjacent to and in the vicinity of the site;
   (3)   The proposed site is adequately served by streets or highways having
sufficient width and improvements to accommodate the anticipated traffic that
the temporary use will or could reasonably be expected to generate;
   (4)   Adequate temporary parking to accommodate expected demand generated by
the temporary use will be available either on-site or at alternate location(s)
acceptable to the Community Development Department;
   (5)   The applicant has satisfactorily demonstrated that the temporary use
will be actively managed to avoid adverse impacts to areas off-site, which are
attributable to noise, dust, odor, contaminants, refuse, or vibration
potentially associated with the use;
   (6)   The applicant has provided satisfactory evidence that the proposed
temporary use complies with all other applicable regulations of the City and
other public agencies with jurisdictions.
   (c)   Conditions of issuance. In approving an application for a temporary
use permit, the Community Development Department may impose conditions that are
necessary to insure that the permit will be in accord with the findings
required by this section. These conditions may involve any aspects affecting
the operation of the temporary use and may include, but are not limited to:
   (1)   Requirement of temporary parking facilities, including vehicular
ingress and egress;
   (2)   Regulation of nuisance factors such as, but not limited to, prevention
of glare or direct illumination of lighting fixtures onto adjacent properties,
noise, vibration, smoke, dust, dirt, odors, garbage, refuse, gases and heat;
   (3)   Regulation of temporary buildings, structures and facilities,
including placement, height and size, location of equipment and open spaces,
including buffer areas within the site;
   (4)   Regulation of operating hours and days and limitations on the duration
of such temporary use;
   (5)   Requirement of a performance bond or other surety to assure that any
temporary facilities or structures used for such proposed temporary use will be
removed from the site within forty-eight (48) hours following the termination
of such use and the property will be restored to its original condition. The
Community Development Director may designate a different time period and/or
require cleanup of additional surrounding property at the Director’s
discretion;
   (6)   Regulation of signs, including location, size, height, colors and
materials to be used;
   (7)   Regulation of fencing including location, height and material to be
used;
   (8)   Approval of the requested temporary use permit is contingent upon
compliance with applicable ordinances and provisions of other laws;
   (9)   Other conditions which will ensure the operation of the proposed
temporary use in an orderly and efficient manner in accordance with the intent
and purpose of the article, and that the temporary use is compatible with
nearby uses;
   (10)    In addition to such other conditions as the Community Development
Department may impose, it shall also be a condition of every temporary use
permit, that such approval shall not authorize the construction, establishment,
alteration or enlargement of any permanent building, structure or facility;
   (11)    Designation of a required termination date reasonably related to the
nature of the temporary use but not to exceed eighteen (18) months from the
commencement of use;
   (12)    Requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES), if applicable, as determined by the Public Works Department.
   (d)   Time extension. Except for temporary uses authorized by Section
9-4.4101(b), the Community Development Director may grant a one-time (up to six
(6) months) only extension of the temporary use which may be requested by the
applicant prior to the expiration of the temporary use authorization by filing
a modification application. (§19, Ord. 1379-NS, eff. August 9, 2001)
Article 42. Oak Tree Preservation and Protection
Sec. 9-4.4201. Purpose.
   The City lies in the Conejo Valley, the beauty of which is greatly enhanced
by the presence of large numbers of majestic oak trees. At one time, the area
was almost completely covered by an oak forest, however, development of the
City has resulted in the removal of a great number of these trees. Further
uncontrolled and indiscriminate destruction of oak trees would detrimentally
affect the safety and welfare of the citizens of Thousand Oaks. The
preservation program outlined in this chapter contributes to the welfare and
aesthetics of the community and retains the great historical and environmental
value of these trees.
   This chapter sets forth the policy of the City to require the preservation
of all healthy oak trees, unless otherwise exempt from this chapter or
reasonable and conforming use of the property justifies the removal, cutting,
pruning and/or encroachment into the protected zone of an oak tree.
(§ 1, Ord. 937-NS, eff. November 14, 1986, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1534-NS,
eff. April 9, 2010, and Part 3, Ord. 1610-NS, eff. January 15, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.4202. Definitions.
   (a)   “Authorized agent” means the Community Development Director.
   (b)   “Clearance pruning” means removing live branches that interfere with
an existing structure, walkway or driveway, or approved parking space.
   (c)   “Community Development Director” means the Community Development
Director or his or her designee.
   (d)   “Cutting” means the detaching or separating, from a protected tree,
any limb, branch or root. Cutting shall include pruning.
   (e)   “Damage” means any action undertaken which causes injury, death, or
disfigurement to a tree. This includes, but is not limited to, cutting,
poisoning, overwatering, relocation or transplanting a protected tree, or
trenching, excavating or paving within the protected zone of a tree.
   (f)   “Deadwood” means limbs, branches or a portion of a tree that contains
no green leaves during a period of the year when they should be present.
   (g)   “Deadwooding” means removing all deadwood from a tree.
   (h)   “Dead tree” is a tree that exhibits no signs of life whatsoever (e.g.
green leaves or live limbs) during a period of the year when they should be
present and has been determined dead by an authorized agent of the City.
   (i)   “Dripline” shall mean the outermost edge of the tree's canopy. When
depicted on a map, the dripline will appear as an irregular shaped circle that
follows the contour of the tree's branches as seen from overhead.
   (j)   “Encroachment” means any intrusion or human activity within the
protected zone of an oak tree including, but not limited to, pruning, grading,
excavating, trenching, parking of vehicles, storage of materials or equipment,
or the construction of structures or other improvements.
   (k)   “Ground plane improvements” are low profile improvements, such as
paving stones, benches, and statuaries, that do not require attachments to an
oak tree, the removal of live tissue, or any grading activity.
   (l)   “Hazardous oak tree” shall mean any oak tree determined to be
dangerous to life or property as determined by an authorized agent of the City.
   (m)   “Multiple trunks” refers to trees that have more than one trunk
growing from one root system. The aggregate total of the trunks shall equal one
tree for purposes of this chapter.
   (n)   “Oak tree” shall mean any oak tree of the Genus Quercus including, but
not limited to, Valley Oak (Quercus lobata), California Live Oak (Quercus
agrifolia) and Scrub Oak (Quercus berberidifolia), regardless of size.
   (o)   “Oak tree permit” is an entitlement issued by the City authorizing
specific work within the protected zone of an oak tree.
   (p)   “Oak Tree Preservation and Protection Guidelines” or “Guidelines”
means the policy established by the City Council and the administrative
procedures and rules established by the Community Development Director for
implementing this chapter.
   (q)   “Person” means any person, partnership, firm, corporation,
governmental agency or other legal entity.
   (r)   “Protected zone” shall mean a specifically defined area totally
encompassing an oak tree within which work activities are strictly controlled.
When depicted on a map, the outermost edge of the protected zone will appear as
an irregular shaped circle that follows the contour of the dripline of the
tree. Using the dripline as a point of reference, the protected zone shall
commence at a point five (5') feet outside of the dripline and extend inward to
the trunk of the tree. In no case shall the protected zone be less than fifteen
(15') feet from the trunk of an oak tree.
   (s)   “Pruning” is any cutting performed upon any portion of an oak tree.
   (t)   “Removal” means the physical removal of a tree or causing the death of
a tree through damaging, poisoning, or other direct or indirect action.
   (u)   “Routine maintenance” means actions needed for the continued good
health of an oak tree, including, but not limited to, removal of deadwood,
insect control spraying, watering, and clearance pruning as defined above.
(§ 1, Ord. 937-NS, eff. November 14, 1986, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1394-NS,
eff. June 21, 2002, § 3, Ord. 1534-NS, eff. April 9, 2010, and Parts 3 and 5,
Ord. 1610-NS, eff. January 15, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.4203. Oak tree preservation.
   Any person who owns, controls, has custody or possession of any real
property within the City that is improved or has been approved for development,
or which is part of or associated with the City approved development of another
piece of property, such as any parcel to be maintained as permanent open space
or for recreational purposes, shall maintain all oak tree(s) located thereon in
a state of good health pursuant to this chapter and the Oak Tree Preservation
and Protection Guidelines adopted by City Council resolution. Failure to do so
will constitute a violation of this chapter.
(§1, Ord. 937-NS, eff. November 14, 1986, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1534-NS, eff.
April 9, 2010, and Parts 3 and 6, Ord. 1610-NS, eff. January 15, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.4204. Permit required.
   (a)   Permit required. No person shall cut, remove, encroach into the
protected zone, or relocate any oak tree on any public or private property
within the City, unless a valid oak tree permit has been issued by the City
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and the oak tree preservation and
protection guidelines.
   (b)   Scope of permit approval. An oak tree permit may authorize the
removal, cutting, or encroachment within the protected zone of one (1) or more
oak trees subject to the conditions set forth in said permit. An oak tree
permit may also authorize future maintenance of oak trees within the permit
area, such as pruning, within parameters established in an oak tree maintenance
program approval in conjunction with the oak tree permit. Activities included
within an approved oak tree maintenance program may be undertaken in compliance
with said program without the filing and approval of a separate
ak tree permit application. Provided, however, an oak tree not covered by the
initial oak tree permit may not be encroached upon without approval of a
subsequent oak tree permit or modification to the original permit.
(§ 1, Ord. 937-NS, eff. November 14, 1986, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1534-NS,
eff. April 9, 2010, and Part 3, Ord. 1610-NS, eff. January 15, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.4205. Exemptions.
   (a)   Exemptions. A permit is not required to cut, remove, or encroach
within the protected zone of any oak tree(s) under the following circumstances.
   (1)   Trees that do not exceed two (2") inches in diameter when measured at
a point four and a half (4-1/2') feet above the tree's natural grade.
   (2)   Ground plane improvements that are proposed between the dripline and
the protected zone limit.
   (3)   Clearance pruning that involves removal of live branches that do not
exceed two (2") inches in diameter, except in conjunction with' any new
construction activity.
   (4)   Deadwooding.
   (5)   When removal is determined necessary by fire department personnel
engaged in fighting a fire.
   (6)   Trees planted or grown in containers and held for sale as part of a
licensed nursery business.
   (7)   Any encroachment, pruning, or removal deemed necessary by an
authorized agent of the City for public safety purposes.
(§ 3, Ord. 1534-NS, eff. April 9, 2010, as amended by Parts 3 and 7, Ord. 1610-
NS, eff. January 15, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.4206. Processing of permits: Standards for granting or denying
permits.
   (a)   Processing. The applicant shall furnish all necessary information as
required by the Oak Tree Preservation and Protection Guidelines in a clear and
accurate format to the Community Development Department and pay the appropriate
filing fee prescribed by City Council resolution.
   (1)   Administrative process. Except as provided below, the Community
Development Director may approve, deny, or conditionally approve a request for
removal of three (3) or fewer oak trees that are less than twenty-four (24")
inches in diameter when measured at a point four and one half (4-1/2') feet
above the tree’s natural grade on a single parcel without hearing or notice.
Provided, however, that if one or more of the oak trees proposed to be removed
extends into any adjoining property, the owner of said adjoining property(ies)
shall be notified in writing of the request prior to the Director rendering a
decision. Any decision of the Director may be appealed to the Planning
Commission and the Commission’s decision may be appealed to the City Council
pursuant to the provisions of Article 28 of this chapter.
   (2)   Planning Commission process. Any request for removal of any non-exempt
oak tree twenty-four (24") inches or greater in diameter when measured at a
point four and one half (4-1/2') feet above the tree’s natural grade, and/or
four (4) or more non-exempt oak trees on a single parcel shall be reviewed by
the Planning Commission following a public hearing, which hearing shall be held
in conjunction with the Commission’s consideration of other entitlement
applications for a project related to the request, if any. The Commission may
approve, conditionally approve, or deny the permit application. The decision of
the Commission may be appealed to the City Council pursuant to the provisions
of Article 28 of this chapter. Notice of all hearings required hereby shall be
provided in the manner set forth in Chapter 12 of Title 9 of this Code.
   (b)   Standards. An oak tree permit may be approved based upon one of the
following findings by the decision maker:
   (1)   The condition or location of the oak trees requires cutting to
maintain or aid its health, balance, structure, or to maintain adequate
clearance from existing structures.
   (2)   The condition of the tree(s) with respect to disease, danger of
falling, proximity to existing structures, high pedestrian traffic areas such
as parking lots, pedestrian walkways, interference with
utility services, or is causing or is likely to cause substantial property
damage based on sufficient evidence and/or documentation and said damage cannot
be controlled or remedied through reasonable preservation and/or preventive
procedures and practices.
   (3)   A permit may be approved when necessary to remove, relocate, cut or
encroach into the protected zone of an oak tree to enable the reasonable and
conforming use of the subject property, which is otherwise prevented by the
presence of the tree. Reasonable use of the property shall be determined in
accordance with the Oak Tree Preservation and Protection Guidelines.
   (4)   Approval of the request is not contrary to or in conflict with the
general purpose and intent of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 937-NS, eff. November 14, 1986, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1178-NS,
eff. May 28, 1993, and § 2, Ord. 1394-NS, eff. June 21, 2002, as amended by
Part 1, Ord. 1446-NS, eff. November 25, 2005, § 3, Ord. 1534-NS, eff. April 9,
2010, and Parts 3 and 8, Ord. 1610-NS, eff. January 15, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.4207. Conditions on removal.
   Conditions that may be imposed on the permit at the discretion of the
decision maker include, but are not limited to, any of the following:
   (a)   A condition requiring the replacement or placement of additional oak
tree(s) on the subject property or at an appropriate location on public
property to offset the permitted removal of the tree(s). Replacement shall be
in accordance with this Chapter and the standards provided by the oak tree
preservation and protection guidelines, subject to approval by the Community
Development Director.
   (b)   The relocation of a tree on-site or off-site.
   (c)   A condition requiring that a maintenance and care program be initiated
to ensure the continuedhealth and care of oak tree(s) for which pruning or
encroachment is permitted, as well as other on-site oak trees on the property.
(Part 3, Ord. 1610-NS, eff. January 15, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.4208. Non-liability of City.
   Nothing in this chapter or within the oak tree preservation and protection
guidelines shall be deemed to impose any liability for damages or a duty of
care and maintenance upon the City or upon any of its officers or employees.
The person in possession of any property shall have a duty to keep the oak
trees upon the property and under their control in a safe, healthy condition.
Any person who feels a tree located on property possessed, owned or controlled
by them is a danger to the safety of themselves, others or structural
improvements on-site or off-site shall have an obligation to secure the area
around the tree or support the tree, as appropriate to safeguard both persons
and improvements from harm.
(§ 1, Ord. 937-NS, eff. November 14, 1986, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1534-NS,
eff. April 9, 2010, and Part 3, Ord. 1610-NS, eff. January 15, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.4209. Enforcement.
   (a)   Violation, penalty. Any person who cuts, damages, moves, or removes
any oak tree within the City or encroaches into the drip line of an oak tree in
violation of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction, may be punished as set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code.
   (b)   Stop work notice. Whenever any construction or work is being performed
contrary to the provisions of this chapter, oak tree preservation guidelines,
oak tree permit, or conditions of any applicable underlying development permit,
the Community Development Director may issue a written notice to the
responsible party to stop work on the project on which the violation has
occurred or upon which the danger exists. The notice shall state the nature of
the violation or danger and no work shall be allowed until the violation has
been rectified and approved by the Community Development Department.
   (c)   Violation, restitution. It has been determined that the oak trees
within the City are valuable assets to the citizens of this community and to
the citizens of the Conejo Valley, and as a result of the loss or damage to any
of these trees, the public should be recompensed. In addition to any penalties
provided by subsection (a) above, any person who cuts, damages or removes any
tree in violation of the terms of this chapter is responsible for proper
restitution and may be required to replace the oak tree(s) so removed or
damaged, by the donation of or by replanting two (2) or more oak trees of
reasonable equivalent size and value to the tree damaged or removed. The
number, size and location of said equivalent replacement oak tree shall be
determined by the Community Development Director.
(§ 1, Ord. 937-NS, eff. November 14, 1986, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1534-NS,
eff. April 9, 2010, and Part 3, Ord. 1610-NS, eff. January 15, 2016)
Article 43. Landmark Tree Preservation and Protection
Sec. 9-4.4301. Purpose.
   The City lies in the Conejo Valley, the beauty of which is greatly enhanced
by the presence of large numbers of majestic trees. At one time, the area was
almost entirely covered by an oak woodland, however, development of the City
has resulted in the removal of a great number of these trees. Further
uncontrolled and indiscriminate destruction of trees would detrimentally affect
the health, safety and welfare of the City of Thousand Oaks. This preservation
program outlined in this chapter contributes to the welfare and aesthetics of
the community and retains the great historical and environmental value of these
trees.
   This chapter sets forth the policy of the City to require the preservation
of all healthy landmark trees unless reasonable and conforming use of the
property justifies the removal, cutting, pruning, and/or encroachment into the
protected zone of a landmark tree.
(§ 2, Ord. 1217-NS, eff. October 28, 1994, as amended by Part 4, Ord. 1610-NS,
eff. January 15, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.4302. Definitions.
   (a)   “Cutting” means the detaching or separating, from a protected tree,
any limb, branch, or root. Cutting shall include pruning.
   (b)   “Damage” means any action undertaken which causes injury, death, or
disfigurement to a tree. This includes, but is not limited to, cutting,
poisoning, overwatering, relocation or transplanting a protected tree, or
trenching, excavating, or paving within the protected zone of a tree.
   (c)   “Deadwood” means limbs, branches, or a portion of a tree that contains
no green leaves during a period of the year when they should be present.
   (d)   “Dripline” shall mean the outermost edge of the tree's canopy. When
depicted on a map, the dripline will appear as an irregular shaped circle that
follows the contour of the tree’s branches as seen from overhead.
   (e)   “Encroachment” means any intrusion or human activity into the
protected zone of a landmark tree including, but not limited to, pruning,
grading, excavating, trenching, parking of vehicles, storage of materials or
equipment, or the construction of structures or other improvements.
   (f)   “Historic tree” shall mean a tree that because of its historic or
cultural significance will be preserved and safeguarded as a symbol of the
City’s heritage and to the beauty and image of the City of Thousand Oaks. All
historic trees shall be designated pursuant to the procedure set forth within
this article.
   (g)   “Landmark tree” shall mean a tree that because of its size, age, or
unique and irreplaceable values to the community needs to be preserved and
safeguarded as symbolic of the City’s heritage, beauty and image. Landmark
trees shall include specimens of the following species which have reached the
designated maturity: Platanus racemosa, (California Sycamore) which exceed
twelve (12") inches in diameter when measured at a point four and one-half (4-
1/2') feet above the natural grade at the base of the tree; Umbellularia
californica, (California Bay Laurel) which exceed eight (8") inches in diameter
when measured at a point four and one-half (4-1/2') feet above the natural
grade at the base of the tree, Juglans californica, (California Black Walnut)
which exceed eight (8") inches in diameter when measured at a point four and
one-half (4-1/2') feet above the natural grade at the base of the tree;
Heteromeles (Photinia) arbutifolia, (California Holly) or (Toyon) which exceeds
eight (8") inches in diameter when measured at a point four and one-half (4-1/
2') feet above the natural grade at the base of the tree. Trees with multiple
trunks shall be deemed to have reached maturity if the sum of the diameters of
the multiple trunks exceed the required diameter plus two (2") inches of a
single trunked tree. Landmark trees shall also include all designated historic
trees. Likewise, landmark trees shall also include any tree(s), of any type,
designated as landmark trees by the Planning Commission or City Council during
review of any land use entitlement request and which trees are required to be
preserved as a condition of that City approved entitlement, land division, or
tract map. This designation shall continue whether or not the use for which the
entitlement is issued is inaugurated or the land division or tract map is
recorded.
   (h)   “Person” shall mean any natural person, partnership, firm,
corporation, governmental agency, or other legal entity.
   (i)   “Protected zone” shall mean a specifically defined area totally
encompassing a landmark or historic tree within which work activities are
strictly controlled. When depicted on a map, the outermost edge of the
protected zone will appear as an irregular shaped circle that follows the
contour of the dripline of the tree. Using the dripline as a point of
reference, the protected zone shall commence at a point five (5) feet outside
of the dripline and extend inward to the trunk of the tree. In no case shall
the protected zone be less than fifteen (15) feet from the trunk of a landmark
tree.
   (j)   “Removal” means the physical removal of a tree or causing the death of
a tree through damaging, poisoning, or other direct or indirect action.
   (k)   “Routine maintenance” means actions needed for the continued good
health of a landmark tree including, but not limited to, removal of deadwood,
insect control spraying, and watering.
(§ 2, Ord. 1217-NS, eff. October 28, 1994, as amended by Parts 4 and 9, Ord.
1610-NS, eff. January 15, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.4303. Landmark tree preservation.
   (a)   Any person who owns, controls, has custody or possession of any real
property within the City that is improved or has been approved for development,
or which is part of or associated with the City-approved development of another
piece of property such as any parcel to be maintained as permanent open space
or for recreational purposes, shall maintain all landmark trees located thereon
in a state of good health pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Failure
to do so will constitute a violation of this section.
(§ 2, Ord. 1217-NS, eff. October 28, 1994, as amended by Part 4, Ord. 1610-NS,
eff. January 15, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.4304. Permit required: Exemptions.
   (a)   Permit required. No person shall cut, remove, encroach into the
protected zone, or relocate any landmark tree on any public or private property
within the City unless a valid landmark tree permit has been issued by the City
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The status of major limbs or trees
as deadwood must be confirmed by the City’s Landmark Tree Preservation
Consultant.
   (b)   Exemptions. A permit is not required to cut, encroach, remove, or
relocate a tree(s) under the following circumstances:
   (1)   Trees damaged by thunderstorms, windstorms, floods, earthquakes,
fires, or other natural disasters and determined to be dangerous by a peace
officer, fireman, civil defense official, or code enforcement officer in their
official capacity. The Community Development Department shall be promptly
noticed of the nature of the emergency and action taken;
   (2)   When removal is determined necessary by fire department personnel
actively engaged in fighting a fire;
   (3)   Trees planted, grown and/or held in for sale as part of a licensed
nursery business. This exemption is limited to trees with main trunks under ten
(10) inches in diameter;
   (4)   Trees within the property boundaries of an occupied single-family
detached dwelling; provided, that the parcel in question is smaller than two
(2) acres;
   (5)   City of Thousand Oaks staff in maintaining public property.
   (c)   Use of explosives. All tree fellers, tree surgeons, or anyone using
explosives within the City limits in connection with the cutting down or
removal of any landmark tree shall first apply to the
City Manager or his or her designee for a permit to do so and shall furnish
such bond or insurance as the City Manager or his or her designee shall deem
necessary for the protection of the property owner or any other person from any
possible damage as a result of such work.
(§ 2, Ord. 1217-NS, eff. October 28, 1994, as amended by Part 4, Ord. 1610-NS,
eff. January 15, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.4305. Processing of permits: Standards for granting or denying
permits.
   (a)   Processing. The applicant shall furnish all necessary information as
required by the landmark tree permit application in a clear and accurate format
to the Community Development Department and pay the appropriate filing fee as
set by Council resolution.
   (1)   Administrative process. The Community Development Director may
approve, deny, or conditionally approve a request for removal of three (3) or
fewer landmark trees on a single parcel provided the request does not involve
any designated historic tree or landmark tree greater than twenty-four (24")
inches in diameter when measured at a point four and one half (4-1/2') feet
above the tree’s natural grade. The decision of the Director may be appealed to
the Planning Commission and the Commission’s decision may be appealed to the
City Council pursuant to the provisions of this Code.
   (2)   Planning Commission process. Any request for removal of any non-exempt
landmark tree that is twenty-four (24") inches or greater in diameter when
measured at a point four and one half (4-1/2') feet above the tree’s natural
grade, the removal of four (4) or more non-exempt landmark trees on a single
parcel, or request for removal of any designated historic tree, shall be heard
by the Planning Commission in conjunction with the Commission’s consideration
of other entitlement applications for a project, if any. The Commission may
approve, conditionally approve, or deny the permit. Any decision of the
Commission may be appealed to the City Council pursuant to the provisions of
Article 28 of this chapter.
   (b)   Standards. A landmark tree permit may be approved based upon one of
the following findings by the decision maker:
   (1)   The condition or location of the landmark tree requires cutting to
maintain or aid its health, balance, or structure;
   (2)   The condition of the tree(s) with respect to disease, danger of
falling, proximity to existing structures, high pedestrian traffic areas such
as parking lots, pedestrian walkways, interference with utility services, or is
causing or is likely to cause substantial property damage based on sufficient
evidence and/or documentation and said damage cannot be controlled or remedied
through reasonable preservation and/or preventative procedures and practices.
   (3)   A permit may be approved when necessary to remove, relocate, cut or
encroach into the protected zone of a landmark tree to enable the reasonable
and conforming use of the property which is otherwise prevented by the presence
of the tree.
(§ 2, Ord. 1217-NS, eff. October 28, 1994, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1394-NS,
eff. June 21, 2002, as amended by Part 2, Ord. 1446-NS, eff. November 25, 2005,
and Parts 4 and 10, Ord. 1610-NS, eff. January 15, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.4306. Conditions on removal.
   The conditions may be imposed on the permit at the discretion of the
decision maker including, but not limited to, any of the following:
   (a)   A condition requiring the replacement or placement of additional trees
on the subject property to offset the impacts associated with the loss of a
tree, limbs, or encroachment into the protected zone of a landmark tree;
   (b)   The relocating of a tree on-site or off-site, or the planting of a new
tree off-site to offset the loss of a tree;
   (c)   A condition requiring an objectively observable maintenance and care
program be initiated to insure the continued health and care of landmark trees
on the property;
   (d)   Payment of a fee or donation of a boxed tree to the City or other
public agency to be used elsewhere in the community should a suitable
replacement location of the tree not be possible on-site or off-site.
(§ 2, Ord. 1217-NS, eff. October 28, 1994, as amended by Part 4, Ord. 1610-NS,
eff. January 15, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.4307. Nonliability of City.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to impose any liability for damages
or a duty of care and maintenance upon the City or upon any of its officers or
employees. The person in possession of any public property or the owner of any
private property shall have a duty to keep the landmark trees upon the property
and under their control in a safe, healthy condition. Any person who feels a
tree located on property possessed, owned, or controlled by them is a danger to
the safety of themselves, others, or structural improvements on-site or off-
site shall have an obligation to secure the area around the tree or support the
tree, as appropriate to safeguard both persons and improvements from harm.
(§ 2, Ord. 1217-NS, eff. October 28, 1994, as amended by Parts 4 and 11, Ord.
1610-NS, eff. January 15, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.4308. Penalties.
   (a)   Violation, penalty. Any violation of this section shall be deemed a
misdemeanor as set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code.
   (b)   Violation, restitution. It has been determined that the landmark trees
within the City are valuable assets to the citizens of the Conejo Valley and as
a result of the loss or damage to any of these trees, the public should be
recompensed. In addition to any penalties provided by subsection (a) above, any
person who cuts, damages, or removes any tree in violation of the terms of this
chapter is responsible for proper monetary restitution and may be required to
replace the landmark tree(s) so removed and damaged, by the donation of or by
replanting two (2) or more landmark trees of reasonable equivalent size and
value to the tree damaged or removed. The number, size and location of said
equivalent replacement landmark tree shall be determined by the Community
Development Director or his or her designee.
(§ 2, Ord. 1217-NS, eff. October 28, 1994, as amended by Part 4, Ord. 1610-NS,
eff. January 15, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.4309. Tree valuation.
   For the purposes of replacement for trees removed, the method of valuation
shall be the “Standards for Valuation of Amenity Trees” of the International
Society of Arboriculture. These standards shall apply to those trees removed
without a permit as well as those removed with a permit, which require off-site
replacements of similar value for the trees removed.
(§ 2, Ord. 1217-NS, eff. October 28, 1994, as amended by Part 4, Ord. 1610-NS,
eff. January 15, 2016)
Sec. 9-4.4310. Designation of historic trees.
   In recognition of the historic or cultural value of certain trees within the
City, the designation of “Historic Tree” may be assigned. The assignment of the
“Historic Tree” designation shall be the responsibility of the City Council,
serving as the Cultural Heritage Board.
   In considering the designation of a “Historic Tree,” the City Council shall
evaluate whether public interest would be served by the placement of the HL
(Historic Landmark) overlay zone on the property.
(§ 2, Ord. 1217-NS, eff. October 28, 1994, as amended by Parts 4 and 12, Ord.
1610-NS, eff. January 15, 2016)
Article 44. Wireless Communications Facilities
Editor’s Note: Former Article 44, Marijuana was repealed by § 5 of Ord. 1636-
NS, eff. December 29, 2017
Sec. 9-4.4401. Purpose.
   The purpose of this Article is to establish rules and procedures to enable
the deployment of wireless communications facilities consistent with State and
Federal laws while limiting adverse impacts on the environment and public use
of City rights-of-way.
(§ 3, Ord. 1661-NS, eff. March 5, 2019)
Sec. 9-4.4402. Permits required.
   All wireless communications facilities, small wireless facilities, and
eligible facilities requests shall be subject to a permit as specified in
Article 21 of this chapter.
(§ 3, Ord. 1661-NS, eff. March 5, 2019)
Sec. 9-4.4403. Compliance with policies.
   All wireless communications facilities, small wireless facilities, and
eligible facilities requests and permits shall be subject to the standards and
procedures provided in the applicable City Council policies as adopted and
amended from time to time by City Council resolution.
(§ 3, Ord. 1661-NS, eff. March 5, 2019)
Article 45. Accessory Dwelling Units
Sec. 9-4.4501. Intent and purpose.
   The intent and purpose of this Article is to expand opportunities in the
City to create additional housing, allow more efficient use of existing housing
stock, and provide a range of housing opportunities through the creation of new
accessory dwelling units (ADUs) and junior accessory dwelling units (JADUs) on
lots in designated zones that already contain one established unit, or in
conjunction with the construction of a new residential unit. It is the intent
of this article to permit ADUs and JADUs, in conformance with state law, in
designated zones subject to such local standards that will ensure the units
contribute to a suitable living environment for people of all ages and economic
levels, while preserving the integrity and character of residential
neighborhoods in a manner consistent with the City's General Plan.
(§ 2, Ord. 1732-NS, eff. November 22, 2024)
Sec. 9-4.4502. Authority.
   (a)   California Government Code Sections 66310-66342 allow local agencies
to provide for the creation of ADUs and JADUs, respectively, in areas zoned for
single-family and multi-family residential use. The City may designate areas
for ADUs based on the adequacy of water and sewer services and the impact on
traffic flow and public safety.
   (b)   If a conflict is found between this Article and California Government
Code Sections 66310-66342, California Government Code Sections 66310-66342, as
it may be amended, shall prevail.
(§ 2, Ord. 1732-NS, eff. November 22, 2024)
Sec. 9-4.4503. Applications and approvals.
   (a)   Except as provided in Sec. 9-4.4513, no ADU or JADU may be created
without an ADU permit and a building permit. Whenever an ADU or JADU is
proposed as a project, an application shall be submitted to the Community
Development Department on a form provided by said department along with any
necessary supporting information. An application for development of a ADU or
JADU created pursuant to this Article will be reviewed ministerially, without
discretionary review or a hearing, and approved if it meets all the
requirements set forth in Sec. 9-4.4504 through Sec. 9-4.4508 (inclusive).
   (b)   ADU and/or JADU applications must be ministerially approved or denied
within 60 days from the date a complete application is submitted if there is an
existing single- or multi-family dwelling on the lot, unless the applicant
requests a delay, in which case the 60-day time period is tolled for the period
of the delay. A denied application for an ADU and/or JADU shall include a full
set of comments to the applicant with a list of items that are defective or
deficient and a description of how the application can be remedied.
   (c)   If the permit application to create or serve an ADU and/or a JADU unit
is submitted with a permit application to create a new single-family dwelling
on the lot, the Community Development Department may delay approving or denying
the permit application for the ADU and/or JADU until the Community Development
Department approves or denies the permit application to create the new single-
family dwelling, but the application to create or serve the ADU and/or JADU
shall be considered without discretionary review or hearing.
   (d)   The City shall not deny an application for a permit to create an
accessory dwelling unit due to the correction of nonconforming zoning
conditions, building code violations, or unpermitted structures that do not
present a threat to public health and safety and are not affected by the
construction of the accessory dwelling unit.
   (e)   A certificate of occupancy for an ADU or JADU may not be issued before
issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the primary dwelling.
   (f)   The permitting of an ADU and/or a JADU is subject to the California
Building Code (CBC) and California Residential Code (CRC), except that the
construction of an accessory dwelling unit shall not constitute a Group R
occupancy change under the local building code, as described in Section 310 of
the California Building Code (Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations),
unless the Building Official makes a written finding based on substantial
evidence in the record that the construction of the accessory dwelling unit
could have a specific, adverse impact on public health and safety.
   (g)   Modifications to an approved ADU or JADU require a new permit,
processed pursuant to this Section.
(§ 2, Ord. 1732-NS, eff. November 22, 2024)
Sec. 9-4.4504. Preclusion of minimum unit development.
   (a)   Development created pursuant to this Article shall comply with the
following standards and requirements so long as the application of such
standards would not have the effect of physically precluding the construction
of at least one ADU of at least 800 square feet of total floor area with four-
foot side and rear yard setbacks, which is constructed in compliance with all
other local development standards, per Government Code Section 66321,
subdivision (b)(3).
   (b)   If the application of the following standards would have the effect of
physically precluding the minimum unit development described above in
subdivision (a), such standard shall be waived only to the extent necessary to
allow construction of the affected unit(s) of a size no greater than 800 square
feet in floor area.
(§ 2, Ord. 1732-NS, eff. November 22, 2024)
Sec. 9-4.4505. Location and number of ADUs.
   (a)   Single Family Zones.
      (1)   ADUs may be constructed on any lot in the R-A, R-E, R-O, R-1, RPD,
or HPD zone that is improved with one existing or proposed primary dwelling
unit, subject to the requirements of this Section.
   (2)   Lots in the R-A, R-E, R-O, R-1, RPD, or HPD zone may have a maximum of
one JADU and one ADU that is either attached to, or located within, the
proposed or existing primary dwelling, including attached garages, storage
areas, or similar uses, or an accessory structure or detached from the proposed
or existing primary dwelling and located on the same lot as the proposed or
existing primary dwelling, including detached garages or detached from the
primary dwelling unit.
   (b)   Multi-Family Zones.
      (1)   Lots in the R-2, R-3, RPD, and MU zone that contain an existing or
proposed multifamily dwelling structure are allowed to have ADUs as permitted
pursuant to Section
9-4.4513.
   (c)   Limits on Unit Location.
      (1)   No ADU shall be located within or encroach upon a natural slope
steeper than 25%.
      (2)   No ADU shall be placed in a location that would require an adjacent
property owner to provide defensible space on the adjacent property pursuant to
Section 4907 of the California Fire Code, as amended and adopted by the Ventura
County Fire Protection District.
      (3)   No ADU shall be placed in any area where structures are prohibited
pursuant to a recorded deed restriction, parcel or final tract map.
(§ 2, Ord. 1732-NS, eff. November 22, 2024; Part 3, Ord. 1735-NS, eff. April
25, 2025)
Sec. 9-4.4506. Development standards.
   (a)   Junior Accessory Dwelling Units.
      (1)   JADUs are to be constructed within the walls of the proposed or
existing single-family residence including an attached garage.
      (2)   The maximum size is 500 square feet of floor area, and the minimum
size is the same as an efficiency dwelling unit.
      (3)   The maximum height of the JADU is limited to the height of the
existing structure in which the JADU is to be located.
      (4)   JADUs must include an efficiency kitchen, with a cooking facility
with appliances and a food preparation counter and storage cabinets.
      (5)   Sanitation facilities may be separate from or shared with the
primary dwelling. If the JADU does not include a separate bathroom, the JADU
shall include an interior entry to the main living area.
   (b)   Conversion Within or Attached to Primary Dwelling Accessory Dwelling
Units.
      (1)   The maximum size is 850 square feet or 50% of the existing primary
dwelling's total floor area, whichever is greater. The minimum size is the same
as an efficiency dwelling.
      (2)   The side and rear setbacks are 4 feet from the property line for
new enclosed square footage for the attached ADU. The front setback is the same
as required for the primary dwelling.
      (3)   The maximum height is 25 feet, or the height limitation as detailed
in Sec. 9-4.2501 that applies to the primary dwelling, whichever is lower.
      (4)   A full kitchen and sanitation facilities are required and must be
separate from the primary dwelling.
      (5)   Attached and converted ADUs must share a minimum of 10 feet of the
wall of the main single-family home. No internal connection is permitted.
   (c)   Detached Accessory Dwelling Units.
      (1)   The maximum size of detached ADUs is 850 square feet for a studio,
1,000 square feet for a one bedroom or more, and 1,200 square feet for two
bedrooms or more on a lot that is equal to or greater than one acre in gross
square feet.
      (2)   The side and rear setbacks are 4 feet from the property line. The
front setback is the same as required for the primary dwelling.
      (3)   The maximum height is 16 feet.
      (4)   The maximum height can be increased to 18 feet for a detached
accessory dwelling unit on a lot with an existing or proposed single family
dwelling unit that is within one-half mile walking distance from a major
transit stop or a high-quality transit corridor, as those terms are defined in
Section 21155 of the Public Resources Code.
      (5)   The maximum height can be increased by two (2) feet to accommodate
a roof pitch that is aligned with the roof pitch of the primary dwelling unit.
      (6)   The maximum height for a detached ADU on a lot with an existing or
proposed multifamily unit is 18 feet.
      (7)   Detached ADUs may not be attached to the existing single-family
dwelling or multi-family unit by breezeways or any similar structure and must
be separated from any proposed or existing structure by a minimum of six feet
as measured from the face of wall to the nearest face of wall.
   (d)   Accessory Structures.
      (1)   No accessory structure shall be attached to a detached ADU unless
the combined total floor area of the accessory structure and ADU does not
exceed the allowable size of the ADU.
      (2)   Where a detached ADU is proposed with an attached garage, the
garage portion shall be no larger than 400 square feet.
      (3)   The size of any proposed patio cover(s) and/or covered porch(s)
will be cumulatively limited to ten (10) percent of the square footage of the
proposed ADU. The patio cover and/or covered porch square footage is not to be
included in the total floor area calculation in Section
9-4.4505(d)(1).
      (4)   An ADU attached to an accessory structure shall not have internal
access to the accessory structure.
   (e)   Conversion of Existing Structures.
      (1)   A portion of an existing legally established single-family
dwelling, or all or a portion of an accessory structure, may be converted to an
ADU, even if such structure does not comply with the otherwise applicable
height and setback requirements.
      (2)   An accessory structure may be demolished and reconstructed in the
same location and to the same dimensions and may be fully or partially
converted to a detached ADU, even if such structure does not comply with the
otherwise applicable height and setback requirements.
      (3)   An accessory structure, including a demolished and reconstructed
structure, that is being fully or partially converted to a detached ADU, may be
expanded by up to 150 square feet to accommodate ingress and egress. Any new
construction proposed for ingress/egress must be setback from the side and rear
yards at least four (4) feet and have a maximum height that matches the
accessory structure or 16 feet, whichever is less.
      (4)   Attached JADUs and ADUs converted from the existing primary
dwelling can add 150 sq. ft. for the purpose of ingress and egress not to
exceed the square footage allowance. Any new construction proposed for the
purposes of ingress/egress must be setback from the side and rear yards at
least four (4) feet and have a maximum height that matches the existing
structure or 16 feet, whichever is less.
      (5)   Where an attached garage that provides the required parking for a
primary dwelling is partially converted to an ADU, the remaining space shall
continue to be utilized for parking if physically feasible. If it is not
feasible for the remaining space to be used for parking, the remaining space
shall be utilized for storage or similar non-habitable use for the primary
dwelling.
(§ 2, Ord. 1732-NS, eff. November 22, 2024; Part 4, Ord. 1735-NS, eff. April
25, 2025)
Sec. 9-4.4507. Objective design standards.
   (a)   Design and Features.
      (1)   The materials and colors of exterior walls, roof, eaves, windows,
and doors of an attached or converted ADU must match those of the primary
dwelling.
      (2)   The roof slope of an ADU must match the dominant roof slope of the
primary dwelling. The dominant roof slope is the slope shared by the largest
portion of the roof as measured by the footprint of the roofed area and not the
face of the roof. If a structure has multiple equal dominant roof slopes as
measured by the footprint of the roofed area, the dominant slope closest to the
public-right-of-way shall be followed.
      (3)   A newly constructed detached ADU must incorporate a minimum of one
material and one color from the existing or proposed primary dwelling unit.
      (4)   All ADU and/or JADU windows that are constructed within 10 feet of
an adjoining residential property shall only contain privacy glass (minimum of
50% opacity) to screen views directly into adjoining residential properties.
      (5)   Skylights are permitted on roofs above 10 vertical feet of the
first-floor wall plane. Skylights must be flat and not domed.
      (6)   Roof-top decks above ADUs and/or JADUs are prohibited.
      (7)   No roof-mounted mechanical equipment shall be allowed on ADUs or
JADUs. All ground-mounted mechanical equipment shall be located outside the 4-
foot side and rear yard setbacks.
    (b)   Exterior Ingress/Egress.
      (1)   All ADUs and JADUs must have an independent exterior entrance
separate from the primary dwelling.
      (2)   Separate exterior access for attached ADUs and/or JADUs shall be
provided on a different wall face than the primary residence's entry door.
   (c)   Second Story ADU(s) and JADU(s).
      (1)   Exterior stairs are not permitted. Stairs or elevator must be
interior and meet four (4) foot side and rear setbacks, with an overhang of one
(1) foot or less.
      (2)   The colors and material of all building walls must be the same as
the primary dwelling unit.
      (3)   The color, slope, style, and material of the roof must be the same
as the primary dwelling unit.
      (4)   ADUs and JADUs that are newly constructed (not converted from
existing square footage) shall be set back a minimum of two feet from the
existing first floor wall plane.
      (5)   To avoid blank facades for second story conversions and additions
for the purpose of creating an ADU or JADU, ADUs and JADUs shall incorporate at
least two of the following standards:
         (i)   A minimum one (1) foot offset for any wall plane that exceeds
twenty (20) feet in length.
         (ii)   Windows or door openings that cover at least ten (10) percent
of the facade and match the color and style of the primary dwelling.
         (iii)   Landscaping or privacy glass must be installed to prevent a
direct line of sight from the ADU windows to a contiguous developed residential
property.
         (iv)   Architectural details which provide visual interest such as
awnings, ornamental light fixtures, window shutters, columns, cornices,
moldings, trellises, etc.
   (d)   Driveway Access.
      (1)   An ADU/JADU must be served by the same driveway access to the
street as the existing primary dwelling unit unless the ADU has access from a
public alley contiguous to the lot or is located on a corner lot for which
secondary vehicular access is already permitted.
      (2)   The driveway may only be removed if it is replaced with landscaping
or open space, and the curb cut, and driveway apron are removed and replaced
with a curb and gutter which meet city standards.
   (e)   Required Walkway Separation.
      (1)   Pedestrian walkways are required to provide access from the right
of way to the entrance of the ADU and/or JADU, if not already provided.
   (f)   Conversion of a Garage to ADU/JADU.
      (1)   The garage door shall be removed, and window(s) shall be installed
in its place incorporating the window style and architectural elements found on
the primary dwelling.
      (2)   The installation of a new wall shall include at least ten (10)
percent of the facade with doors and/or windows.
      (3)   Street facing garage conversions shall provide a minimum of three
(3) feet landscaping directly in front of the converted garage wall, except for
where an entrance is proposed.
   (g)   Development within a Protected Ridgeline Area.
      (1)   ADUs proposed on properties that are located within the Protected
Ridgeline Overlay zone are subject to the following objective standards:
         i.   No new structure or addition to an existing structure shall be
placed or constructed, no grading shall occur and, except as to meet fire
clearance requirements, no native vegetation shall be removed within three
hundred (300') feet horizontally or one hundred (100') feet vertically of the
crest of a protected ridgeline unless the construction of the minimum allowed
two units of 800 square feet or less is precluded, in which case the
development must be sited at the lowest possible elevation.
   (h)   Tree Protection.
      (1)   No ADU created pursuant to this Article shall be constructed, or
require grading at the time of construction, within the protected zone (as
defined by Sec.
9-4.4202 and
9-4.4302) of a protected tree unless the construction of the minimum of 800
square feet or less is precluded, in which case the protected tree may be
encroached upon or removed if replaced onsite per the recommendations of a City
Arborist, on a 1:1 basis, with a thirty-six (36") inch box Quercus agrifolia
Live Oak or Quercus lobato Valley Oak. If the replacement tree(s) is unable to
be successfully sited onsite, an in-lieu fee will be required per Resolution
2010-014, as may be amended.
(§ 2, Ord. 1732-NS, eff. November 22, 2024; Part 5, Ord. 1735-NS, eff. April
25, 2025)
Sec. 9-4.4508. Parking.
   (a)   One (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for an ADU, in
addition to the parking required for the primary residence. ADU parking spaces
may be covered or uncovered, may be located in any setback area, and may be
tandem in a driveway.
   (b)   ADU parking spaces are required in addition to those required for the
primary dwelling on the lot. Provided however that when a garage, carport,
covered parking structure, or uncovered parking space is demolished or
converted in conjunction with the construction of an ADU, those parking spaces
are not required to be replaced.
   (c)   The parking in subsection (a) above is not required for an ADU in any
of the following instances:
      (1)   The ADU is located within one-half mile walking distance of public
transit.
      (2)   The ADU is located within an architecturally and historically
significant historic district.
      (3)   The ADU is part of the proposed or existing primary dwelling or an
accessory structure and/or is created from the conversion or reconstruction of
an existing structure.
      (4)   On-street parking permits are required but not offered to the
occupant of the ADU.
      (5)   There is a car share vehicle located within one block of the ADU.
      (6)   When a permit application for an accessory dwelling unit is
submitted with a permit application to create a new single-family dwelling or a
new multifamily dwelling on the same lot, provided that the accessory dwelling
unit or the parcel satisfies any other criteria listed in this section.
(§ 2, Ord. 1732-NS, eff. November 22, 2024; Part 6, Ord. 1735-NS, eff. April
25, 2025)
Sec. 9-4.4509. Fire sprinklers and utilities.
   (a)   Fire sprinklers are not required for the proposed ADU/JADU(s) if they
are not required for the primary dwelling. The construction of an accessory
dwelling unit shall not trigger a requirement for fire sprinklers to be
installed in the existing primary dwelling.
   (b)   New or separate utility connections from the primary dwelling is
required for ADUs, except for ADUs created from the conversion or
reconstruction of an existing structure.
   (c)   ADUs utilizing an existing or proposed new onsite wastewater treatment
system, must demonstrate adequate septic feasibility to the satisfaction of,
and permitted by, the California State Water Resources Control Board prior to
building permit issuance. Properties to be connected to an onsite wastewater
treatment system shall submit an application for a new onsite wastewater
treatment system concurrently with the application for Accessory Dwelling Unit
Development. Construction of all wastewater treatment systems shall be
permitted by the City and comply with the current plumbing and building code
standards.
(§ 2, Ord. 1732-NS, eff. November 22, 2024)
Sec. 9-4.4510. Occupancy and conveyance.
   (a)   An ADU and/or JADU may be rented separately from the primary dwelling
but may not be sold or otherwise conveyed separately from the primary dwelling
except as provided in Government Code Section 66341.
   (b)   An ADU and/or JADU may not be rented for a period of less than 30
consecutive days.
   (c)   On a lot with a JADU, the property owner must occupy either the
primary dwelling or the JADU. Owner-occupancy shall not be required if the
owner is another governmental agency, land trust, or housing organization.
(§ 2, Ord. 1732-NS, eff. November 22, 2024)
Sec. 9-4.4511. JADU deed restriction.
   (a)   Upon approval of a JADU, a deed restriction running with the land in a
form provided by the City must be recorded with the Ventura County Recorders
Office at the Property owner's expense. The deed restriction must include the
following:
      (1)   Rentals of the JADU must be for a term that is longer than 30
consecutive days;
      (2)   A prohibition on the sale of the JADU separate from the sale of the
single-family dwelling, including a statement that the deed restriction may be
enforced against future purchasers; and
      (3)   A restriction on the size and attributes of the JADU that conforms
with this article and Government Code Section 66333 et seq.
      (4)   Notice and disclosure to future owners of the owner occupancy
requirement.
      (5)   The deed restriction is enforceable by the Community Development
Department or their designee for the benefit of the City. Failure of the
property owner to comply with the deed restriction may result in legal action
against the property owner, and the City is authorized to obtain any remedy
available to it at law or equity, including, but not limited to, obtaining an
injunction enjoining the use of the JADU in violation of the recorded
restrictions or abatement of the illegal unit.
(§ 2, Ord. 1732-NS, eff. November 22, 2024)
Sec. 9-4.4512. Fees.
   (a)   An ADU/JADU may not be considered a new residential use by a local
agency, special district, or water corporation to calculate utility connection
fees or capacity charges unless the ADU is constructed with a new single-family
dwelling.
   (b)   Impact fees may not be assessed by local agencies, special districts,
or water corporations on an ADU smaller than 750 square feet. Impact fees may
be assessed on an ADU of 750 square feet or greater in an amount proportionate
to the square footage of the primary dwelling unit.
(§ 2, Ord. 1732-NS, eff. November 22, 2024)
Sec. 9-4.4513. State-mandated ADUs.
   (a)   The City shall ministerially approve an application for a building
permit within a residential or mixed-use zone to create any of the following:
      (1)   Conversions on single-family lots: One ADU and one JADU on a lot
with a proposed or existing single-family dwelling on it, where the ADU or
JADU:
         (i)   Is either: within the space of a proposed single-family
dwelling; within the existing space of an existing single-family dwelling; or
in the case of an ADU only, within the existing space of an existing accessory
structure, plus up to one hundred fifty (150) additional square feet if the
expansion is limited to accommodating ingress and egress;
         (ii)   Has exterior access that is independent of that for the single-
family dwelling; and
         (iii)   Has side and rear setbacks sufficient for fire and safety, as
dictated by applicable building and fire codes.
         (iv)   The JADU complies with the requirements as described in this
article.
      (2)   A newly constructed detached ADU on single-family lots: One (1)
detached, new-construction ADU on a lot with a proposed or existing single-
family dwelling (in addition to any JADU that might otherwise be established on
the lot under subsection 1.i. above), if the detached ADU satisfies the
following limitations:
         (i)   The side- and rear-yard setbacks are at least four (4) feet;
         (ii)   The gross floor area is eight hundred (800) square feet or
smaller; and
         (iii)   The roof peak height above grade is sixteen (16) feet or less.
      (3)   Conversions on lots with existing multifamily dwellings: At least
one ADU, and up to 25 percent of the existing multifamily dwelling units,
within portions of existing multifamily dwelling structures that are not used
as livable space, including but not limited to storage rooms, boiler rooms,
passageways, attics, basements, or garages, if each converted ADU complies with
state building standards for dwellings.
      (4)   Detached ADUs on multifamily lots with existing multifamily
dwelling: Not more than eight (8) detached ADUs, or as many ADUs as there are
existing units on the lot, whichever is less, provided that each detached ADU
satisfies the following limitations:
         (i)   The side- and rear-yard setbacks are at least four (4) feet. If
the existing multifamily dwelling has a rear or side setback of less than four
feet, no modification of the existing multifamily dwelling is required.
         (ii)   The gross floor area is eight hundred (800) square feet or
smaller; and
         (iii)   The roof peak height above grade is sixteen (16) feet or less
for single story dwellings.
         (iv)   The roof peak height above grade is eighteen (18) feet or less
for multistory dwellings.
      (5)   Detached ADUs on lot with proposed multifamily dwelling: Not more
than two (2) detached ADUs, provided that each detached ADU satisfies the
following limitations:
         (i)   The side- and rear-yard setbacks are at least four (4) feet.
         (ii)   The gross floor area is eight hundred (800) square feet or
smaller; and
         (iii)   The roof peak height above grade is sixteen (16) feet or less
for single story dwellings.
         (iv)   The roof peak height above grade is eighteen (18) feet or less
for multistory dwellings.
(§ 2, Ord. 1732-NS, eff. November 22, 2024; Part 7, Ord. 1735-NS, eff. April
25, 2025)
CHAPTER 5. ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT AND ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY
PROTECTION*
*   Chapter 5 consisting of Sections 9-5.101 through 9-5.107, 9-5.201 through
9-5.223, 9-5.301, 9-5.302, 9-5.401 through 9-5.413, 9-5.501 through 9-5.508, 9-
5.601 through 9-5.617, 9-5.701 through 9-5.708, 9-5.801 through 9-5.807, 9-
5.901 through 9-5.903, 9-5.1001 through 9-5.1003, and 9-5.1101 through 9-
5.1103, added by Ordinance No. 362-NS, effective April 26, 1973, amended in its
entirety by Section I, Ordinance No. 463-NS, effective June 13, 1974. Sections
9-5.101 through 9-5.107, 9-5.201 through 9-5.226, 9-5.301, 9-5.302, 9-5.401
through 9-5.414, 9-5.501 through 9-5.509, 9-5.601 through 9-5.617, 9-5.701
through 9-5.708, 9-5.801 through 9-5.807, 9-5.901 through 9-5.903, and 9-5.1001
through 9-5.1003, added by said Ordinance No. 463, amended in their entirety by
Section I, Ordinance No. 523-NS, effective April 24, 1975.
    Chapter 5 entitled “Environmental Quality Standards, Procedures, and
Guidelines for Analysis and Protection,” consisting of Sections 9-5.101 through
9-5.107, 9-5.201 through 9-5.227, 9-5.301, 9-5.302, 9-5.401 through 9-5.413, 9-
5.501 through 9-5.509, 9-5.601 through 9-5.619, 9-5.701 through 9-5.709, 9-
5.801 through 9-5.808, 9-5.901 through 9-5.903, and 9-5.1001 through 9-5.1003,
added by said Ordinance No. 523-NS, repealed by Section II, Ordinance No. 633-
NS, effective June 9, 1977.
Article 1. Purpose
Sec. 9-5.101. Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish guidelines for the preservation
of environmental quality in the Conejo Valley and for the assessment of the
environmental impact of proposed projects in accordance with the California
Environmental Quality Act of 1970 and the State EIR Guidelines issued pursuant
thereto.
(§ I, Ord. 633-NS, eff. June 9, 1977)
Sec. 9-5.102. Specific provisions.
   Specific policies and procedures with respect to the preservation of
environmental quality and guidelines for the assessment of environmental impact
and the preparation of environmental documents shall be adopted by the Council
by resolution.
(§ I, Ord. 633-NS, eff. June 9, 1977)
Article 2. Continuity and Ratification
Sec. 9-5.201. Ratification of prior City requirements.
   The Council hereby affirms the environmental impact regulation policies and
procedures heretofore ordered by the Council following the decision of the
California Supreme Court in Friends of Mammoth, et al. v. Board of Supervisors
of Mono County, et al. 8 Cal. 3rd 1 (8 Cal 3rd 247) on September 21, 1972.
Those rules, policies, and procedures are specifically set forth in Resolution
Nos. 72-311, 72-317, 72-388, and 72-412 of the Council. All requirements
pursuant to said resolutions for conservation element statements, conservation
element reports, environmental impact statements (environmental impact
declarations), and environmental impact reports are hereby reaffirmed.
(§ I, Ord. 633-NS, eff. June 9, 1977)
Sec. 9-5.202. Ratification of prior reports.
   Insofar as permitted by law, the Council hereby finds and affirms all prior
findings or decisions or orders of the Community Development Director, Planning
Commission, and, where superseded by appeal to the Council, the Council
pertaining to the sufficiency of or the need for the evaluation of any of the
statements, reports, or declarations specified in Section
9-5.201 of this article or Resolution Nos. 72-311, 72-317, 72-384, and 72-412
of the Council. All such reports heretofore approved or disapproved by the
Community Development Director, Council, or Planning Commission are hereby
respectively approved or disapproved for all purposes of this chapter.
(§ I, Ord. 633-NS, eff. June 9, 1977)
Sec. 9-5.203. Continuity.
   The Council hereby finds that the Conservation Element Report (including a
finding of compliance with the Conservation Element of the Thousand Oaks
Development Plan) and an environmental impact report are substantially
identical in character and therefore orders that, for all purposes required by
the provisions of this chapter, a finding of compliance or noncompliance with
the Conservation Element of the Thousand Oaks Development Plan (General Plan),
where based on a Conservation Element Compliance Report, shall be treated the
same for all the purposes of this chapter as a finding or environmental impact
report required by the provisions of this chapter.
(§ I, Ord. 633-NS, eff. June 9, 1977)
Article 3. Notice Requirements
Sec. 9-5.301. Notice of draft environmental documents.
   Public review periods for draft environmental documents shall be as required
by the California Public Resources Code, and notice of the availability of
draft environmental documents for public review shall be given as required by
Section
9-12.302 herein.
(§ 49, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993)
CHAPTER 6. LIABILITY FOR ANNEXATION FEES
Sec. 9-6.01. Recitals.
(§ I, Ord. 372-NS, eff. May 24, 1973; repealed by § 28, Ord. 1250-NS, eff.
January 9, 1996)
Sec. 9-6.02. Inhabited annexations (twelve or more registered voters).
(§ I, Ord. 372-NS, eff. May 24, 1973; repealed by § 28, Ord. 1250-NS, eff.
January 9, 1996)
Sec. 9-6.03. All annexations.
   For the purpose of defraying the expenses involved in connection with
processing an annexation, a filing fee prescribed by Council resolution shall
be submitted with all applications for annexation. Such fee shall be in
addition to the required State Board of Equalization and Local Agency Formation
Commission filing fees.
(§ I, Ord. 372-NS, eff. May 24,1973, as amended by § XVII, Ord. 776-NS, eff.
April 16, 1981, and § 29, Ord. 1250-NS, eff. January 9, 1996)
CHAPTER 7. EXEMPTED CHARGES FOR LOW INCOME SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING
Sec. 9-7.01. Exempted charges for low income senior citizen housing.
   (a)   The following fees, taxes, and charges shall not apply to the
construction and development of residential housing projects:
   (1)   Which are subsidized, in whole or in part, by the Federal and State
government, are built exclusively for senior citizens of low income by
nonprofit corporations, and where the property is exempt from County property
taxes and any income therefrom exempt from Federal and State income taxes; or
   (2)   Which are privately developed, but the project is constructed and
maintained exclusively for habitation by low income senior citizens, as defined
by current applicable laws and regulations of the federal and State government,
and the continued exclusive maintenance thereof as a low income senior citizen
development is guaranteed, by appropriate documents or bonds, to the
satisfaction of the City Attorney or designee.
   The fees, taxes and charges so exempted are as follows:
 
Fee, Charge or Tax                                T.O.M.C. Section No.
                                                  9-3.601 through
Dedication or payment of in-lieu fee for park and 9-3.1612 and
recreational purposes                             9-4.2601 through
                                                  9-4.2611
                                                  10-1.401,
Sewer connection charges and inspection fees      10-1.408 and
                                                  10-1.409
                                                  10-2.306,
Water service connection charges                  10-2.401 and
                                                  10-2.410
Water plant investment fees                       10-2.701
Cross-connection fees                             10-2.604 and
                                                  10-2.614
 
   (b)   The construction of the projects described in subsection (a) of this
section shall comply with all the applicable provisions of this Code, including
the provisions relative to land development and building construction. In the
event any project described in subsection (a) of this section is no longer
maintained exclusively for the habitation of low income senior citizens, all
fees, charges, and taxes exempted by the provisions of this chapter shall
become immediately due and payable to the City, with interest thereon at the
rate of eight (8%) percent per annum, compounded, from the date such charges
would have been imposed in the absence of the exemption provided by subsection
(a) of this section.
(Ord. 529-NS, eff. May 15, 1975; as amended by § 30, Ord. 1250-NS, eff. January
9, 1996)
CHAPTER 8. DEDICATION OF LAND AND/OR PAYMENT OF IN-LIEU FEES FOR SCHOOL
FACILITIES
Sec. 9-8.01. Findings and purpose.
   The Council does hereby find and declare as follows:
   (a)   Adequate school facilities shall be available for children residing in
new residential developments within the City.
   (b)   Public and private residential developments within the City require
the expansion of existing public schools or the construction of new school
facilities.
   (c)   Funds for the construction of new classroom facilities within the City
are not available when new development occurs, resulting in the overcrowding of
existing schools.
   (d)   New housing developments within the City cause conditions of
overcrowding in existing school facilities which cannot be alleviated under
existing law within a reasonable period of time.
   (e)   The General Plan of the City provides for the location of public
schools.
   (f)   For the reasons set forth in this section, this chapter is enacted for
the purpose of providing a new and improved method of financing for interim
school facilities necessitated by new residential developments within the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 684-NS, eff. August 17, 1978)
Sec. 9-8.02. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Council” shall mean the City Council of the City of Thousand Oaks;
provided, however, “Council” shall also mean the Planning Commission of the
City if the function or activity to be performed has been delegated by the
Council to the Planning Commission.
   (b)   “Conditions of overcrowding” shall mean that the total enrollment of a
school, including the enrollment from a proposed development, exceeds the
capacity of such school as determined by the governing body of the school
district.
   (c)   “District” or “school district” shall mean the Conejo Valley Unified
School District.
   (d)   “Dwelling unit” shall mean a building, or portion thereof, or a mobile
home designed for residential occupation by one or more persons.
   (e)   “Residential development” shall mean a project containing residential
dwellings, including mobile homes, of one or more units or a division of land
for the purpose of constructing one or more dwelling units. “Residential
development” shall include, but is not limited to, a preliminary or final
development plan, a subdivision tentative or final map, a parcel map, a
conditional use permit, a building permit, or any other discretionary permit
for a new residential use.
(§ 1, Ord. 684-NS, eff. August 17, 1978)
Sec. 9-8.03. Application of chapter provisions.
   For the purpose of establishing an interim method of providing classroom
facilities where conditions of overcrowding exist, the City hereby requires the
dedication of land, the payment of fees in lieu thereof, or a combination of
both for classroom and related facilities for elementary, intermediate, or high
school purposes as a condition to the approval of a residential development in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all residential developments
within the City. The Council, from time to time, by resolution, may adopt
regulations to provide for the administration and implementation of this
chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 684-NS, eff. August 17, 1978)
Sec. 9-8.04. Findings required.
   If the governing body of the district makes a finding supported by clear and
convincing evidence that conditions of overcrowding exist in one or more
attendance areas within the district which will impair the normal functioning
of educational programs, including the reason for such conditions existing, and
that all reasonable methods of mitigating conditions of overcrowding have been
evaluated and no feasible method for reducing such conditions exists, the
governing body of the district shall notify the Council of such findings. The
notice of findings sent to the City shall specify the mitigation measures
considered by the district and the reasons for their rejection. If the Council
concurs in such findings, the Council shall not adopt an ordinance rezoning
property to a residential use, grant a discretionary permit for residential
use, or approve a tentative subdivision map for residential purposes within
such area unless:
   (a)   The dedication of land, the payment of fees in lieu thereof, or a
combination of both for classroom and related facilities for elementary,
intermediate, or high schools is imposed as a condition to the approval of a
residential development; or
   (b)   The school district has entered into an agreement with the applicant
of a proposed residential development, which agreement provides a feasible
means for mitigating any aggravation of such conditions of overcrowding which
would otherwise be caused by the proposed residential development; or
   (c)   The Council finds there are specific overriding fiscal, economic,
social, or environmental factors which, in the judgment of the Council, would
benefit the City, thereby justifying the approval of a residential development
otherwise subject to the imposition of such a condition.
   The methods for mitigating the conditions of overcrowding which the district
shall consider when making its findings required by this section shall include,
but not necessarily be limited, to the following:
   (a)   Agreements between a subdivider and the district whereby temporary use
buildings will be leased to the district or temporary use buildings owned by
the district will be used;
   (b)   The use of relocatable structures, student transportation, and school
boundary realignments;
   (c)   The use of available bond or State loan revenues to the extent
authorized by law; and
   (d) The use of funds which could be available from the sale of surplus
school district real property and funds available from other appropriate
sources, as determined by the governing body of the district.
(§ 1, Ord. 684-NS, eff. August 17, 1978)
Sec. 9-8.05. Dedication of land or payment of fees required.
   Unless otherwise specifically excepted, every owner or developer of a
residential development situated in or served by an attendance area with
conditions of overcrowding shall dedicate land, pay fees in lieu thereof, or a
combination of both for classroom and related facilities for elementary or high
schools as a condition to the approval of a residential development.
   When a fee is required to be paid in lieu of land dedication, the amount of
such fee shall be the sum of Two Thousand Two Hundred and no/100ths ($2,200.00)
Dollars per pupil which, in either the current fiscal year or any one of the
next succeeding four (4) fiscal years, will be expected to reside in the
dwelling unit or units authorized by the proposed residential development
permit and will be expected to enroll in a school or schools serving the
attendance area in which such dwelling unit or units will be located. The
amount of such fee per pupil, and the factor or criteria to be used in
determining the estimated number of pupils expected to reside in the dwelling
units authorized by the permit and expected to enroll in a school or schools
serving the attendance area, may be determined and modified from time to time
by resolution of the Council on the basis of evidence submitted to it by the
school district and other interested parties.
   The minimum amount of land required to be dedicated pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall be at least equal in monetary value to the
fees which would be otherwise required by this section. The Council shall
determine and establish the monetary value of land area for the purposes of
this chapter.
   Only the payment of fees shall be required in subdivisions containing fifty
(50) parcels or less.
(§ 1, Ord. 684-NS, eff. August 17, 1978)
Sec. 9-8.06. Choice of dedication or payment of fees: Procedures.
   The procedure for determining whether the dedication of land, the payment of
fees in lieu thereof, or a combination of both for classroom and related
facilities for elementary, intermediate, or high schools as a condition to the
approval of a residential development shall be as follows:
   (a)   Requests of owners. At the time of filing an application for a
residential development, the owner of the property, as a part of the filing,
shall state whether he desires to either dedicate land or pay a fee in lieu
thereof. If he desires to dedicate land for such purpose, he shall designate
the area thereof on the tentative tract map or the plot plan submitted.
   (b)   Action by City. At the time of the approval of such residential
development, the Planning Commission or the Council, upon the advice of the
district, shall determine, as a part of such approval, whether to require a
dedication of land, the payment of fees in lieu thereof, or a combination of
both for classroom and related facilities for elementary or high schools. Only
the payment of fees shall be required in subdivisions containing fifty (50)
parcels or less.
   (c)   Dedication procedures. Where dedication is required, the land shall be
conveyed directly to the district in accordance with standard conveyance
procedures as approved by the County Counsel and shall be recorded prior to the
issuance of a building permit.
   (d)   In lieu fee procedure. When the payment of in lieu fees is required,
such fees shall be deposited with the district, and a receipt therefor from the
district shall be filed with the Community Development Department prior to the
issuance of a building permit.
   (e)   Criteria for determinations. Whether the Planning Commission or the
Council, upon the advice of the district, determines to require a dedication of
land, the payment of an in lieu fee, or a combination of both shall be
determined by consideration of the following criteria:
   (1)    The City’s General Plan;
   (2)   The topography, geology, access, and location of the land in the
development available for dedication;
   (3)   The size and shape of the development and the land available for
dedication;
   (4)   The location of existing or proposed classroom and related facilities
for elementary or high schools within and adjacent to the attendance area of
the development; and
   (5) The desirability of developing the land proposed for dedication as
determined by a schematic site plan submitted by the owner or developer.
   The determination of the Planning Commission as to whether land shall be
dedicated, or whether a fee shall be paid, or a combination thereof shall be
final and conclusive, unless appealed to the Council, or unless the
determination is made directly by the Council on a matter regarding which final
discretionary approval is vested in the Council.
(§ 1, Ord. 684-NS, eff. August 17, 1978)
Sec. 9-8.07. Limitations on use of land and fees.
   The land or fees, or both, transferred to the district shall be used only
for the purpose of providing interim elementary, intermediate, or high school
classroom and related facilities. The location and amount of land to be
dedicated or the amount of fees to be paid, or both, shall bear a reasonable
relationship and shall be limited to the needs of the community for interim
elementary, intermediate, or high school facilities and shall be reasonably
related and limited to the need for school facilities caused by the
development. The facilities to be constructed from such fees or the land to be
dedicated, or both, shall be consistent with the City’s General Plan, and a
finding to that effect shall be made by the Planning Commission or the Council.
   If conditions of overcrowding no longer exist, the City shall cease levying
any fee or requiring the dedication of any land pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 684-NS, eff. August 17, 1978)
Sec. 9-8.08. Schedules specifying use of land or fees.
   Following the decision by the City to require the dedication of land or the
payment of fees, or both, the governing body of the district shall submit a
schedule specifying how it will use the land or fees, or both, to solve the
conditions of overcrowding. The schedule shall include the school sites to be
used, the classroom facilities to be made available, and the times when such
facilities will be available. In the event the governing body of the district
cannot meet the schedule, it shall submit modifications to the Council and the
reasons for the modifications. The Council shall make a finding that the
facilities to be constructed from such fees or the land to be dedicated or
both, is consistent with the General Plan.
(§ 1, Ord. 684-NS, eff. August 17, 1978)
Sec. 9-8.09. Reports by the school district.
   The district receiving funds pursuant to this chapter shall maintain a
separate unencumbered financial institution account for any fees paid and shall
file an audited report with the Council on the balance in the account at the
end of the previous fiscal year and the facilities leased, purchased, or
constructed during the previous fiscal year. In addition, the report shall
specify which attendance areas will continue to be overcrowded when the fall
term begins and where conditions of overcrowding will no longer exist. Such
report shall be filed by August 1 of each year and shall be filed more
frequently at the request of the Council.
(§ 1, Ord. 684-NS, eff. August 17, 1978)
CHAPTER 9. TIME LIMITATIONS FOR JUDICIAL REVIEWS OF CITY DECISIONS OR ACTIONS
TAKEN
Sec. 9-9.01. Time limitations for judicial reviews of City decisions or actions
taken.
   Section
1-4.05 of this Code shall apply to any action or decision taken pursuant to
this title.
(§ II, Ord. 705-NS, eff. March 29, 1979, as amended by § 24, Ord. 907-NS, eff.
February 11, 1986)
CHAPTER 10. AFFORDABLE HOUSING
Article 1. General Provisions
Sec. 9-10.101. Intent and purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is:
   (a)   To establish procedures and requirements for providing affordable
housing in the City and to ensure that affordable housing is included in future
housing stock developed within the City.
   (b)   To establish a linkage fee program through which nonresidential
developments are able to mitigate the additional demand for affordable housing
in the City caused by new employment resulting from nonresidential
developments.
   (c)   To implement goals and policies of the Housing Element of the City's
General Plan that seek to increase the supply of affordable housing in the
City.
   (d)   To comply with the provisions of California Government Code Section
65915, which requires cities to adopt an ordinance that specifies how it will
provide density bonuses and other incentives to applicants who construct
housing developments that include specified percentages of affordable housing.
(§ 1, Ord. 1506-NS, eff. October 9, 2008)
Sec. 9-10.102. Definitions.
   If a word or term is defined in another chapter of this Title (e.g., Chapter
4) it shall have the same meaning in this chapter. Wherever the following words
and terms are used in this chapter, they shall have the meanings set out in
this section:
   (a)   “Adjusted for household size appropriate for the unit.” A household of
one (1) person in the case of a studio unit, two (2) persons in the case of a
one-bedroom (1-bedroom) unit, three (3) persons in the case of a two-bedroom
(2-bedroom) unit, four (4) persons in the case of a three-bedroom (3-bedroom)
unit, five (5) persons in the case of a four-bedroom (4-bedroom) unit, and six
(6) persons in the case of a five-bedroom (5-bedroom) unit. This household size
standard is used in the Affordable Housing Cost calculations. It is neither an
occupancy minimum nor a maximum.
   (b)   “Affordable housing costs.” The total housing costs paid by a
qualifying household, which shall not exceed a specified fraction of their
gross income, adjusted for household size appropriate for the unit, as follows:
   (1)   “Affordable ownership cost.” A sales price that results in a monthly
housing cost for moderate-income households as defined in California Health &
Safety Code Section 50052.5.
   (2)   “Affordable rent.” A rent that results in a total monthly housing cost
that is equal to thirty (30%) percent of eighty (80%) percent of the Ventura
County median income.
   (c)   “Affordable Housing Trust Fund.” A fund created by the City in which
all fees collected in compliance with Chapter 10, Article 2 shall be deposited.
   (d)   “Common interest development.” Shall have the same meaning as defined
in Civil Code Section 1351(c).
   (e)   “Condominium/Townhouse Residential Project.” A residential development
with attached dwelling units located on a single lot where the dwelling units
are designated for separate ownership with proportional undivided ownership of
common land and facilities, pursuant to Section 1351(f) of the California Civil
Code.
   (f)   “Eligible Household.” A household that meets any of the following as
applicable:
   (1)   “Low-income household.” A household whose income does not exceed the
qualifying limits for Ventura County set by California Health and Safety Code
Section 50093, as published and annually updated by HCD.
   (2)   “Moderate-income household.” A household whose income does not exceed
the qualifying limits for Ventura County set by California Health and Safety
Code Section 50079.5, as published and annually updated by HCD.
   (3)   “Very low-income household.” A household whose income does not exceed
the qualifying limits for Ventura County set by California Health and Safety
Code Section 50105, as published and annually updated by HCD.
   (g)   “HCD.” State of California Department of Housing and Community
Development.
   (h)   “Household.” Means all the persons who will occupy the Inclusionary
Unit.
   (i)   “Inclusionary housing agreement.” A recorded agreement between an
applicant and the City specifying the affordable income level served and
guaranteeing the affordability of dwelling units constructed pursuant to this
chapter, in order to ensure that the requirements of this chapter are
satisfied.
   (j)   “Density bonus unit.” Those dwelling units granted pursuant to the
provisions of State Density Bonus Law which exceed the otherwise allowable
maximum residential density for the site.
   (k)   “Inclusionary units.” Dwelling units within a residential development
which are required to be sold or rented at an affordable housing cost, pursuant
to Article 3 of this chapter.
   (l)   “Market-rate unit.” Any dwelling unit in a residential development
that is not an inclusionary unit.
   (m)   “Nonresidential development.” Any development or use other than
developments or uses solely involving the construction, alteration or
condominium conversion of dwelling units. A “nonresidential development” also
includes the conversion of a residential use to nonresidential use and the
conversion of one nonresidential use to another nonresidential use.
   (n)   “Residential development.” Any development that includes either the
construction of dwelling units or a condominium conversion.
   (o)   “Single-family detached residential project.” A development consisting
of one-family dwellings each located on a single lot, where both the dwelling
and land are owned together in fee.
   (p)   “Ventura County area median income.” Area median income for Ventura
County as published by HCD pursuant to California Code of Regulations, Title
25, Section 6932, or successor provision.
(§ 1, Ord. 1506-NS, eff. October 9, 2008, as amended by § 1, 2, Ord. 1540-NS,
eff. July 23, 2010, and § 1, Ord. 1543-NS, eff. October 8, 2010, and § 1, Ord.
1719-NS, eff. November 24, 2023)
Article 2. Affordable Housing Trust Fund
Sec. 9-10.201. Creation of the Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
   There is hereby created and established within the Treasury of the City of
Thousand Oaks a fund to be known as the “Affordable Housing Trust Fund” (Fund)
for the purposes of receiving and disbursing monies to address the housing
needs of very low, lower, and moderate income households within the City of
Thousand Oaks. This Special Revenue Fund shall be separate from all other
monies held by the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 1506-NS, eff. October 9, 2008)
Sec. 9-10.202. Revenue to Fund.
   Revenues intended for deposit in the Fund may come from the following
sources:
   (a)   Monies that the City receives pursuant to any program identified in
this chapter, including the repayment of loans from the Fund and interest
thereon.
   (b)   Monies that the City receives by gift, grant or other award which are
designated for affordable housing purposes.
   (c)   Any monies received by the City from any other sources for the purpose
of providing affordable housing, excluding Redevelopment Agency affordable
housing set-aside funding, that the City Council elects to deposit in the Fund.
   (d)   Any monies that the City has received, prior to the effective date of
the ordinance adopting this chapter, from any source for the purpose of
providing affordable housing the City Council elects to deposit in the Fund.
   (e)   From time to time, at its discretion and subject to, limitations of
law, the City Council may designate additional revenue and appropriate monies
from any source for deposit in the Fund.
(§ 1, Ord. 1506-NS, eff. October 9, 2008)
Sec. 9-10.203. Purpose and use of monies in the Fund.
   (a)   Money in this fund shall be expended exclusively on activities related
to the prioritization for the construction of affordable housing in the City of
Thousand Oaks, for the benefit of extremely-low, very-low, lower and moderate-
income households. Preservation, or rehabilitation of affordable housing shall
be used in the event there is limited opportunity for the creation of new
affordable housing using this fund. The City may enact Guidelines, consistent
with this article, to more specifically implement the purposes of the Fund,
which shall be adopted by City Council Resolution.
   (b)   Money disbursed from the Fund shall only be expended within the
boundaries of the City of Thousand Oaks.
   (c)   Monies collected through the Nonresidential Linkage Fee program shall
be deposited in a separate subaccount in the Fund.
   (d)   No expenditure may be made from the Fund without the prior approval of
the City Council.
(§ 1, Ord. 1506-NS, eff. October 9, 2008, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1543-NS, eff.
October 8, 2010, and § 2, Ord. 1719-NS, eff. November 24, 2023)
Sec. 9-10.204. Administration of the Fund.
   (a)   Any gifts, contributions or other money received for the stated
purposes of the Fund shall be placed in the Fund. The Fund shall accrue
interest at the same rate as the City's Investment Rate. All interest earnings
accruing on money in the Fund shall become part of the Fund.
   (b)   Money in the Fund shall not revert to the General Fund of the City,
nor shall it be transferred to any other Fund by means of loan or other
mechanism except upon repeal of this article.
   (c)   Monies disbursed from the Fund which are required to be repaid to the
Fund shall be placed in the Fund upon repayment, as shall any interest that
accrues.
   (d)   All funds received pursuant to this article shall immediately be
deposited into the Fund.
   (e)   Any units developed with monies from the Fund will be subject to an
Affordable Housing Agreement pursuant to Article 6.
(§ 1, Ord. 1506-NS, eff. October 9, 2008)
Article 3. Inclusionary Housing Program
Sec. 9-10.301. Purpose and intent.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this article is to provide a mechanism and
procedures for implementing inclusionary housing as part of new residential
development.
   (b)   Intent.
   (1)   Ensure the development and availability of decent, affordable housing
to a broad range of households with varying income levels throughout the City.
   (2)   Promote the City's goal to add affordable dwelling units to the City's
housing stock.
   (3)   Ensure the long-term affordability of dwelling units and availability
for eligible households in years to come.
   (4)   Ensure that the private sector, in addition to public sector,
participates in the provision of affordable housing for workers within the City
of Thousand Oaks.
   (5)   Ensure that affordable housing will be dispersed throughout the City
and each residential development, and not segregated from market-rate housing,
by adopting the inclusionary housing requirement for each applicable
residential development.
(§ 1, Ord. 1506-NS, eff. October 9, 2008, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1543-NS, eff.
October 8, 2010, and § 3, Ord. 1719-NS, eff. November 24, 2023)
Sec. 9-10.302. Applicability.
   Unless otherwise exempted pursuant to Section
9-10.303, all residential developments of ten (10) or more residential units
shall be subject to the requirements of this article, and shall be subject to
the following requirements:
   (a)   Construction of Rental Inclusionary Units. Apartment developments
shall provide at least ten (10%) percent of the total dwelling units as low-
income inclusionary units.
   (b)   Construction of Ownership Inclusionary Units. Condominium/Townhome
developments shall provide at least ten (10%) percent of the total dwelling
units as moderate-income inclusionary units. Detached single-family home
developments shall provide at least five (5%) percent of the total dwelling
units as moderate-income inclusionary units.
   (c)   For the purposes of calculating the number of inclusionary units
required, any additional dwelling units authorized as a density bonus under the
City Density Bonus Ordinance or State law will not be counted in determining
the required number of inclusionary units.
   (d)   Any fractional number of inclusionary units required in a residential
development, shall be provided by payment of an in-lieu fee in the amount
determined pursuant to Section
9-10.306 of this Chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1506-NS, eff. October 9, 2008, as amended by § 4, Ord. 1543-NS, eff.
October 8, 2010, and § 4, Ord. 1719-NS, eff. November 24, 2023)
Sec. 9-10.303. Exemptions.
   The following residential developments are exempt from the provisions of
this article:
   (a)   A residential development of nine (9) or fewer dwelling units.
   (b)   A vesting tentative tract map application that has been determined to
be complete prior to the effective date of the ordinance adopting this article.
   (c)   A residential development that has received its discretionary
approvals from the City prior to the effective date of the ordinance adopting
this chapter.
   (d)   A residential development which is subject to the terms of a
development agreement approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance
adopting this article, but only to the extent that the development agreement
precludes application of the provisions herein.
   (e)   The reconstruction of any dwelling units that has been destroyed by
fire, flood, earthquake or other act of nature provided that the reconstruction
of the project does not result in an increase in the number of existing units
by ten (10) or more.
   (f)   The reconstruction of any dwelling units that has been destroyed by
fire, flood, earthquake or other act of nature provided that the reconstruction
of the project does not result in an increase in the number of existing units
by six (6) or more.
(§ 1, Ord. 1506-NS, eff. October 9, 2008, as amended by § 5, Ord. 1719-NS, eff.
November 24, 2023)
Sec. 9-10.304. Inclusionary housing plan.
   (a)   Preliminary Inclusionary Housing Plan. Any applicant proposing to
satisfy the requirements of this article by any means other than payment of an
in-lieu fee shall be required to submit a Preliminary Inclusionary Housing
Plan. The Preliminary Inclusionary Housing Plan shall be submitted at the time
application is made to the Community Development Department for discretionary
approval of the residential development. The Preliminary Inclusionary Housing
Plan shall include the following information, as well as any other information
required by the Community Development Director to evaluate the proposal:
   (1)   A site plan and floor plan that depicts the location of all proposed
market-rate and inclusionary units. For multi-story residential projects, each
floor containing inclusionary units shall be depicted separately.
   (2)   The Preliminary Inclusionary Housing Plan shall include a unit count
of all proposed units, market-rate and inclusionary, a mathematical calculation
that demonstrates compliance with this article, the square footage and number
of bedrooms and bathrooms for each inclusionary unit, and the income levels to
which each inclusionary unit will be made affordable.
   (3)   A list of any requested incentives pursuant to Section
9-10.307.
   (4)   Upon submittal, the Community Development Director or designee shall
determine if the Preliminary Inclusionary Housing Plan is complete and conforms
to the provisions of this article. If an Inclusionary Housing Plan is required,
no application for a residential development may be deemed complete unless a
Preliminary Inclusionary Housing Plan has been determined to be complete.
   (b)   Final Inclusionary Housing Plan. No building permits for a residential
development shall be issued until a Final Inclusionary Housing Plan
demonstrating compliance with this article has been approved by the Community
Development Department.
(§ 1, Ord. 1506-NS, eff. October 9, 2008, as amended by § 6, Ord. 1719-NS, eff.
November 24, 2023)
Sec. 9-10.305. Standards for inclusionary units.
   Where inclusionary units are provided in a project, the City and applicant
shall enter into an Affordable Housing Agreement to document and guarantee the
provision of the required affordable housing units. The Affordable Housing
Agreement shall incorporate the approved Inclusionary Housing Plan.
Inclusionary units shall also be subject to the following minimum standards.
   (a)   Design. Inclusionary units shall be comparable in design to market-
rate units, with comparable infrastructure (including sewer, water, and other
utilities), construction quality, and exterior design. The bedroom and bathroom
mix for inclusionary units shall be proportional to the bedroom and bathroom
mix in corresponding market-rate units. Inclusionary units shall have same
exterior finishes and features as the market-rate units. The Inclusionary units
shall have the same type or quality of appliances, fixtures, and finishes as
the market rate units in the development.
   (b)   Location. Inclusionary units shall be equally distributed throughout a
residential development and not clustered in a particular area of the
development. Inclusionary units within developments that share a common
entrance shall not have separate entrances for market-rate and inclusionary
units.
   (c)   Timing of construction. Inclusionary units shall be constructed and
occupied concurrently with or prior to the construction and occupancy of
market-rate units. In phased developments, inclusionary units may be
constructed and occupied in proportion to the number of dwelling units in each
phase of the development.
   (d)   Access to common amenities. Residents of inclusionary units shall have
the same rights and access to common amenities in the development, such as
parking, open space, storage, and recreational space, as residents in market-
rate units.
(§ 1, Ord. 1506-NS, eff. October 9, 2008, as amended by § 7, Ord. 1719-NS, eff.
November 24, 2023)
Sec. 9-10.306. Alternative Compliance Procedures.
   (a)   In-lieu fees. The requirements of this article may be satisfied by
paying a fee, in-lieu of constructing inclusionary units. The fee set by City
Council pursuant to Section
9-10.306 shall be charged per leasable or saleable square foot of all units in
a project. Any money paid pursuant to this subsection shall be deposited in the
Affordable Housing Trust Fund as provided in Article 2.
   (1)   The payment of in-lieu fees may be used to satisfy the inclusionary
housing requirement for the following residential developments:
   (i)   Any fractional number of inclusionary units required in a residential
development.
   (ii)   Ownership developments.
   (iii)   Rental developments with 20 or fewer dwelling units.
   (iv)   Rental developments with more than 20 dwelling units, provided the
City Council finds that constructing the required inclusionary units on site
would be an extreme hardship, based on factors such as project size, site
constraints, and/or excessively large affordability gaps. One way this can be
achieved is for the developer to demonstrate that the imposition of the
affordable housing production requirement would violate the California and/or
United States Constitutions.
   (2)   In-lieu fees shall be paid according to a fee schedule adopted by the
City Council and will be adjusted annually based on the percentage change in
new home prices and average apartment rent increases in Ventura County.
   (3)   In-lieu fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of the first building
permit for the development. For phased developments, the developer may pay a
pro rata share of the in-lieu fee concurrently with the issuance of building
permits for each development phase.
   (b)   Production of Rental Inclusionary Units as part of an Ownership
Housing development.
   (1)   Developers of ownership housing developments are allowed to fulfill
the development's Inclusionary Housing obligations with rental Inclusionary
Units on a site that meets one of the following criteria:
   (i)   A separate Inclusionary Housing parcel that is created within the
development site for the market rate residential development; or
   (ii)   A site that is located within one mile of the development site for
the market rate residential development.
   (2)   City Council shall be the approval authority for the following:
   (i)   Development location for the off-site inclusionary production option.
   (ii)   On-site parcel option for the size and location within the original
development site for the market rate ownership residential development.
   (3)   Rental Inclusionary Unit requirements.
   (i)   Fifteen (15%) percent applied to the total number of ownership housing
and apartment units being developed.
   (ii)   Low-income level, unless developer volunteers to fulfill the
requirement with very low-income units.
   (iii)   Bedroom mix is not required to match the unit mix provided in the
market rate ownership housing development.
   (iv)   Notwithstanding subdivision (3)(iii) above, the off-site inclusionary
units shall meet the following requirements:
   1.   No more than fifteen (15%) percent of the off-site inclusionary units
shall be studios.
   2.   At least forty (40%) percent of the off-site inclusionary units shall
include two (2) or more bedrooms.
   (4)   A market-rate developer may enter into an agreement with an affordable
housing developer to construct, own and operate the offsite inclusionary units
required to fulfill the inclusionary housing requirement, provided:
   (i)   The affordable housing developer has relevant recent experience and is
approved by the City.
   (ii)   The affordable housing developer does not request any financial
assistance from the City.
   (iii)   The affordable housing developer may apply to use the California
Government Code Sections 65915-65918 (Section 65915) density bonus and the
statutorily established number of incentives or concessions.
   (c)   Land Dedication. At the discretion of the City Council, the
inclusionary housing requirement may be satisfied by the dedication of land as
follows:
   (1)   The land shall be conveyed to the City at no cost.
   (2)   Payment in full of all property taxes and special taxes shall be made
when the proposal for land dedication is submitted, and again prior to
conveyance of the land to the City.
   (3)   The inclusionary units constructed on the land shall be set at fifteen
(15%) percent of the rental units and affordable to eligible very low-income
households.
   (4)   Location of the units:
   (i)   The land to be dedicated shall be located within one (1) mile of the
market-rate development that is subject to the inclusionary housing
requirement, unless the units are located within a moderate or higher resource
area as defined by the California Tax Credit Allocation Committee (CTCAC)
Opportunities Mapping.
   (ii)   The inclusionary units constructed on the land to be dedicated shall
not create an overconcentration of deed-restricted affordable dwelling units in
any specific neighborhood, unless the units are located within a moderate or
higher resource area as defined by the California Tax Credit Allocation
Committee (TCAC) Opportunities Mapping.
   (iii)   Overconcentration is defined as more than fifty (50) deed-restricted
dwelling units for eligible very low-or low-income within one-fourth (1/4) mile
of the land, or more than two hundred (200) deed restricted dwelling units for
eligible very low-or low-income households within one-half (1/2) mile of the
land.
   (5)   Upon submittal of a proposal for land dedication, evidence shall be
provided that:
   (i)   The developer has control of the land to be dedicated.
   (ii)   The land to be dedicated is free of any liens.
   (iii)   Any encumbrances or easements that adversely impact the property's
title must be disclosed and factored into the estimated value of the interests
proposed to be conveyed to the City.
   (iv)   The land cannot contain any hazardous materials at the time the land
dedication proposal is submitted:
   1.   The developer has disclosed whether any hazardous materials were
previously contained on the site.
   2.   If any hazardous materials were previously remediated on the site, the
developer has provided evidence that cleanup was performed in accordance with
applicable law.
   (v)   The land has not been improved with any residential use for at least
five (5) years prior to the submission of the land dedication proposal.
   (vi)   The land's existing General Plan and Zoning allows for residential
use at a density sufficient to permit the development of the required number of
inclusionary units.
   (vii)   The land is suitable in terms of size, configuration, and physical
characteristics to allow cost-efficient development of the required number of
inclusionary units.
   (viii)   The land is fully served by the necessary infrastructure to support
the required number of inclusionary units prior to the conveyance to the City.
   (6)   The developer shall submit all necessary information to evaluate
compliance with the requirements of this Chapter, including:
   (i)   Conceptual site plan and narrative description of a project that could
be developed on the property.
   (ii)   An identification of the income and affordability restrictions
proposed to be imposed.
   (iii)   A pro forma analysis that qualifies any financial gap associated
with the identified development scope and describes how this financial gap will
be filled.
   (iv)   If a Section 65915 density bonus will be required, an identification
of the terms of the requested density bonus; incentives and concessions; and
development standards waivers.
   (7)   City staff shall review land dedication proposals prior to
consideration by the decision-making authority, to ensure they meet the
requirements of this Section.
   (8)   The City shall re-convey dedicated properties to developers with
experience developing affordable apartment developments targeted to very low-
income households.
(§ 1, Ord. 1506-NS, eff. October 9, 2008, as amended by § 8, Ord. 1719-NS, eff.
November 24, 2023)
Sec. 9-10.307. Inclusionary housing incentives.
   Applicants for residential developments who elect to satisfy the
requirements of this article by constructing the requisite number of
inclusionary units may request a regulatory incentive consistent with
Government Code Section 65915(d)(2) regardless of whether the project includes
a Density Bonus.
(§ 1, Ord. 1506-NS, eff. October 9, 2008, as amended by § 9, Ord. 1719-NS, eff.
November 24, 2023)
Sec. 9-10.308. General requirements for inclusionary units.
   In addition to the requirements of this article, inclusionary units shall be
subject to the requirements of Article 6 of this chapter (Compliance
Requirements).
   (a)   Term of Affordability. Inclusionary units which are individually sold
shall remain affordable for a cumulative period of forty-five (45) years from
the date of initial occupancy. Inclusionary units which are rented shall remain
affordable for as long as the property is developed with a residential use, but
not less than a fifty-five (55) year period from the date of initial occupancy.
(§ 1, Ord. 1506-NS, eff. October 9, 2008, as amended by § 10, Ord. 1719-NS,
eff. November 24, 2023)
Article 4. Nonresidential Development Linkage Fees
Sec. 9-10.401. Purpose.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this article is to provide a mechanism for
producing housing affordable to extremely-low, very-low, lower and moderate-
income households by requiring applicable nonresidential development pay a fee
to be used for the production, preservation, or rehabilitation of affordable
housing units.
(§ 1, Ord. 1506-NS, eff. October 9, 2008, as amended by § 5, Ord. 1543-NS, eff.
October 8, 2010, and § 11, Ord. 1719-NS, eff. November 24, 2023)
Sec. 9-10.402. Applicability.
   A linkage fee is hereby established for each Nonresidential Use Category
contained in this article, and shall apply to the following types of
nonresidential developments:
   (a)   New Construction and Additions. Any new nonresidential project(s) or
addition(s) to an existing nonresidential project proposing to construct or add
seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet or more of new gross floor
area.
   (b)   Intensification of a Nonresidential Use. Any intensification of a
nonresidential use changing seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet or
more of gross floor area from one (1) Nonresidential Use Category to a more
intensive Nonresidential Use Category where no fee has previously been paid.
For purposes of this article, intensification of a Nonresidential Use means
change from one (1) Nonresidential Use Category to another Nonresidential Use
Category having a higher linkage fee amount.
   (c)   Conversion from Residential to Nonresidential Use. Any conversion of a
residential project changing seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet or
more of gross floor area to a nonresidential use.
   The Community Development Director or designee shall be responsible for
determining the applicability of this article to individual projects.
(§ 1, Ord. 1506-NS, eff. October 9, 2008)
Sec. 9-10.403. Exemptions.
   The following nonresidential developments are exempt from the provisions of
this article:
   (a)   A nonresidential development that has received its discretionary
approvals from the City prior to the effective date of the ordinance adopting
this chapter.
   (b)   Building projects undertaken by a public agency for public purposes.
   (c)   Exterior alterations and improvements to existing nonresidential
projects.
   (d)   The reconstruction of any structures that have been destroyed by fire,
flood, earthquake or other act of nature provided that the reconstruction of
the project does not result in an increase in the total gross floor area by
seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet or more.
   (e)   Nonresidential developments otherwise exempt by law.
   (f)   School - Private non-profit grammar and high schools and colleges.
(§ 1, Ord. 1506-NS, eff. October 9, 2008, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1539-NS, eff.
July 23, 2010)
Sec. 9-10.404. Nonresidential Use Categories.
   For the purposes of determining the linkage fee amount to be charged, every
nonresidential development will be classified into one of the following
nonresidential land use categories:
   (a)   Retail/Commercial – includes but is not limited to retail, service,
and commercial uses, or similar uses in a center, stand alone, or mixed use
format;
   (b)   Office – includes but is not limited to professional, administrative
and medical offices;
   (c)   Lodging – includes but is not limited to hotels and motels and
extended stay facilities;
   (d)   Industrial – includes but is not limited to warehouse, manufacturing,
storage and similar facilities; or,
   (e)   Research and development or flex space – Includes but is not limited
to research and development, laboratory or other similar facilities. Flex space
is space that can be used in a combination of office, warehouse, industrial and
or showroom usage.
(§ 1, Ord. 1506-NS, eff. October 9, 2008)
Sec. 9-10.405. Assignment of specific use to nonresidential use categories.
   (a)   Listed Uses.
   (1)   The City Council shall adopt by resolution a standardized list showing
the assignment of specific uses to each Nonresidential Use Category.
   (2)   In the case of land uses not designated in said City Council
resolution, the Community Development Director shall determine the appropriate
Nonresidential Use Category from those set forth in Sec.
9-10.404 above, based on the characteristics of each use.
   (b)   Multiple Uses in a Project. When a nonresidential development includes
uses that are classified in different categories (e.g., a project with some
retail commercial space and some office space), then the total gross floor area
of the project shall be allocated among each applicable Nonresidential Use
Categories for purposes of determining the fee.
(§ 1, Ord. 1506-NS, eff. October 9, 2008)
Sec. 9-10.406. Method of calculation.
   For each nonresidential development subject to the provisions of this
article, linkage fees shall be calculated by multiplying the fee amount by for
each applicable Nonresidential Use Category by the gross square footage of the
new construction, addition, intensification or conversion. No application for a
building permit or discretionary permit for a nonresidential development
subject to this article shall be deemed complete for processing unless the
application contains:
   (a)   A calculation of the gross floor area of the nonresidential
development and the gross floor area of each intended nonresidential use in the
nonresidential development.
   (b)   For nonresidential developments involving the conversion of
residential use to nonresidential use, or the intensification of a
nonresidential use to another nonresidential use, the gross floor area of each
existing use and each intended use.
(§ 1, Ord. 1506-NS, eff. October 9, 2008)
Sec. 9-10.407. Determination and payment of fees.
   (a)   In calculating an applicable linkage fee, the Community Development
Director or designee shall impose those fees in effect at the time of issuance
of the building permit or, if no building permit is required, at the time of
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
   (b)   Where applicable, linkage fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of
a building permit or, where no building permit is required, prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy, as applicable.
(§ 1, Ord. 1506-NS, eff. October 9, 2008)
Sec. 9-10.408. Adjustment and review of fees.
   Linkage fee rates shall be set by City Council resolution and may be
adjusted biennially in an amount equal to the percentage change, if any, in the
construction cost index for Los Angeles for the corresponding period of time,
as published by Engineering News Record/McGraw-Hill Construction Weekly or any
substitute index that the City Council may adopt by resolution. In the future,
the City Council may direct that further study and analysis be conducted to
determine the continuing reasonableness of current fees and whether linkage
fees should be applied to additional Nonresidential Use Categories.
(§ 1, Ord. 1506-NS, eff. October 9, 2008)
Sec. 9-10.409. Use of linkage fees.
   All linkage fees shall be deposited into the Affordable Housing Trust Fund
established by Article 2 of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1506-NS, eff. October 9, 2008)
Article 5. Density Bonus Program
Sec. 9-10.501. Purpose and intent.
   This article implements the requirements placed upon the City by California
Government Code Section 65915 et seq., as may be amended from time to time (the
“Density Bonus Law”), and furthers the provision of affordable housing pursuant
to the Housing Element of the General Plan. Unless an exception or modification
applies as set forth in this Article, any person seeking a density bonus,
concession, or waiver under the Density Bonus Law shall comply with the
California Government Code requirements.
(§ 1, Ord. 1506-NS, eff. October 9, 2008; as amended by § 7, Ord. 1733-NS, eff.
January 3, 2025)
Sec. 9-10.502. General density bonus program provisions.
   (a)   Application. Any person that desires a density bonus, concession, or
waiver under the Density Bonus Law must make an application on a form approved
by the Director at the time of submitting an entitlement application for the
housing development for which a density bonus, concession, or waiver is
requested pursuant to the Density Bonus Law.
   (b)   City’s discretion in granting density bonus. Nothing in this chapter
will be construed to prohibit the Planning Commission or City Council from
granting a density bonus greater than what is described in this chapter or the
Density Bonus Law for a development that meets the requirements of this chapter
or the Density Bonus Law, or from granting a proportionately lower density
bonus than what is required by this chapter or the Density Bonus Law for
developments that do not meet the requirements of this chapter or the Density
Bonus Law.
   (c)   City Financial Participation not Required. Nothing in this Section
requires the City or other public agency to provide direct financial incentives
for the residential development, such as but not limited to the provision of
financial subsidies, publicly owned land, fee waivers, or waiver of dedication
requirements. The City at its sole discretion may choose to provide such direct
financial incentives. Any such incentives may require payment of prevailing
wages by the residential development if required by State law.
(§ 7, Ord. 1733-NS, eff. January 3, 2025)
Sec. 9-10.503. City review and approval of density bonus plan.
   (a)   Density Bonus Plan Review. The density bonus plan, including any
request for a density bonus or incentives, shall be processed, reviewed, and
approved or denied as part of the discretionary application(s) required for the
residential development. Prior to the decision-making body taking any action on
a residential development involving a request for density bonus, the Community
Development Director shall have determined that the density bonus application
is complete and conforms to the provisions of by the Density Bonus Law.
   (b)   Findings for Denial of Incentives. The approval body shall approve the
density bonus plan unless the decision-making body makes the requisite findings
for denial allowed by the Density Bonus Law.
   (c)   A request for a minor change to an approved density bonus plan may be
processed as a minor modification to the project's entitlement and be granted
if the modification is substantially in compliance with the original density
bonus plan and other conditions of approval of the project's entitlement(s).
More substantial proposed changes to the density bonus plan shall be processed
as a major modification to the project's entitlement. The Community Development
Director shall select the type of modification process in the Director's sole
discretion.
(§ 1, Ord. 1506-NS, eff. October 9, 2008, as amended by § 7, Ord. 1540-NS, eff.
July 23, 2010; § 7, Ord. 1733-NS, eff. January 3, 2025)
Sec. 9-10.504. General requirements for density bonus affordable units.
   Except as otherwise stated herein, affordable units qualifying a residential
development for a density bonus shall be subject to the requirements of Section
9-10.305 (Standards for Inclusionary Units), and Section 9-10.308 (General
requirements for inclusionary units).
(§ 1, Ord. 1506-NS, eff. October 9, 2008; as amended by § 7, Ord. 1733-NS, eff.
January 3, 2025)
Article 6. Compliance Procedures
Sec. 9-10.601. Affordable housing agreement.
   A developer who proposes to construct affordable units on-site or off-site
pursuant to this chapter, or whose project receives money from the Housing
Trust Fund, shall execute an Affordable Housing Agreement with the City.
   (a)   Form of Agreement. The forms of the Affordable Housing Agreement and
any related Declarations, Resale Restrictions, deeds of trust, and other
documents authorized by this chapter shall be approved as to form by the City
Attorney prior to being executed with respect to any residential development
subject to this chapter. Any such agreements may be approved and executed by
the City Manager.
   (b)   Recording of Agreement. The affordable housing agreement shall be
recorded prior to, or concurrently with, final map recordation or, where the
residential development does not include a map, prior to issuance of a building
permit for any structure on the site. Resale restrictions, deeds of trust, and/
or other documents comprising or related to the affordable housing agreement
shall also run with the land and bind all future owners and successors in
interest.
(§ 1, Ord. 1506-NS, eff. October 9, 2008, as amended by § 12, Ord. 1719-NS,
eff. November 24, 2023)
Sec. 9-10.602. Affordable unit restrictions.
   All affordable units offered for sale or rent in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter shall be subject to certain restrictions as
reflected in the Affordable Housing Agreement.
   (a)   Units offered for Sale.
   (1)   Initial Sales Price and Resale. During the term of affordability, the
maximum sales price permitted for initial sale and resale of an inclusionary
unit designated for owner-occupancy shall be at a price established by the
City.
   (2)   Owner Occupancy Required. All affordable units sold that are subject
to the requirements of this chapter shall be occupied and used as owner's
principal place of residence.
   (3)   Permitted Changes in Ownership. An affordable unit designated for
owner-occupancy may be transferred or inherited subject to requirements
established by the City, but all new owners shall continue to be subject to the
terms of all recorded restrictions.
   (4)   Continued Occupancy. Purchasers of an affordable unit may continue to
occupy that unit if their incomes rise above allowable income limits provided
they continue to meet the other requirements of this program.
   (b)   Units offered for Rent.
   (1)   Establishment of Rental Rates. Affordable units offered for rent to
eligible lower, very-low, and extremely-low income households shall be rented
at a maximum rate established by the City's Housing Division on an annual
basis. Rental rates are calculated based on requirements stipulated in the
State housing law.
   (2)   Continued Occupancy. Tenants of an affordable unit may continue to
occupy that unit if their incomes rise above allowable income limits provided
they continue to meet the other requirements of this program.
(§ 1, Ord. 1506-NS, eff. October 9, 2008, as amended by § 6, Ord. 1543-NS, eff.
October 8, 2010)
Sec. 9-10.603. Implementation, monitoring and enforcement.
   (a)   The City Council may adopt guidelines, by resolution, to assist in the
implementation of all aspects of this chapter.
   (b)   No household shall be permitted to begin occupancy of a dwelling unit
which is required to be affordable under this chapter unless the City or its
designee has determined a household's eligibility using methods as proscribed
by the City.
   (c)   The City shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter
and all Affordable Housing Agreements, regulatory agreements, covenants, resale
restrictions, promissory notes, deed of trust, and other requirements placed on
inclusionary units, and other affordable units, by civil action and any other
proceeding or method permitted by law. The City may, at its discretion, take
such enforcement action as is authorized under the Municipal Code and/or any
other action authorized by law or equity or by any regulatory document,
restriction, or agreement executed under this chapter.
   (d)   Failure of any official or agency to fulfill the requirements of this
chapter shall not excuse any applicant or owner from the requirements of this
chapter. No permit, license, map, or other approval or entitlement for a
residential or nonresidential development shall be issued, including without
limitation a final inspection or certificate of occupancy, until all applicable
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
   (e)   The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive
and shall not preclude the City from any other remedy or relief to which it
otherwise would be entitled under law or equity.
   (f)   For inclusionary and affordable units occupied under the provisions of
the chapter, the City may require written verification of owner occupancy, or
household eligibility and rental rates.
   (g)   The City Council by resolution may establish fees for the on-going
administration and monitoring of affordable units, which fees may be updated
periodically, as required.
Sec. 9-10.604. Waiver requirements.
   (a)   A developer may request that the requirements of this chapter be
adjusted or waived based on a showing that applying the requirements of this
chapter would effectuate an unconstitutional taking of property or otherwise
have an unconstitutional application to the property. A developer may also
request that the requirements of this chapter be satisfied by the developer in
another manner which would result in reasonably comparable compliance with this
chapter.
   (b)   Any request for a waiver, adjustment, or reduction under this section
shall be submitted concurrently with the inclusionary housing plan required by
Section
9-10.304, or density bonus plan required by Section
9-10.506, or with the application for a non-residential development. The
applicant shall bear the burden of presenting substantial evidence to support
the request and set forth in detail the factual and legal basis for the claim,
including all supporting technical documentation.
   (c)   The request for a waiver, adjustment, or reduction shall be processed,
reviewed, and approved or denied by the City Council, and may be processed
concurrently with the discretionary applications, if required, for the
development project. In making a determination on an application for waiver,
adjustment, or reduction, the applicant shall bear the burden of presenting
substantial evidence to support the claim.
   The waiver, adjustment, or reduction may be approved only to the extent
necessary to avoid an unconstitutional result, or if it is determined that an
adjustment would result in a reasonably comparable compliance with this
chapter, after adoption of written findings, based on substantial evidence,
supporting the determinations required by this section. If a waiver,
adjustment, or reduction is granted, any change in the use within the project
shall invalidate the waiver, adjustment, or reduction.
(§ 1, Ord. 1506-NS, eff. October 9, 2008)
Article 7. Incentives for Small and Underutilized Parcels
Sec. 9-10.701. Purpose and intent.
   The purpose of this article is to encourage the production of affordable
housing by providing incentives for developing small and underutilized parcels.
(§ 1, Ord. 1568-NS, eff. March 9, 2012)
Sec. 9-10.702. Eligibility for incentives.
   A housing development that meets all of the criteria (a) through (d) below
is eligible for an incentive described in Sec.
9-10.703.
   (a)   The development will be built on a site that is:
   (1)   An existing parcel that is less than 1/2 acre in size, including an
existing parcel of less than 1/2 acre that is developed in combination with one
or more contiguous parcels; or
   (2)   A parcel listed in the inventory of underutilized sites with
redevelopment potential in the Housing Element of the Thousand Oaks General
Plan;
   (b)   All of the housing, with the exception of a managers unit (if any),
shall be provided to extremely low-, very low- or low-income households at
affordable rents or affordable housing costs;
   (c)   All of the housing shall be multiple- family housing developed at a
minimum density of 20 dwellings per net acre;
   (d)   The development density shall comply with any law, including
Government Code 65863, that restricts the City from allowing a parcel to be
developed at a lower density than needed to accommodate the City’s share of the
regional housing need;
   (e)   The project shall be subject to a recorded agreement between the City
and a housing developer specifying the income level of the occupants and
guaranteeing the affordability of the units.
(§ 1, Ord. 1568-NS, eff. March 9, 2012)
Sec. 9-10.703. Incentives.
   (a)   The developer of a housing development that is eligible for an
incentive may request any two of the incentives set forth in Sec.
9-10.503(b) under the density bonus program. Such incentives shall be in
addition to any incentive that may be granted under the density bonus program.
   (b)   The City shall grant the requested incentives unless the decision-
maker makes a written finding, based upon substantial evidence, of either of
the following:
   (1)   The incentives would have a specific adverse impact, as defined in
paragraph (2) of subdivision (d) of Section 65589.5 of the Government Code,
upon public health and safety or the physical environment or on any real
property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources and
for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the
specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to the
targeted households.
   (2)   The incentives would be contrary to state or federal law.
(§ 1, Ord. 1568-NS, eff. March 9, 2012)
Article 8. Incentives for Affordable Housing with Lot Consolidation
Sec. 9-10.801. Purpose and intent.
   The purpose of this article is to encourage the redevelopment of smaller
sites through allowing incentives for qualifying housing projects that include
the merging or consolidation of parcels.
(§ 3, Ord. 1734-NS, eff. January 10, 2025)
Sec. 9-10.802. Eligibility for incentives.
   (a)   Qualifying Projects: Housing developments that consist of lot
consolidation pursuant to Section 9-3.1218 Voluntary Lot Mergers and meet
either of the following location and affordability criteria:
      (1)   Housing Inventory Sites (HIS) that construct at a minimum, the
number of residential units at the level of affordability identified in the
Housing Element Appendix C: Sites Inventory.
      (2)   Mixed-Use (MU), Mixed-Use Overlay Zone (MUOZ) or Multiple-Family
(R-3) zoned sites not identified in the Housing Element Sites Inventory
associated with a rental development proposal consisting of twenty (20%)
percent of the units affordable to lower income households and ownership
development proposal consisting of twenty (20%) percent of the units affordable
to moderate income households.
(§ 3, Ord. 1734-NS, eff. January 10, 2025)
Sec. 9-10.803. Incentives.
   (a)   Fee Based: A pre-application will be processed with no fees imposed by
the Planning Division.
   (b)   Locations: Housing Element Inventory Sites and other multifamily or
mixed-use sites may be consolidated either separately or in combination when
properties are adjoining and proposed to be merged.
   (c)   Development Standards:
      (1)   Qualifying projects located in the R-3 zone may use the Mixed-Use
Zone Development Standards per Section 9-4.1052 and as allowed in this section
(2) through (4).
      (2)   Waive the following Mixed-Use Zone Development Standards.
         (i)   Ground Floor Plate height: Minimum 14 feet.
         (ii)   Minimum average depth of retail of 60 feet.
         (iii)   Third Floor Setback – Minimum: 10 foot average from first
floor street front building façade.
         (iv)   Public Exterior Space – Minimum three (3%) percent of area of
building footprint.
      (3)   Change the following Mixed Use development standards to the
following:
         (i)   Side yard setback:10 feet minimum from a residential zone.
         (ii)   Building Height maximum along a side property line within 40
feet of side yard abutting a residential zone:
            (1)   Twenty feet from property line - 25 feet maximum.
            (2)   Twenty feet to 40 feet from property line - 45 feet maximum.
            (3)   Over 40 feet from property line - 50 feet maximum.
         (iii)   Minimum Ground Floor Windows: thirty-five (35%) percent for
ground floor residential.
      (4)   Reduce or waive Objective Design Standards for Courtyard, Stacked
Dwelling and Mixed-use Block building types:
         (i)   Minimum Courtyard area reduction from fifteen (15%) percent to
ten (10%) percent of lot area.
         (ii)   Minimum courtyard dimensions must be thirty feet (30') when the
long axis of the courtyard is within forty-five (45) degrees of an east/west
orientation and twenty feet (20') when the courtyard is within forty-five (45)
degrees of a north/south orientation.
         (iii)   Courtyard dimensions must have no less than a one to two
proportion between any horizontal dimension and adjacent building height.
         (iv)   A maximum of one hundred percent (100%) of the total units
within a project can be in a stacked dwelling building type.
   (d)   Eligible for regulatory incentives consistent with California
Government Code Section 65915(d)(2) regardless of whether the qualifying
project includes a Density Bonus.
(§ 3, Ord. 1734-NS, eff. January 10, 2025)
Sec. 9-10.804. Affordability requirements.
   Rental units must be deed restricted as affordable housing units for no
fewer than 55 years and ownership units must be deed restricted as affordable
housing units for no fewer than 45 years, subject to Article 6. Compliance
Procedures.
(§ 3, Ord. 1734-NS, eff. January 10, 2025)
CHAPTER 11. DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
Sec. 9-11.01. Authority.
   These regulations are adopted under the authority of California Government
Code Sections 65864, et seq.
(§ 1, Ord. 953-NS, eff. January 20, 1987)
Sec. 9-11.02. Applications.
   The Community Development Director shall prescribe the form for each
application for a development agreement, and for any document required under
this chapter. The Director may require an applicant to submit such information,
data, and analyses necessary to process the application. The applicant shall
submit with the application a list and description of, but not limited to, the
unique benefits to the City for entering into the agreement, term of the
agreement, project phasing, applicable development standards, uses, densities,
applicant’s financing arrangement for any public improvements to be constructed
in consideration for the development agreement and any special provisions or
clauses the applicant requests to be in the agreement.
(§ 1, Ord. 953-NS, eff. January 20, 1987)
Sec. 9-11.03. Fees.
   A filing fee, as set by Council resolution, to cover the costs of processing
shall be charged to the applicant.
(§ 1, Ord. 953-NS, eff. January 20, 1987)
Sec. 9-11.04. Qualification as an applicant.
   Only a qualified applicant may file an application for a development
agreement. A qualified applicant is a person, or their authorized agent, who
has legal or equitable interest in the real property which is the subject of
the development agreement. The Director may require an applicant to submit
written proof of their interest in the real property or the authority of any
agent to act for the applicant.
(§ 1, Ord. 953-NS, eff. January 20, 1987)
Sec. 9-11.05. Review of application.
   The Director shall review the application and may reject it if it is
incomplete or inaccurate. If the Director finds that the application is
incomplete, the Director shall notify the applicant of the additional
requirements necessary in order to conduct negotiations. After receiving the
required information and meeting with the applicant for negotiation purposes,
the Director shall prepare a staff report and recommendation to the Planning
Commission. This report shall include a statement the proposed agreement has
been reviewed by the City Attorney and whether the agreement would be
consistent with the City’s General Plan and any applicable Specific Plan.
(§ 1, Ord. 953-NS, eff. January 20, 1987)
Sec. 9-11.06. Public hearings.
   A public hearing shall be held before the Planning Commission and the City
Council to consider whether the City should enter into the development
agreement. The public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the City’s
normal procedural standards for conducting zoning hearings. The applicant has
the burden of proof at the public hearing on the applicant’s need for,
advantages of the benefits to the City for such a development agreement.
(§ 1, Ord. 953-NS, eff. January 20, 1987)
Sec. 9-11.07. Notice requirements.
   The Director shall give notice of the public hearings required by this
chapter in the manner required by the California Government Code and Chapter 12
of this Title.
(§ 1, Ord. 953-NS, eff. January 20, 1987, as amended by §52, Ord. 1178-NS, eff.
April 27, 1993)
Sec. 9-11.08. Failure to receive notice.
   The failure of any person entitled to notice required by law or these
regulations does not affect the authority of the City to enter into a
development agreement.
(§ 1, Ord. 953-NS, eff. January 20, 1987)
Sec. 9-11.09. Determination by Planning Commission.
   The Commission shall make a written recommendation on the development
agreement to the City Council. The recommendation shall include the
Commission’s reasons and determination whether the development agreement:
   (a)   Is consistent with the objectives, policies, general land uses and
programs specified in the General Plan and any applicable specific plan;
   (b)   Is compatible with the uses authorized in, and the regulations
prescribed for, the land use district in which the real property is located;
   (c)   Is in conformity with public convenience, general welfare and good
land use practice:
   (d)   Will be detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare; and
   (e)   Will adversely affect the orderly development of property or the
preservation of property values.
(§ 1, Ord. 953-NS, eff. January 20, 1987)
Sec. 9-11.10. Decision by City Council.
   The approval of development agreements is a discretionary decision of the
City Council. The Council may accept, modify or disapprove the recommendation
of the Planning Commission. It may refer matters not previously considered by
the Commission back to the Planning Commission for additional recommendations.
The Commission shall then hold a public hearing on matters referred back to it
by the Council.
   The City Council may approve the development agreement if it finds that the
agreement is consistent with the General Plan and any applicable Specific Plan.
(§ 1, Ord. 953-NS, eff. January 20, 1987)
Sec. 9-11.11. Approval and effective date of a development agreement.
   A development agreement shall be adopted by an ordinance, and is subject to
referendum.
   Only after the ordinance approving the development agreement takes effect
(thirty (30) days after the second reading), shall the City enter into the
agreement and that agreement be binding and effective.
(§ 1, Ord. 953-NS, eff. January 20, 1987)
Sec. 9-11.12. Recordation.
   Within ten (10) days after the City enters into the development agreement,
the City Clerk shall have the agreement recorded with the County Recorder.
   If the agreement is terminated, amended or canceled, the City Clerk shall
have notice of such action recorded.
(§ 1, Ord. 953-NS, eff. January 20, 1987)
Sec. 9-11.13. Periodic review required.
   (a)   Unless a shorter time is specified by the City Council, the Community
Development Director shall review for compliance each development agreement
every twelve (12) months from the date the agreement is entered. The applicant,
or successor in interest, shall have the burden to demonstrate good faith
compliance with the terms of the agreement. The determination shall be based
upon the evidence presented.
   (b)   If the City finds that the applicant has complied in good faith with
the terms and conditions of the agreement, the review for that period is
conducted.
   (c)   If the City finds that the applicant has not complied in good faith
with the terms and conditions of the agreement during the period under review,
the City may modify or terminate the agreement.
(§ 1, Ord. 953-NS, eff. January 20, 1987)
Sec. 9-11.14. Proceedings for amending, modification or termination.
   (a)   Amendment or mutual cancellation. Either party may propose an
amendment to, or cancellation in whole or in part of, a development agreement.
The procedure for considering an amendment to, or canceling of the development
agreement is the same as for entering into an agreement as set forth in this
Chapter. When the City initiates the proposed amendment or cancellation, it
shall first five written mailed notice to the other party to the agreement of
such intention at least thirty (30) days in advance of the giving of notice of
the public hearing.
   (b)   Non-compliance or termination. If, upon a finding under Section
9-11.13(c), the City Council determines to proceed with modification or
termination of the agreement, the City shall hold a noticed public hearing. At
the hearing, the other party to the agreement shall be given an opportunity to
be heard. The Council may refer the matter to the Planning Commission for
further proceedings or for report and recommendation. The Council may impose
such conditions to its action as it considers necessary to protect the
interests of the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 953-NS, eff. January 20, 1987)
CHAPTER 12. PUBLIC HEARING AND ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW NOTICE REQUIREMENTS
Article 1. Purpose
Sec. 9-12.101. Applicability: Notices of application and public hearing
notices.
   For certain planning and development applications, this Code requires a
notice of application and/or a public hearing to be held by the City Council,
Planning Commission, Residential Development Evaluation Board, or the Community
Development Director or the Director’s designee. Where a notice of application
and/or a notice of public hearing is required for such applications, this
chapter establishes regulations for providing such notice.
(§ 1, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, as amended by § 16, Ord. 1210-NS, eff.
May 24, 1994)
Sec. 9-12.102. Applicability: Environmental review notices.
   This chapter establishes regulations for providing notice of the
availability for public review of draft environmental documents prepared by the
City pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act, including draft
negative declarations and draft environmental impact reports.
(§ 1, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993)
Sec. 9-12.103. Intent.
   Regulations contained in this chapter are not intended to supersede or
conflict with regulations contained in State law administrative regulations,
but rather to expand the public hearings notice requirements for certain
applications within the City.
   Notice of all public hearings shall comply with applicable regulations
established by the California Government Code.
   Notice of availability of draft environmental documents shall comply with
applicable regulations established by or pursuant to the California
Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code Section 21000 et seq.)
(“CEQA”) and the Guidelines for Implementation of CEQA (14 Cal. Code of Regs.
Section 15000, et seq.) (the “Guidelines”).
(§ 1, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993)
Article 2. Notices of Applications and Public Hearing Notices
Sec. 9-12.201. Contents of notice.
   (a)   Notice of application. Every notice of application provided pursuant
to this article shall contain the following information:
   (1)   The date on which the decision-making officer proposes to render a
decision absent a written statement of opposition to the application or request
for public hearing;
   (2)   A general description of the application, project, or other matter to
be considered;
   (3)   The identity of the applicant;
   (4)   Where applicable, the location of the subject property by street
address, map or description in relationship to existing streets.
   (b)   Notice of public hearing. Every notice of public hearing provided
pursuant to this article shall contain the following information:
   (1)   The date, time and place of the public hearing;
   (2)   The identity of the hearing body or officer (e.g., City Council,
Planning Commission or administrative hearing officer);
   (3)   A general description of the application, project or other matter to
be considered;
   (4)   The identity of the applicant;
   (5)   Where applicable, the location of the subject property by street
address, map or description in relationship to existing streets.
(§ 1, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, as amended by § 17, Ord. 1210-NS, eff.
May 24, 1994)
Sec. 9-12.202. Notice requirements.
   (a)   All notices of application and notices of public hearings shall be
given by the means specified in this section; provided, however, that the City
Council, Planning Commission or Community Development Director may provide
additional notice of a hearing in any manner deemed desirable.
   (b)   Category 1 applications. The following types of applications are
defined as Category 1 applications:
Precise plan of design
Temporary use permits, and modifications thereto
   Where this Code requires a notice of application or a notice of public
hearing for a Category 1 application, it shall be given by all of the following
means:
   (1)   By mailing or delivery as specified by Section
9-12.203 of this article;
   (2)   By posting as specified by Section
9-12.207 of this article.
   (c)   Category 2 applications. The following types of applications are
defined as Category 2 applications:
Lot line adjustment
   Where this Code requires a notice of application or a notice of public
hearing for a Category 2 application, it shall be given by the following means:
   (1)   By mailing or delivery as specified by Section
9-12.204 of this article.
   (d)   Category 3 applications. The following types of applications are
defined as Category 3 applications:
Administrative action
Alternate parking agreement
Minor modifications–permits and tracts
Parcel map waiver
Permits–administrative hearing
   Where this Code requires a notice of application or a notice of public
hearing for a Category 3 application, it shall be given by all of the following
means:
   (1)   By mailing or delivery as specified by Section
9-12.204 of this article;
   (2)   By posting as specified by Section
9-12.207 of this article.
   (e)   Category 4 hearings. Where this Code requires that a public hearing be
held to consider the following types of applications, it shall be defined as a
Category 4 public hearing:
Development Agreements–Specific Plan 15 area only
Land divisions and modifications thereto
Reversion to acreage
Variances and modifications thereto
   Notice of Category 4 public hearings shall be given by all of the following
means:
   (1)   By mailing or delivery as specified by Section
9-12.204 of this article;
   (2)   By mailing or delivery to local agencies as specified by Section
9-12.205 of this Article;
   (3)   By mailing or delivery to homeowners or property owners associations
as specified by Section
9-12.206 of this article;
   (4)   By posting as specified by Section
9-12.207 of this article;
   (5)   By publication as specified by Section
9-12.209 of this article.
   (f)   Category 5 hearings. Where this Code requires that a public hearing be
held to consider the following types of applications, it shall be defined as a
Category 5 public hearing:
General Plan amendments
Amendments to the Zoning Regulations of the City
Zone changes and prezoning
Specific Plans and Specific Plan amendments
Development agreements, amendments, cancellation (other than Specific Plan 15
area)
Tentative tract maps
Condominium conversions
Civic district establishment or amendment
Permits-Planning Commission hearing
Major modifications to permits and tracts
Sale, disposition, lease or other transfer of City open space property per
Chapter 13 of this title.
   Notice of Category 5 public hearings shall be given by all of the following
means:
   (1)   By mailing or delivery as specified by Section
9-12.204 of this article;
   (2)   By mailing or delivery to local agencies as specified by Section
9-12.205 of this article;
   (3)   By mailing or delivery to homeowners or property owners associations
as specified by Section
9-12.206 of this article.
   (4)   By posting as specified by Section
9-12.208 of this article;
   (5)   By publication as specified by Section
9-12.209 of this article.
   Provided, however, that in the case of General Plan amendments and
amendments to the Zoning Regulations of the City which are not site-specific,
the only required notice shall be notice by publication as specified in Section
9-12.209 of this article. At least forty-five (45) days prior to the public
hearing, a notice of application shall be provided with the information
specified by Section
9-12.201.
   At least forty-five (45) days prior to the public hearing, a notice of
application shall be provided with the information specified by Section
9-12.204.
   (g)   Category 6 hearings. Where a public hearing by the Planning Commission
is required to consider an application referred by, or an appeal of a decision
rendered by, the Community Development Director, or where a public hearing by
the City Council is required to consider an appeal of a decision rendered by
the Planning Commission, it shall be defined as a Category 6 hearing.
   Notice of Category 6 hearings shall be provided in the same manner as
originally required for the application or administrative action being appealed
or referred; provided, however, that any notice of a Category 6 hearing which
is required to be published shall be published in the legal advertising section
pursuant to the specifications set forth in Section
9-12.209 of this article.
   (h)   Where this section would require a notice by mailing or delivery, and
the number of notices that would be required is greater than one thousand
(1,000), then notice may be given by publication one time within a display
advertisement, said advertisement to be at least one-eighth (1/8) page in size,
in lieu of mailing or delivery.
   (i)   As used herein, the term “permits” includes those permits defined and
regulated by Article 28 of Chapter 4 of this title.
(§ 1, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1194-NS, eff.
December 14, 1993, § 1 Ord. 1203-NS, eff. March 22, 1994, § 18, Ord. 1210-NS,
eff. May 24, 1994, §§ 1, 2, Ord. 1279-NS, eff. April 9, 1997, § 20, Ord. 1379-
NS, eff. August 9, 2001 § 2, Ord. 1385-NS, eff. October 18, 2001, and § 37,
Ord. 1555-NS, eff. May 13, 2011)
Sec. 9-12.203. Notice by mailing or delivery: Category 1 applications.
   (a)   Where the notice of applications or notice of public hearing is
required to be given pursuant to this section, it shall be given by mailing or
delivery, at least fourteen (14) days prior to the public hearing, or in the
case of a notice of application, at least fourteen (14) days prior to the
proposed decision date, to the owner of the subject property or the owner’s
duly authorized agent, to the applicant, and to any person who has filed a
written request for notice with either the City Clerk or the Community
Development Director.
   (b)   For precise plan of design applications, in addition to the notice
required by subsection (a) above, notice shall also be given to owners of real
property located within one hundred fifty (150') feet of the real property
which is the subject of the application or public hearing.
   (c)   For temporary use permits, in addition to the notice required by
subsection (a) above, notice shall also be given to all owners of real property
located adjacent to or across the street from the real property which is the
subject of the application or public hearing.
   (d)   Ownership information shall be obtained from the latest equalized
assessment roll, or records of the County Assessor Tax Collector containing
more recent ownership information.
(§ 1, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, as amended by § 19, Ord. 1210-NS, eff.
May 24, 1994, § 1, Ord. 1373-NS, eff. February 8, 2001, and § 8, Ord. 1414-NS,
eff. Oct. 2, 2003)
Sec. 9-12.204. Notice by mailing or delivery: Five-hundred (500') foot radius.
   Where notice of application or notice of public hearing is required to be
given pursuant to this section, it shall be given by mailing or delivery, at
least fourteen (14) days prior to the public hearing, or in the case of a
notice of application, at least fourteen (14) days prior to the proposed
decision date, to the owner of the subject property or the owner’s duly
authorized agent, to the applicant, to any person who has filed a written
request for notice with either the City Clerk or the Community Development
Director, and to all owners of real property located within five-hundred (500')
feet of the real property which is the subject of the application or public
hearing. Ownership information shall be obtained from the latest equalized
assessment roll, or records of the County Assessor or Tax Collector containing
more recent ownership information.
(§ 1, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, as amended by § 19, Ord. 1210-NS, eff.
May 24, 1994, and § 2, Ord. 1373-NS, eff. February 8, 2001)
Sec. 9-12.205. Notice to local agencies.
   Where notice is required to be given pursuant to this section, it shall be
given by mailing or delivery at least fourteen (14) days prior to the public
hearing, to each local agency expected to provide water, wastewater, streets,
roads, schools, parks or other essential facilities or services to the property
or project, whose ability to provide those facilities and services may be
significantly affected.
(§ 1, Ord. 1178-NS, eff April 27, 1993, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1373, NS, eff.
February 8, 2001)
Sec. 9-12.206. Notice to homeowners and property owners associations.
   Where notice is required to be given pursuant to this section, it shall be
given by mailing or delivery, at least fourteen (14) days prior to the public
hearing, to any homeowners or property owners association representing areas
within one mile of the real property which is the subject of the public
hearing, which association has informed the Community Development Director in
writing of its existence. Such notice shall be mailed or delivered to the
president of the association, or to such other representative of the
association as may be designated in writing by the president of the
association, at an address specified in writing by the president of the
association or designated representative.
(§ 1, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, as amended by § 4, Ord. 1373-NS, eff.
February 8, 2001)
Sec. 9-12.207. Notice by posting with a small sign.
   Where notice of application or notice of public hearing is required to be
given pursuant to this section, it shall be given by posting on the real
property which is the subject of the application or public hearing at least
fourteen (14) days prior to the public hearing, or in the case of a notice of
application, at least fourteen (14) days prior to the proposed decision date,
with a sign of at least twenty-four (24") by twenty-four (24") inch dimension,
designed, constructed and located in accordance with specifications issued by
the Community Development Director.
(§ 1, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, as amended by § 19, Ord. 1210-NS, eff.
May 24, 1994; and § 5, Ord. 1373-NS, eff. February 8, 2001)
Sec. 9-12.208. Notice by posting with a large sign.
   Where notice is required to be given pursuant to this section, it shall be
given by posting on the real property which is the subject of the public
hearing, at least forty-five (45) days prior to the public hearing, with a sign
or signs, not to exceed a total of four (4) in number, of thirty-two (32)
square feet in size, designed, constructed and located in accordance with
specifications issued by the Community Development Department. Copy indicating
date and time of the hearing shall be in place on the sign at least fourteen
(14) days prior to the hearing.
(§ 1, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993 and § 3, Ord. 1385-NS, eff. October 18,
2001)
Sec. 9-12.209. Notice by publication (legal advertising section).
   Where notice is required to be given pursuant to this section, it shall be
given by publication one time in the legal advertising section of a newspaper
of general circulation within the City, said publication to occur at least
fourteen (14) days prior to the public hearing.
(§ 1, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993; as amended by § 6, Ord. 1373-NS, eff.
February 8, 2001)
Sec. 9-12.210. Notice by publication (display advertisement).
(§ 1, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993, repealed by § 4, Ord. 1279-NS, eff.
April 9, 1997)
Article 3. Environmental Review Notices
Sec. 9-12.301. Contents of notice.
   Every notice of availability of a draft negative declaration or draft
environmental impact report provided pursuant to this article shall contain
information prescribed by CEQA and the Guidelines and shall include the
following information:
   (a)   The project’s application number or title, and a general description
of the project;
   (b)   The identity of the applicant;
   (c)   Where applicable, the location of the subject property by street
address, map, or description in relationship to existing streets;
   (d)   The length of the public review period and the date it closes;
   (e)   The location where comments on the draft environmental document shall
be submitted.
(§ 1, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993)
Sec. 9-12.302. Notice requirements.
   In addition to any other parties required to be given notice pursuant to the
California Environmental Quality Act or administrative guidelines issued
pursuant thereto, notice of the availability of all draft environmental
documents shall be given by publication one time in the legal advertising
section of a newspaper of general circulation within the City; provided,
however, that the City Council, Planning Commission, or Community Development
Director may provide additional notice in any other manner deemed desirable.
(§ 1, Ord. 1178-NS, eff. April 27, 1993)
CHAPTER 13. DISPOSITION OR LEASE OF PROPERTY HELD BY THE CITY FOR OPEN SPACE
PURPOSES
Article 1. General
Sec. 9-13.101. Purpose.
   From time to time, the City may acquire real property for open space
purposes. Generally such property is held in perpetuity for said purposes. From
time to time, however, it may become appropriate and beneficial to the citizens
of Thousand Oaks that property of this nature shall be sold, exchanged, or
otherwise disposed for the public benefit.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedural requirements which
must be met prior to the disposition of open space property owned by the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 1194-NS, eff. December 14, 1993)
Sec. 9-13.102. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   (a)   “Minor open space adjustment” shall mean either of the following:
   (1)   A lot line adjustment under the Subdivision Map Act, which involves
less than one-half (1/2) acre of City open space; or
   (2)   The granting of a utility easement for a facility or use which will
occur entirely below the surface of the land.
   (b)   “Open space” land shall mean land owned by the City which has been
designated for the preservation of the surface of that land in essentially an
open, natural, and undeveloped state. Open space may contain limited
improvements and uses which are compatible and consistent with open space use.
   City property shall be “open space” property if any one or more of the
following apply:
   (1)   The deed, recorded tract map, or other instrument transferring the
property to the City designates the property as open space, or some document
appurtenant to the transfer stipulates that the purpose of the transfer is to
maintain the property as open space;
   (2)   The City Council declares by resolution that the property is open
space. Said resolution may be adopted before, concurrent with, or after the
acquisition of the property in question.
   (3)   The City Council has placed the property in the Open Space (OS) Zone,
as defined by Article 36 of Chapter 4 of this title.
(§ 1, Ord. 1194-NS, eff. December 14, 1993)
Sec. 9-13.103. City Council authority.
   Open space property owned by the City of Thousand Oaks shall not be sold,
exchanged, or otherwise transferred, nor shall a land lease, easement, or other
specific long-term permission to use the property be granted or issued, without
the authorization of the City Council given pursuant to this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1194-NS, eff. December 14, 1993)
Article 2. Disposition of Open Space Property
Sec. 9-13.201. Public hearing required.
   Except as authorized by Article 3 of this chapter, the Council shall not
authorize City open space property to be sold, exchanged, leased, or otherwise
disposed of, authorize the construction of improvements which are inconsistent
with passive recreational uses on such open space; or authorize the granting of
an easement over open space property, until after the City Council has
conducted a public hearing on the matter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1194-NS, eff. December 14, 1993)
Sec. 9-13.202. Notice requirements.
   Notice of the date, time, place, hearing body, and subject matter of any
public hearing required by Section
9-13.201 of this article shall be given in the manner required by Chapter 12 of
this title.
(§ 1, Ord. 1194-NS, eff. December 14, 1993)
Sec. 9-13.203. Consolidation of hearings.
   If the proposed use of the open space property requires an entitlement from
the City, then the required public hearing on the proposed sale, disposition,
transfer, lease, or grant of easement may be consolidated with the public
hearing on the entitlement. If an administrative officer or Planning Commission
has decision-making authority over the entitlement, any decision on said
entitlement shall not be final unless ratified by the City Council following a
public hearing as required by this article.
(§ 1, Ord. 1194-NS, eff. December 14, 1993)
Article 3. Exceptions
Sec. 9-13.301. Transfer to other agencies for open space purposes.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to the transfer of
property to one or more other public agencies for the same purposes of open
space preservation. Such transfers shall require the approval of the City
Council, but shall not require a noticed public hearing prior to said transfer.
(§ 1, Ord. 1194-NS, eff. December 14, 1993)
Sec. 9-13.302. Minor open space adjustments.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to minor open space
adjustments.
(§ 1, Ord. 1194-NS, eff. December 14, 1993)
ZONING MAPS
   The Zoning Maps are available for viewing in the office of the City Clerk.
APPENDIX A: SPECIFIC PLAN NO. 15
RANCHO CONEJO INDUSTRIAL PARK
1. Authority for Specific Plan No. 15.
   Specific Plan No. 15 is approved in accordance with, and is authorized by,
Sections 65450 through 65457 of the California Government Code, and Sections
9-2.401 through
9-2.403 of the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code.
   The original territory within Specific Plan No. 15 was located within the
unincorporated area of Ventura County, within the Sphere of Influence of the
City of Thousand Oaks as defined by the Local Agency Formation Commission, and
within the Thousand Oaks Planning Area, as defined by the Thousand Oaks General
Plan.
2. Boundary of Specific Plan No. 15.
   The original boundaries of Specific Plan No. 15 were coterminous with the
boundaries of the Rancho Conejo Reorganization and were described in the
official legal description for said Reorganization, as approved by the Local
Agency Formation Commission on October 18, 1990. Said legal description was
incorporated by reference as the legal description of the boundaries of
Specific Plan No. 15. These boundaries were also depicted on the Specific Plan
Map, attached to Ordinance 1132-NS which adopted this Appendix. Current
specific plan boundaries as amended by this ordinance are depicted on the
Specific Plan Map Exhibit A, attached to Ordinance 1573-NS.
3. Intent and Purposes.
   Specific Plan No. 15 has been created to provide specific development
standards for industrial properties which are currently in this unincorporated
area, but which are being annexed to the City of Thousand Oaks. Because of the
unique development history, use patterns, and existing development, the
Specific Plan is unique and requires special use authorization and standards.
   The purpose and intent of Specific Plan No. 15 is to provide continuation of
development and use standards equivalent, except as provided herein, to those
under existing Ventura County standards as of the date of annexation, to
authorize continuation of the special uses and standards previously approved in
the unincorporated area, and to provide adequate assurances to property owners
within Specific Plan No. 15 of an orderly transition to City governance.
4. Permitted Uses.
   Permitted uses within Specific Plan No. 15 shall include all those uses
which are set forth as permitted within the City’s M-1 (Industrial Park) Zone,
in Sections
9-4.1602 (Permitted Uses),
9-4.1603 (Uses requiring special use permits), and
9-4.1604 (Uses requiring development permits) of the Thousand Oaks Municipal
Code, subject to the type of permit required by the applicable Code section.
The following additional uses are also permitted subject to the applicable type
of permit:
   A. Additional Uses Permitted with Development Permit.
   1. Clubhouses.
   2. Communications facilities, including radio and television stations.
   3. Ambulance services.
   4. Manufacturing industries of the following types:
   a)   Apparel and related products;
   b)   Drugs, pharmaceuticals, perfumes, cosmetics and the like;
   c)   Electrical and electronic machinery, equipment and supplies, except for
manufacture of batteries;
   d)   Bakery products;
   e)   Instruments for measuring, analyzing, or controlling;
   f)   Jewelry, silverware and plated ware;
   g)   Leather and leather products, but excluding tanning, curing and
finishing of hides and skins;
   h)   Furniture and cabinet manufacture;
   i)   Musical instruments, including pianos and organs;
   j)   Office, computing and accounting machines;
   k)   Pens, pencils and other office and artists’ materials;
   l)   Personal goods;
   m)   Photographic, medical and optical goods; watches and clocks;
   n)   Printing, publishing and related industries;
   o)   Glass products made of purchased glass;
   p)   Toys and amusement, sporting and athletic goods.
   5. Recording studios and sound stages;
   6. Repair and reconditioning services of the following types:
   a)   Electrical and electronic machinery and equipment;
   b)   Instruments, including musical instruments;
   c)   Office, computing, and accounting machines;
   d)   Photographic and optical goods;
   7. Mail order houses.
   8. Auction halls, not involving livestock.
   9. Exhibits, building of.
   10. Sign painting and lettering shops.
   11. As an accessory use to a primary use permitted herein, retail sale of
products manufactured on-site.
   12. Automobile painting, provided that all work is conducted within an
enclosed building that is not within four hundred (400') feet of any
residentially zoned property.
   B. Additional Uses Permitted by Special Use Permit.
   1. Amusement and recreational facilities including batting cages, indoor
golf driving ranges, and bicycle racing tracks.
   2. Cemeteries, columbaria and mausoleums.
   3. Religious facilities, synagogues, and other places of religious worship.
   4. Manufacturing industries of the following types:
   a)   Household appliances;
   b)   Transmission and distribution equipment and industrial apparatus;
   c)   Food and related products other than bakery products, but excluding the
following:
   i)   Alcoholic beverages;
   ii)   Meat, seafood and poultry packing plants;
   iii)   Slaughtering, refining, and rendering of animal fats and oils;
   iv)   Sugar refining.
   d)   Plating, polishing, anodizing, engraving and related operations.
   5. Rental and leasing of durable goods.
   6. Automobile repair and reconditioning services, including component
repair, but excluding bodywork.
   7. Disinfecting and exterminating services.
   8. Swap meets.
   9. As an accessory use to a primary use permitted herein:
   i)   Dwelling for superintendent or owner;
   ii)   Dwelling, caretaker;
   iii)   Retail sale of products manufactured on-site.
   10. Recycling facilities and centers.
   C. Continuing Uses.
   All special uses and permits previously approved by the County of Ventura
within the Specific Plan area shall be renewed administratively unless the City
or other interested parties demonstrate, by substantial evidence in the
administrative hearing record, that the property owner or permittee has failed
to comply with all the terms or conditions of such permit, or that a
significant change in circumstances relating to the property has occurred since
the granting of the prior permit. In situations of prior noncompliance with any
permit conditions by the permittee, if, when considering the renewal, there is
no protest by any property owners, the City shall renew the permit and require
all conditions be complied with in the future.
   D.   Additional Uses Permitted Without a Development Permit or Special Use
Permit.
   Emergency shelters, subject to the special standards described in Section
9-4.2525 of this chapter. Except for such special standards, emergency shelters
shall be subject to the same development and management standards that apply to
commercial development in Specific Plan No. 15.
5. Nonconforming Uses.
   It is the intent of this Specific Plan that any use established as a legal
conforming use within the County shall be considered a legal conforming use
under this Specific Plan. Any nonconforming use within the County, and which
does not conform with a permitted use in the City, shall be considered a
nonconforming use in the City and shall be regulated pursuant to Section
9-4.2701 of the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code.
6. Setbacks.
   The provision of Section
9-4.1605(d) of the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code which requires a one hundred
(100') foot setback from centerlines of adjacent streets shall not apply.
Instead, all structures shall have a minimum setback of twenty (20') feet from
the property line adjacent to a street.
7. Parking Requirements.
   Parking shall meet City parking requirements, with the following
modifications which shall apply in the Specific Plan area:
   A)   For manufacturing uses and research and development uses, the required
number of parking spaces shall be calculated solely on the basis of the
applicable ratio of parking spaces to floor area, with no requirement for a
relationship between the number of parking spaces and the number of employees
on the largest shift or spaces for company vehicles. Provided, however, that
uses which do have a large number of fleet vehicles shall demonstrate that
sufficient parking is provided for the fleet vehicles.
   B)   Unless the City can demonstrate good reason to require a lower
percentage, industrial uses, research and development uses, and large scale
employment centers (e.g. corporate offices) shall be granted a compact parking
ratio of thirty-five (35%) percent.
8. Minimum Lot Size.
   The provision of Section
9-4.1605(k) of the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code, which provides for a minimum
lot area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet for lots created after
September 5, 1969, shall apply. Provided, however, that lots smaller than
twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, but in no case less than ten thousand
(10,000) square feet, may be allowed in conjunction with site plan approval by
a Development Permit or Special Use Permit.
9. Parking Lot Maintenance.
   For purpose of interpreting Section
9-4.2404(f)(1) of the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code, pertaining to maintenance
of parking facilities, the following activities shall be considered “minor
repair and maintenance:”
   A. Repair of defects in the surface of the parking area, including holes and
cracks.
   B. Repair or replacement in the same location of damaged planters and curbs.
   C. Restriping of a parking area with the identical delineation of parking
spaces.
   D. Slurry coating, defined as use of a liquid material, such as oil or a
sealant, to cover the existing parking area, including driveways or other
access routes, for protection and sealing the paved areas only.
   E. Refurbishment of plant material.
   F. Parking area overlay, defined as the addition of a layer of asphalt over
the existing pavement.
   Pursuant to Section
9-4.2404(f)(1) of the Municipal Code, the above-listed activities shall not
require submittal or approval of a minor modification application by the City.
   The following activities shall not be considered “minor repair and
maintenance,” and shall require submittal of a minor modification application
pursuant to Section
9-4.2404(f)(1):
   A. Restriping in which the number of parking spaces or their configuration
is changed.
   B. Alteration of the number, shape, or size of parking area planters.
10. Nonconforming Buildings.
   Buildings which have met or meet the current County Zoning Code at the time
of annexation to the City, but which do not meet the requirements of the City
Code, may be maintained and altered or expanded in accordance with applicable
regulations, including Specific Plan No. 15, provided that the specific
nonconformity is not increased. In the event of involuntary destruction, such
buildings may be replaced or rebuilt to the same size and height and in the
same location, with the same parking, and site improvements.
11. Other Conditions and Limitations.
   The requirements in the above paragraphs do not cover all the conditions,
limitations, and requirements for development permits and special use permits
relating to the property within Specific Plan No. 15. Any and all conditions,
limitations, and requirements not expressly addressed in this Specific Plan No.
15 shall be the same as those which were part of the Planned Development Permit
or Conditional Use Permit issued by the County of Ventura for that property
prior to the annexation to the City of Thousand Oaks.
   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in or referred to in this
Specific Plan, no conditions, limitation, or requirements (including but not
limited to side yards, rights of ingress/egress, etc.) which are different from
the Ventura County requirements, as defined in the County-issued Planned
Development Permit or Conditional Use Permit, shall apply to the Owners’
Property.
12. Applicability.
   Specific Plan No. 15 shall apply to all land within the Specific Plan upon
annexation to the City. For Property Owners who do not execute a development
agreement with the City, all future changes to Specific Plan No. 15 shall apply
to their property. For Property Owners executing a development agreement with
the City relating to Specific Plan No. 15, such Development Agreement shall
govern the applicability of all City zoning, development, and land use
ordinances, resolutions, regulations, administrative policies, and changes to
Specific Plan No. 15.
   For purposes of interpretation, all references herein to ordinances,
resolutions, regulations, and policies are to those as currently written.
13. Severability.
   If any condition or term herein is declared illegal, null and void, or
unenforceable, the other terms and conditions shall remain in full force and
effect to the fullest extent permitted by law.
14. Amendment.
   Amendments to Specific Plan No. 15 shall be considered pursuant to
procedures established by Section 65453 of the State of California Government
Code. In addition to any other manner that is required by law, notice of any
public hearings on any future Specific Plan amendment shall also be provided to
all property owners within the Specific Plan area.
15. Adoption.
   Upon the approval of Specific Plan No. 15 by the City, and pursuant to the
provisions of California Government Code Section 65453, the City shall adopt an
ordinance establishing Specific Plan No. 15 and codifying it as part of Title 9
(Planning and Zoning) of the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code.
(App. A., Ord. 1132-NS, eff. January 7, 1992, as amended by §34, Ord. 1392-NS,
eff. June 7, 2002, §29, Ord. 1547-NS, eff. January 13, 2011, and §§ 3, 4, Ord.
1561-NS, eff. October 14, 2011, Ord. 1573-NS, eff. May 11, 2012)
TITLE 10. UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1. WASTEWATER
Article 1. General Provisions
      
10-1.101–Public Works Department and Public Works Director
      
10-1.102–Service area
      
10-1.103–City responsibility
      
10-1.104–Liability limitations
      
10-1.105–Application and use of design and construction standards
      
10-1.106–Administration of developer projects
      
10-1.107–General policy
      
10-1.108–General connection policy
      
10-1.109–Application of provisions
      
10-1.110–Private wastewater disposal facilities: Conditions permitting
      
10-1.111–Ambiguities
      
10-1.112–Other applicable codes or policies
Article 2. Definitions
      
10-1.201–Accessible wastewater line
      
10-1.202–Adjusted total floor area
      
10-1.203–Apartment
      
10-1.204–Applicant
      
10-1.205–Building lateral
      
10-1.206–City
      
10-1.207–Condominium
      
10-1.208–Condominium, Detached
      
10-1.209–Council action
      
10-1.210–Customer
      
10-1.211–Domestic wastewater
      
10-1.212–Dwelling unit
      
10-1.213–Equivalent residential unit
      
10-1.214–HCTP-NPDES permit
      
10-1.215–Local share
      
10-1.216–Main line extension agreements
      
10-1.217–Mobile home
      
10-1.218–Plans
      
10-1.219–Plumbing Code
      
10-1.220–Plumbing fixture unit
      
10-1.221–Pro-rata share
      
10-1.222–Public wastewater line or system
      
10-1.223–Public Works Director
      
10-1.224–Reimbursement agreement
      
10-1.225–Service lateral
      
10-1.226–Service unit
      
10-1.227–User
      
10-1.228–Wastewater
      
10-1.229–Wastewater connection charge
      
10-1.230–Wastewater Design and Construction Standards
      
10-1.231–Wastewater main
      
10-1.232–Wastewater service charge
      
10-1.233–Will-Serve letter
Article 3. Classes of Service
      
10-1.301–Residential service
      
10-1.302–Commercial/industrial service
      
10-1.303–Condominium service
      
10-1.304–Other
Article 4. Connection Rules
      
10-1.401–General
      
10-1.402–Application
      
10-1.403–Requirement to apply for wastewater service
      
10-1.404–Public wastewater connections: Conditions requiring
      
10-1.405–Independent service laterals
      
10-1.406–Size and location
      
10-1.407–Facilities responsibility
      
10-1.408–Service lateral installations
      
10-1.409–Connection to public system
      
10-1.410–Alterations to wastewater system
      
10-1.411–Extension of wastewater system
      
10-1.412–Dedication of facilities
      
10-1.413–Acceptance of wastewater facilities
Article 5. Service and General Discharge Regulations
      
10-1.501–General prohibitions on wastewater discharges
      
10-1.502–Reserved
      
10-1.503–Reserved
      
10-1.504–Reserved
      
10-1.505–Emergency discontinuances
      
10-1.506–Reserved
      
10-1.507–Right of entry
      
10-1.508–Reserved
Article 6. Sewer Use Regulations
General Provisions
      
10-1.601–Purpose
      
10-1.602–Severability
      
10-1.603–Administration
      
10-1.604–Abbreviations and acronyms
      
10-1.605–Definitions
General Sewer Use Requirements
      
10-1.606–Prohibited discharge standards
      
10-1.607–National categorical pretreatment standards
      
10-1.608–State pretreatment standards
      
10-1.609–Local limits
      
10-1.610–City’s right of revision
      
10-1.611–Division
      
10-1.612–Hauled or trucked waste
Pretreatment of Wastewater
      
10-1.613–Pretreatment facilities
      
10-1.614–Interceptors, clarifiers and traps
      
10-1.615–Additional pretreatment measures
      
10-1.616–Accidental discharge/slug discharge control plans
Wastewater Discharge Permits
      
10-1.617–Wastewater analysis
      
10-1.618–Wastewater discharge permit requirements
      
10-1.619–Wastewater discharge permitting: existing connections
      
10-1.620–Wastewater discharge permitting: new connections
      
10-1.621–Wastewater discharge permit application contents
      
10-1.622–Wastewater discharge permit decisions
      
10-1.623–Wastewater discharge permit duration
      
10-1.624–Wastewater discharge permit contents
      
10-1.625–Wastewater discharge permit modification
      
10-1.626–Wastewater discharge permit transfer
      
10-1.627–Wastewater discharge permit revocation
      
10-1.628–Wastewater discharge permit reissuance
Reporting Requirements
      
10-1.629–Baseline monitoring reports
      
10-1.630–Compliance schedule progress reports
      
10-1.631–Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline
      
10-1.632–Periodic compliance reports
      
10-1.633–Reports of changed conditions
      
10-1.634–Reports of potential problems
      
10-1.635–Reports from unpermitted users
      
10-1.636–Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting
      
10-1.637–Notification of discharge of hazardous waste
      
10-1.638–Analytical requirements
      
10-1.639–Sample collection
      
10-1.640–Date of receipt of reports
      
10-1.641–Recordkeeping
      
10-1.642–Confidential information
      
10-1.643–Certification statements
Compliance Monitoring
      
10-1.644–Right of entry: inspection and sampling
      
10-1.645–Inspection warrants
Administrative Enforcement Remedies
      
10-1.646–Significant non-compliance
      
10-1.647–Notice of violation
      
10-1.648–Consent order
      
10-1.649–Compliance order
      
10-1.650–Cease and desist order
      
10-1.651–Administrative fines
      
10-1.652–Emergency suspensions
      
10-1.653–Termination of discharge
      
10-1.654–Publication of users in significant non-compliance
      
10-1.655–Appeals
Judicial Enforcement Remedies
      
10-1.656–Injunctive relief
      
10-1.657–Civil penalties
      
10-1.658–Criminal prosecution
      
10-1.659–Remedies non-exclusive
      
10-1.660–Upset
      
10-1.661–Bypass
Article 7. Charges
      
10-1.701–Wastewater connection charge
      
10-1.702–Additional charges for capital improvements
      
10-1.703–Wastewater service charges
      
10-1.704–Unauthorized use of the wastewater system
      
10-1.705–Miscellaneous repair and/or maintenance costs
      
10-1.706–Other fees and charges covered by Council action
Article 8. Main Line Extension and Oversizing Agreements
      
10-1.801–Reimbursement agreement - General
      
10-1.802–Main line extension
      
10-1.803–Oversizing agreement
Article 9. Billing and Payment
      
10-1.901–Billing - General
      
10-1.902–Due dates
      
10-1.903–Due dates for miscellaneous uses and special services
      
10-1.904–Overpayments
      
10-1.905–Underpayments
      
10-1.906–Errors: Adjustments
      
10-1.907–Blockage in lateral: Adjustments
      
10-1.908–Liability for payment
      
10-1.909–Delinquencies: Penalties
      
10-1.910–Multiple-party applications: Liability
      
10-1.911–City to use all necessary remedies
      
10-1.912–Property liens for delinquencies
      
10-1.913–Termination of service
CHAPTER 2. WATER
Article 1. General Provisions
      
10-2.101–Public Works Department
      
10-2.102–Service area
      
10-2.103–City responsibility
      
10-2.104–Liability limitations
      
10-2.105–Application and use of design and construction standards
      
10-2.106–Administration of developer projects
      
10-2.107–General meter policies
      
10-2.108–Other applicable codes or policies
Article 2. Definitions
      
10-2.201–Applicant
      
10-2.202–Approved water supply
      
10-2.203–Automatic fire sprinkler service
      
10-2.204–Auxiliary supply
      
10-2.205–Backflow prevention
      
10-2.206–Billing period
      
10-2.207–Billing unit
      
10-2.208–City
      
10-2.209–Council action
      
10-2.210–Cross connection
      
10-2.211–Customer
      
10-2.212–Customer hand valve
      
10-2.213–Domestic service
      
10-2.214–Dwelling unit
      
10-2.215–Fire flow
      
10-2.216–Fire flow surcharge
      
10-2.217–Historical base period
      
10-2.218–Irrigation service or meters
      
10-2.219–Lang Ranch zone
      
10-2.220–Local share
      
10-2.221–Main line extension agreement
      
10-2.222–Plans
      
10-2.223–Plant investment fee
      
10-2.224–Plumbing Code
      
10-2.225–Potable water
      
10-2.226–Pressure zone
      
10-2.227–Public water main or system
      
10-2.228–Public Works Director
      
10-2.229–Pumping lift charge
      
10-2.230–Purveyor
      
10-2.231–Reimbursement agreement
      
10-2.232–Reservoir
      
10-2.233–Reservoir storage fee
      
10-2.234–Service line
      
10-2.235–Service zone
      
10-2.236–Special facilities surcharge
      
10-2.237–Unmetered water
      
10-2.238–Water Design and Construction Standards
      
10-2.239–Water main
      
10-2.240–Water service
      
10-2.241–Water shortage condition
      
10-2.242–Will-serve letter
      
10-2.243–Zone
Article 3. Classes of Service
      
10-2.301–Domestic service
      
10-2.302–Construction water
      
10-2.303–Unmetered water
      
10-2.304–Automatic fire sprinkler service
      
10-2.305–Private fire hydrant service
      
10-2.306–Temporary service connections
Article 4. Connection Rules
      
10-2.401–General
      
10-2.402–Application
      
10-2.403–Requirement to apply for and install meter
      
10-2.404–Facilities responsibility
      
10-2.405–Size and location
      
10-2.406–Valves within meter box
      
10-2.407–Curb stops or angle meter valve
      
10-2.408–Customer building control valve
      
10-2.409–Alterations to water system
      
10-2.410–Connections
      
10-2.411–Extension of water system
      
10-2.412–Dedication of facilities
      
10-2.413–Acceptance of water facilities
      
10-2.414–Calleguas requirements
Article 5. Service Regulations
      
10-2.501–City responsibilities for maintenance
      
10-2.502–Operation of City valves and fire hydrants
      
10-2.503–Domestic meters
      
10-2.504–Water pressure
      
10-2.505–Emergency discontinuances
      
10-2.506–Tampering with Water Department property
      
10-2.507–Right of entry
      
10-2.508–Easements
      
10-2.509–Customer piping responsibilities
      
10-2.510–Conditions affecting the purity or potability of water
      
10-2.511–Cross connection and backflow prevention
      
10-2.512–Water shortages
      
10-2.513–Large increases in water use
      
10-2.514–Presumptions and penalties involving theft of water services
Article 6. Cross Connection and Backflow Prevention
      
10-2.601–Cross Connections - General
      
10-2.602–Other applicable codes or standards
      
10-2.603–Cross Connection Control Officer
      
10-2.604–Backflow prevention devices
      
10-2.605–Requirement to comply
      
10-2.606–Where devices are required
      
10-2.607–Device requirements
      
10-2.608–Fire systems
      
10-2.609–Process waters
      
10-2.610–Marking safe and unsafe water lines
      
10-2.611–Building plumbing
      
10-2.612–Premises water supervisor
      
10-2.613–No introduction of chemicals into water supply
      
10-2.614–Fees
Article 7. Charges
      
10-2.701–Plant investment fee
      
10-2.702–Special facilities surcharge
      
10-2.703–Fire flow surcharge
      
10-2.704–Additional charges for capital improvements
      
10-2.705–Domestic use rates
      
10-2.706–Groundwater use rates
      
10-2.707–Construction water
      
10-2.708–Unmetered water
      
10-2.709–Unauthorized use of water
      
10-2.710–Street sweeping
      
10-2.711–Service connections and meters
      
10-2.712–Miscellaneous repair and/or maintenance costs
      
10-2.713–Automatic fire sprinkler service
      
10-2.714–Service disconnections and restoration (domestic)
      
10-2.715–Miscellaneous charges
      
10-2.716–Other fees and charges covered by Council action
Article 8. Main Line Extension and Oversizing Agreements and Local Shares
      
10-2.801–Reimbursement Agreement - General
      
10-2.802–Main line extension
      
10-2.803–Oversizing agreement
Article 9. Billing and Payment
      
10-2.901–General
      
10-2.902–Due dates
      
10-2.903–Due dates for miscellaneous uses
      
10-2.904–Overpayments
      
10-2.905–Underpayments
      
10-2.906–Adjustments to water bills
      
10-2.907–Breaks in service lines: Adjustments
      
10-2.908–Liability for payment
      
10-2.909–Delinquencies: Penalties
      
10-2.910–Multiple party applications: Liability
      
10-2.911–City to use all necessary remedies
      
10-2.912–Property liens for delinquencies
      
10-2.913–Closing bills
Article 10. Groundwater Wells
      
10-2.1001–Purpose
      
10-2.1002–Definitions
      
10-2.1003–Permit required
      
10-2.1004–Application for permit
      
10-2.1005–Permit requirements and expiration
      
10-2.1006–Time to complete permitted work and satisfy permit requirements
      
10-2.1007–Guarantee of permitted work
      
10-2.1008–License and registration of persons performing permitted work
      
10-2.1009–Suspension or termination of permit
      
10-2.1010–Standards
      
10-2.1011–Log of well
      
10-2.1012–Flow prevention device
      
10-2.1013–Well seal inspection reports
      
10-2.1014–Corrective action
      
10-2.1015–Destruction of abandoned wells
      
10-2.1016–Certificate of exemption/return to active status
      
10-2.1017–Fees
      
10-2.1018–Inspection
      
10-2.1019–Misdemeanor/infractiont
      
10-2.1020–Notice of violation
      
10-2.1021-Delivery of notice
      
10-2.1022-Administrative appeals
      
10-2.1023-Abatement
      
10-2.1024-Exemption
      
10-2.1025-Aquifer protection program
      
10-2.1026-Liens applied
      
10-2.1027-Appeals
Article 11. Water Conservation
      
10-2.1101–Established conservation measures and definitions
      
10-2.1102–Application
      
10-2.1103–General prohibition: Enforcement, Penalties
      
10-2.1104–Permanent and Level 1 water conservation requirements
      
10-2.1105–Level 2 water supply shortage: conservation requirements
      
10-2.1106–Level 3 water supply shortage: water conservation measures
      
10-2.1107–Level 4 water supply shortage: water conservation measures
      
10-2.1108–Level 5 water supply shortage: water conservation measures
      
10-2.1109–Level 6 water supply shortage: water conservation measures
      
10-2.1110–Procedures for determination: notification of water supply shortage
      
10-2.1111–Waiver
      
10-2.1112–Additional water conservation measures
CHAPTER 1: WASTEWATER*
*   Chapter 1 entitled “Sewage Disposal,” consisting of Article 1 entitled
“Definitions,” Article 2 entitled “General Provisions,” Article 3 entitled
“Connections to the Sewerage System,” Article 4 entitled “Use of the Sewerage
System,” Article 5 entitled “Charges,” and Article 6 entitled “Severability,”
codified from Ordinance No. 245 §§ 1108 and 1109 T.O.O.C. as added by Ordinance
No. 250, and Ordinance Nos. 183-NS, 587-NS, 756-NS, and 791-NS, as amended by
Ordinance Nos. 152-NS, 183-NS, 297-NS, 303-NS, 309-NS, 401-NS, 492-NS, 530-NS,
543-NS, 556-NS, 576-NS, 587-NS, 596-NS, 614-NS, 618-NS, 651-NS, 664-NS, 680-NS,
685-NS, 715-NS, 731-NS, 756-NS, 760-NS, and 791-NS, repealed by Ordinance No.
827-NS, effective February 24, 1983, as amended by Ordinance Nos. 947-NS, 1059-
NS, 1091-NS, 1190-NS, 1437-NS. Subsequently repealed and replaced by Ord. 1515-
NS, eff. June 5, 2009.
Article 1. General Provisions
Sec. 10-1.101. Public Works Department and Public Works Director.
   The Public Works Department shall administer the wastewater properties,
facilities and services of the City and shall exercise the powers and perform
the duties set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.102. Service area.
   The area in which service is or will be furnished is as shown on the maps
available for inspection at the Public Works Department.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.103. City responsibility.
   The City shall exercise reasonable diligence and care to:
   (a)   Endeavor to accept, transfer, treat and dispose of authorized
wastewater flow generated within the City's service area;
   (b)   Construct, maintain and operate the City's system of collection and
transmission pipelines and wastewater treatment facilities;
   (c)   Endeavor to meet waste discharge requirements as set forth by the
Regional Water Quality Control Board.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.104. Liability limitations.
   The City shall not be liable for:
   (a)   Damages to building plumbing or premises as a result of the customer's
failure to maintain those pipes and protection devices on the customer's
service lateral or within the building;
   (b)   Interruption of service on a temporary basis wherein such interruption
is a result of repairs and/or maintenance necessary to operate the public
system;
   (c)   Damages resulting from negligence or unlawful acts of others in not
complying with provisions of the Municipal Code.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.105. Application and use of Design and Construction Standards.
   All wastewater collection and transmission pipelines and related facilities
shall be designed and constructed in complete conformity with the Wastewater
Design and Construction Standards and approved plans and specifications (as
appropriate). These standards are adopted by Council action and cover such
topics as: design criteria, materials, plan preparation, administrative
requirements, construction and testing. All engineers designing wastewater
facilities and contractors constructing such facilities shall have obtained the
Wastewater Design and Construction Standards prior to their activities.
   Wastewater facilities not covered by the Wastewater Design and Construction
Standards shall be designed and constructed in conformity with all applicable
requirements and standards of governmental agencies having jurisdiction within
the City's service area.
   The Wastewater Design and Construction Standards may be revised with such
revisions being adopted by the City Council via Council Action. Copies of the
standards are available for inspection and/or purchase at the Public Works
Department.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.106. Administration of developer projects.
   Most administration requirements are set by the Wastewater Design and
Construction Standards with fees set by Council Action. Other administrative
requirements shall be established by the Director of the Public Works
Department.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.107. General policy.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner upon public or private property any human or
animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. It shall be unlawful to
discharge to the ground or to a natural watercourse any wastewater (sewage)
including, but not limited to, any industrial wastewater or other polluted
water, in a manner that would create a hazard or nuisance or that would impair
the usefulness of ground or surface water.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.108. General connection policy.
   (a)   Each parcel of property and each house, building or dwelling unit of
separate ownership shall be provided with its own service lateral. More than
one lateral may be permitted to a building where judged necessary such as a
commercial building housing various users. The requirement for each separate
ownership unit to have its own separate lateral shall also pertain to
residential condominium conversion projects, unless otherwise approved by the
Public Works Department. Where the provision is waived, the wastewater system
must be private and must be maintained by a condominium or property owners
association.
   (b)   When property provided with a service connection is partitioned, split
or otherwise divided, the existing service connection shall be assigned to the
lot or parcel nearest the lateral unless the City determines that an alternate
assignment or location is appropriate. Additional lateral(s) shall be installed
to the other parcel(s) or building(s).
   (c)   All new subdivisions or developments requiring wastewater service
shall, unless expressly exempted by the City Council, be annexed to the City
prior to final connections to the City's wastewater system.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.109. Application of provisions.
   The provisions of this Title shall apply to all persons utilizing any of the
facilities or services of the wastewater system of the City; provided, however,
nothing contained in this Title shall be construed to prevent the City from
entering into special agreements for the disposal of wastes through the City's
wastewater facilities.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.110. Private wastewater disposal facilities: Conditions permitting.
   (a)   Where a connection to the public wastewater system is not required
under the provisions of this title, an owner, with written permission from the
Public Works Director, may construct private wastewater disposal facilities
conforming to the requirements of the Municipal Code and the City's Community
Development Department. The owner shall enter into an agreement with the City
to participate in the costs of future wastewater facilities that will serve the
property and to connect to the public main when it becomes available. Said
agreement shall be recorded against the property as notice to future owners.
   (b)   A private wastewater disposal facility shall be under the same
ownership as the property served. Neither the disposal facility nor the
property served shall be separately sold.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.111. Ambiguities.
   Any ambiguities concerning the application, meaning or intent of the
provisions of this title shall be resolved by written decision of the Public
Works Director with a copy to the City Clerk's office unless subsequent Code
revision is made or other administrative interpretation made.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.112. Other applicable codes or policies.
   The provisions of this title shall be used in conjunction with the
Wastewater Design and Construction Standards, pertinent City Council ordinances
or resolutions, other sections of the Municipal Code, as well as the codes and
policies of other public agencies having jurisdiction on a particular subject
matter. In case of conflict, the Public Works Director shall review the matter
and render a decision based upon an interpretation which is most consistent
with this Title.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Article 2. Definitions
Sec. 10-1.201. Accessible wastewater line.
   "Accessible wastewater line" means a publicly owned wastewater pipeline at a
location and depth such that the pipeline can serve a particular parcel of
property via a gravity or a pumped system. The pipeline can be either within
public right-of-way or within a wastewater easement adjacent to or within the
property.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.202. Adjusted total floor area.
   "Adjusted total for area" means the total area within the outside walls of a
building, additive for multiple floors, but with the following adjustments:
   (a)   A room or area which is predominantly used for the sheltering of motor
vehicles shall be excluded, provided it has no wastewater drain.
   (b)   An area of screened porches shall be reduced by one-half (1/2),
provided it has no wastewater drain.
   (c)   A roofed but unenclosed and un-screened area overhung by roofs shall
be included as porches, excluding, however, the roofed area determined by lines
parallel from the edge of the roof within six (6') feet horizontally therefrom.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.203. Apartment.
   "Apartment" means a room or flat occupied, or intended or designed to be
occupied, by one housekeeping unit for living and sleeping purposes and with
cooking facilities and shall include hotels and motels where the rooms are
occupied by the same tenant consecutively for a period of thirty (30) days or
more. For purposes of this Title, each separate apartment shall be treated as a
single residential unit in regard to wastewater service charges.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.204. Applicant.
   "Applicant" means a person, firm or company that submits a written
application for wastewater service.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.205. Building lateral.
   "Building lateral" means the pipe on private property connecting a building
with the service lateral on public property at the property line.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.206. City.
   For purposes of this chapter, the term "City" may be used interchangeably
with the Public Works Department.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.207. Condominium.
   "Condominium" means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided
interest in a common portion of a parcel of real property, together with a
separate interest in space in a building on such real property. A condominium
may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of such real
property.
   For the purposes of this chapter, each separate residential condominium unit
shall be treated as a single residential unit in regard to wastewater
connection and service charges. Non-residential condominiums shall be
considered on a building by building basis in regard to connection and service
charges.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.208. Condominium, Detached.
   "Condominium, Detached" means an estate in real property consisting of an
undivided interest in a common portion of a parcel of real property, together
with a separate interest in a detached building on such real property. A
detached condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other
portions of such real property.
   For the purposes of this Chapter, each separate detached condominium unit
shall be treated as a single residential unit or single commercial/industrial
entity in regard to wastewater connection and service charges.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.209. Council action.
   "Council action" means a resolution or ordinance adopted by the Thousand
Oaks City Council approving fees, charges, standards or other provisions
referenced in this Title.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.210. Customer.
   "Customer" means a person, firm or company which has an approved application
for wastewater service or who has received such service without an application.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1. 211. Domestic wastewater.
   "Domestic wastewater" means the liquid and waterborne wastes derived from,
or equivalent to, that of ordinary residential living processes and which are
of such a character as to permit satisfactory disposal, without special
treatment, into the service lateral.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.212. Dwelling unit.
   "Dwelling unit" means any residential unit including, but not limited to,
single family homes, condominiums, townhouses and mobile homes, secondary
dwelling units, apartments, congregate care facilities and motels with
kitchens.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.213. Equivalent residential unit.
   Equivalent residential unit (ERU) is a number which represents the discharge
to the wastewater system which is equal to that from an average residential
unit. One ERU is equal to 20 plumbing fixture units or the discharge of 285
gallons per day having an average strength.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.214. HCTP-NPDES Permit.
   "HCTP-NPDES Permit" shall mean the Waste Discharge Requirements (WDR) - City
of Thousand Oaks, Hill Canyon Wastewater Treatment Plant (NPDES Permit No.
CA0056294).
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.215. Local share.
   "Local share" means a contribution made by an owner or company towards an
improvement constructed by others where the parcel or property in question is
fronting said improvement and is beneficiary of that improvement.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.216. Main line extension agreements.
   "Main line extension agreements" means an agreement for extension of the
City pipeline system and may or may not involve reimbursement to the developer/
owner.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.217. Mobile home.
   "Mobile home" means a residential dwelling unit transportable in one or more
sections designed to be used with or without a foundation system. For purposes
of this Title, each separate mobile home unit shall be treated as a single
residential unit with respect to wastewater service charges.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.218. Plans.
   "Plans" refers to the drawings of wastewater facilities prepared by a
California registered Civil Engineer and approved by the Public Works
Department.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.219. Plumbing Code.
   "Plumbing Code" means the "City of Thousand Oaks Plumbing Code" as defined
in Title 8 of the City of Thousand Oaks Municipal Code.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.220. Plumbing fixture unit.
   "Plumbing Fixture Unit" is the number assigned in the Plumbing Code to the
various plumbing appurtenances. The unit count of each fixture type is as
determined in the current edition of the California Plumbing Code adopted by
the City Council using the water demand weight of fixtures. For any fixture
type not listed in the Plumbing Code, the Public Works Director shall determine
a weight in fixture units in relation to the amount contributed.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.221. Pro-rata share.
   "Pro-rata share" means a contribution made by an owner or company towards a
wastewater improvement previously constructed or being constructed by others
where the parcel or property in question is fronting said improvement and/or
benefits from the improvement.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.222. Public wastewater line or system.
   "Public wastewater line or system" refers to a main wastewater line or the
associated collection, transportation and treatment system dedicated for public
use and owned by the City and available to receive connections from buildings
or other approved sources. It shall not include the building lateral or
pretreatment facilities located on the private property.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.223. Public Works Director.
   "Public Works Director" means the Director of the Public Works Department or
an authorized representative, also referred to as the Public Works Department
when discussing wastewater matters.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.224. Reimbursement agreement.
   "Reimbursement agreement" means an agreement entered into by and between the
City and an individual or company per the provisions of this Code where the
City agrees to collect and transfer to the individual or company funds from
other benefiting properties as reimbursement for a wastewater facility
originally installed by the individual or company.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.225. Service lateral.
   "Service lateral" means the pipe designed or intended to convey wastewater
from the building lateral to the public wastewater pipeline.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.226. Service unit.
   "Service unit" is a number which results from the multiplication of the
number of equivalent residential units by the adjustment factor for the user
group to reflect the strength and volume of the discharge from that user group.
The discharge from the average residential user is defined as being equal to
one service unit.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.227. User.
   "User" means any person, firm or company who discharges or causes a
discharge of wastewater directly to a service lateral or the public wastewater
system.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.228. Wastewater.
   "Wastewater" means water which has been polluted or contaminated by use in a
residence, institution, industrial establishment, commercial business or
recreational building and shall include, but not be limited to, any wastewater
collected by the plumbing drains of any building. Also referred to as "sewage".
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.229. Wastewater connection charge.
   "Wastewater connection charge" means a charge which reflects as nearly as
possible the cost increment necessary to serve a new customer who has submitted
an application to connect to the existing wastewater system. This cost
increment represents capital costs exclusive of in-tract wastewater facilities,
such as service mains and service laterals. Capital costs include transmission
mains, pumping stations, treatment facilities and other facilities required to
provide wastewater service.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.230. Wastewater Design and Construction Standards.
   "Wastewater Design and Construction Standards" refers to those standards
governing the design and construction of wastewater facilities as adopted by
Council action and are available for inspection and/or purchase at the Public
Works Department.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.231. Wastewater main.
   "Wastewater main" means a pipeline within the wastewater system serving one
or more customers and generally being six (6") inches or larger in diameter and
located in the public right of way or easement.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.232. Wastewater service charge.
   "Wastewater service charge" means a charge which is assessed to each
property or entity with the ability to discharge wastes to the City wastewater
system. This charge covers the costs of operating and maintaining the City's
wastewater collection and treatment facilities, including administration costs,
replacement of upgraded equipment or capital facilities, and capital
improvements necessary to meet new regulatory requirements.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.233. Will-Serve letter.
   "Will-serve letter" is a document in which the Public Works Department
certifies that an applicant's property lies within the City's wastewater
service area and that the City is able to provide wastewater service to the
property, subject to certain terms, conditions and limitations. A will-serve
letter is typically not provided by the City until such time as all fees have
been paid and the terms and conditions for City service have been met to the
satisfaction of the Public Works Department.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Article 3. Classes of Service
Sec. 10-1.301. Residential service.
   Residential service is that general class of dwelling units including, but
not limited to, single-family dwellings, townhouses, condominiums, apartments
and mobile homes. Connection charges are based upon the number of residential
units. The monthly wastewater service charge is based upon the average flow
contribution from all residential users as opposed to an exact determination
for any one user or type of user.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.302. Commercial/industrial service.
   Commercial/industrial service is that general class of commercial and
industrial establishments for which service is provided and for which the
monthly service charge is based upon the number of service units multiplied by
the service unit rate. The number of service units is a composite function of
the volume of the discharged flow, the biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and
suspended solids (SS) loadings. The connection charge is based upon the number
of service units multiplied by the service unit rate.
   Special industrial waste discharge permits are required for industrial
dischargers and some commercial dischargers as determined by the Public Works
Director.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.303. Condominium Service.
   (a)   It is anticipated all newly-constructed residential condominium
complexes shall provide individual wastewater laterals to the public wastewater
system unless otherwise directed by the Public Works Director.
   (b)   Non Residential and existing residential condominium conversions shall
conform to the following provisions:
   (1)   This is the class of service furnished to properties where a one-lot
condominium map has been recorded over the subject property. All of the land
area within the boundary of the map shall be considered to be the parent
property. Each parent property shall be provided with a single wastewater
lateral connection to the public wastewater system; however, where, due to
topographic constraints, more than one lateral is determined advisable or
necessary by the Public Works Department, more laterals may be approved.
   (2)   There may be one or more buildings situated on the parent property.
Where multiple buildings exist or are proposed, at the discretion of the Public
Works Department, the wastewater mains connecting laterals to each building may
be (1) privately owned and maintained by the Property Owners Association (POA),
or (2) may be constructed to City standards and dedicated to the City for
maintenance purposes. The POA or property management firm acting on behalf of
the POA, encompassing a single building or a group of buildings on the "parent
property" shall be billed for monthly wastewater service charges of all users
within the "parent property". Each individual ownership shall be a member of
the POA.
   (3)   Where a building, or separate condominium within a building, is either
subdivided or constructed, and that building or separate condominium generates
wastewater which would be classified as industrial strength waste (§
10-1.602), said building or condominium unit shall provide a sampling well
outside the building which is readily accessible to City staff for purposes of
monitoring and sampling the contents and strengths of the wastewater being
discharged to the City's wastewater system, all pursuant to Section
10-1.605 of the City of Thousand Oaks Municipal Code.
   (4)   The POA shall enter into a binding agreement with the City, said
agreement being in the form as determined by the City, in which the POA agrees
to: (1) pay all connection fees and ongoing monthly wastewater service charges;
(2) maintain onsite wastewater mains in good working condition; (3) not
discharge substances into the wastewater system in violation of the City's
industrial waste ordinance; and (4) to pay any penalties or fines imposed by
the City or other governmental agencies for any illegal discharge.
   (5)   Each individual property's owner shall be a member of the POA.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.304. Other.
   This class of service includes any customers other than residential or
commercial/industrial users such as those persons or companies which are
allowed by permit to pump or discharge wastes into the City's public wastewater
system.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Article 4. Connection Rules
Sec. 10-1.401. General.
   Installation of a service lateral to any property and for any connection to
the public wastewater system shall only follow receipt and approval of the
application (permit) and payment of all applicable fees.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.402. Application.
   The application for wastewater service shall:
   (a)   Include the name and address of the owner;
   (b)   Include an agreement by the applicant to abide by all laws, policies
and regulations relating to the wastewater system.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.403. Requirement to apply for wastewater service.
   (a)   If wastewater service to a premises is being used, the person in
possession or person taking possession shall make a proper application to the
City for such service.
   (b)   If wastewater service is used without having made application, the
owner will be held liable for all charges for the wastewater service received
for the length of time service was provided to the property subject to
limitations by other governmental codes.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.404. Public wastewater connections: Conditions requiring.
   (a)   All tract, land division, residential, commercial, industrial and
public building projects shall connect to the public wastewater system unless
an exemption is specifically granted by the Public Works Director. Exceptions
for certain condominiums are cited in Section
10-1.303.
   (b)   Single-family residences or those buildings previously not connected
nor granted a deferral to connect to the public wastewater system shall be
required to connect if any one of the following applies:
   (1)   If any part of the parcel of property is within three hundred (300')
feet from an accessible wastewater line, all buildings on the parcel shall be
required to connect and any existing onsite private septic system shall be
abandoned;
   (2)   Within sixty (60) days after the City Council or the Public Health
Department or Public Health Officer declares a private disposal facility to be
a public nuisance. Included in this requirement shall be any cesspool or septic
tank which requires pumping in excess of three (3) times in any twelve (12)
month period or which has rising or overflowing wastewater which could cause
contamination in the groundwater or on the surface. The private disposal
facility shall then be removed or rendered inoperative and nuisance-free in
accordance with the requirements of the Ventura County Environmental Health
Department, the Plumbing Code, City of Thousand Oaks Community Development
Department and/or any other applicable law;
   (3)   Upon the sale or transfer of the property. Exceptions to rule (1)
above may be granted by the Public Works Director or the City Council under
special circumstances with such waivers being subject to (2) and (3) as well as
any other conditions deemed necessary. As a condition for granting an exception
for connection of a property or building to the public wastewater system, the
Public Works Department will require the applicant to sign an agreement or
other similar document specifying a future date and/or conditions for
connecting to the system. Such agreement or document shall be recorded upon the
property title at the Office of the Ventura County Recorder to provide
proactive title notification of this obligation to future purchasers of the
property.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.405. Independent service laterals.
   An independent service lateral shall be provided for each property, lot,
parcel, dwelling unit or other individual unit of ownership receiving service
even though the building may have common walls of construction. Exceptions for
certain condominiums are cited in Section
10-1.303.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.406. Size and location.
   The Wastewater Department reserves the right to determine the size and
location of the service lateral in relation to the boundaries and facilities of
the property to be served. Where possible, the wastewater building lateral to
the property line shall not be laid until the service lateral is installed. In
the event the building lateral is put in place prior to the time the service
lateral is installed, and its location does not correspond with that of the
service lateral, the customer shall bear the additional cost and obligation of
properly connecting the building lateral to the service lateral.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.407. Facilities responsibility.
   The installation, maintenance, repair or replacement of service laterals and
other facilities beyond the City's public main shall be solely the complete
responsibility of the property owner or property owners association. The City's
responsibility shall cease at the public main and beyond that point the
customer shall by their application for wastewater service agree to defend,
hold the City harmless and indemnify the City in the event of judgment,
including reasonable attorney's fee, for any and all claims of damage or
liability to persons or property arising occurring beyond that point.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.408. Service lateral installations.
   (a)   The costs and obligations for connection of a service lateral and for
making a connection to the public wastewater system including administration
and inspection fees shall be borne by the property owner.
   (b)   The City may install wastewater service laterals where the Public
Works Director finds that it would be in the best interest of the City and
property owners. However, normally, the Wastewater Department will allow the
installation of a service lateral by a private contractor wherein the
installation shall be made in accordance with the City's Wastewater Design and
Construction Standards. The Public Works Department shall inspect and approve
the connection of the lateral to the wastewater main line and the Community
Development Department shall inspect and approve the service lateral connection
to the building lateral prior to the backfill of such lateral installation.
   (c)   The Public Works Department shall be notified at least twenty-four
(24) business hours in advance of any connection to the wastewater system so
that inspections by the Public Works Department and the Community Development
Department may be conducted.
   (d)   All service lateral installations within the public right-of-way shall
be done in strict accordance within the requirements, as applicable, of the
City's Public Works Department including, but not limited to, those
requirements as set forth in an Encroachment Permit.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.409. Connection to public system.
   Such connections shall not be made final until the wastewater system
constructed by the private contractor has been accepted by the City, all
connections and administrative charges and fees have been paid, and the system
has been offered for dedication to the City, where applicable.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.410. Alterations to wastewater system.
   All changes to the Public Works Department's wastewater system including
changing the size of the service lateral, relocating of any facilities, raising
or lowering any facilities, etc., must be done with approval of the Public
Works Department and payment of applicable fees.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.411. Extension of wastewater system.
   The Public Works Department shall not be obligated to extend wastewater
services to those areas beyond existing City mains and/or off the public
rights-of-way.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.412. Dedication of facilities.
   As a condition precedent to receiving wastewater services for each
subdivision or parcel of land, the owner shall furnish, install and offer for
dedication to the City all necessary local system improvements as required by
the Public Works Department, designed and constructed according to the
Wastewater Design and Construction Standards and subject to approval and
acceptance by the City. Unless otherwise approved by the Public Works Director,
no occupancy of newly completed tracts or projects shall be permitted until the
City accepts such dedication and the developer has satisfied all other
applicable portions of this Code.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.413. Acceptance of wastewater facilities.
   City Council acceptance of wastewater facilities shall only follow
completion of the physical improvements as well as administrative items as
required by the Wastewater Design and Construction Standards, Municipal Code,
or as deemed necessary by the Public Works Director. Acceptance of wastewater
facilities may be delayed until substantial use is either present or
anticipated as evidenced by the construction of buildings/houses and occupancy
of those units. Acceptance may be delayed until at least seventy-five (75%)
percent of the buildings/houses are under construction or at least fifty (50%)
percent of the buildings/houses are occupied.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Article 5. Service and General Discharge Regulations
Sec. 10-1.501. General prohibitions on wastewater discharges.
   No person shall discharge or deposit, or allow to be discharged or deposited
into any opening leading to the wastewater system, any wastewater lateral, main
or other, which contains the following:
   (a)   Oils and grease. Total fat, wax, grease or oil concentrations (whether
emulsified or not) subject to the discharge limits set forth by Council Action.
   (b)   Explosive mixtures. Liquids, solids or gases which either alone or by
interaction with other substances may cause fire or explosion or may in any way
be injurious to the wastewater facilities or to the operation of the system.
Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, wastestreams with a
closed cup flash point of less than one hundred forty (140°) degrees Fahrenheit
or sixty (60°) degrees Centigrade.
   (c)   Noxious material. Noxious or malodorous solids, liquids, gases, vapors
or fumes which either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are capable
of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life, or an acute or chronic worker
health and safety problem, or may prevent entry into the public wastewater
system for maintenance or repair.
   (d)   Improperly shredded organic garbage. Organic garbage that has not been
ground or comminuted to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely
in suspension under flow conditions normally prevailing in the public
wastewater lines, with no particle greater than one-quarter (1/4") inch in mean
diameter.
   (e)   Radioactive waste. Radioactive wastes or isotopes not complying with
applicable regulations of governmental bodies.
   (f)   Solid or viscous wastes. Solid or viscous wastes which may cause
obstruction to the flow or interfere with the operation of the public
wastewater system. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to,
uncomminuted garbage, offal, earth, sand, rocks, plaster, concrete, rags,
plastics, metal filings and metal objects.
   (g)   Chemical toilets. Any discharge from a chemical toilet excepting
privately owned recreational vehicles which use nontoxic chemical agents.
   (h)   Excessive discharge rate. Quantities of pollutants or rates of flow
which overload the City's wastewater system, cause excessive City collection or
treatment costs, use a disproportionate share of the City's facilities, inhibit
or disrupt wastewater treatment operations, or cause or contribute to a
violation of any requirement of the City's HCTP-NPDES Permit. Any discharges of
flow which exceed the normal operating discharge pattern in either flow
quantity or concentration of pollutants in the discharge shall be prohibited,
unless such discharge receives prior approval in writing from the Public Works
Director.
   (i)   Toxic substances. Quantities of toxic substances identified and
regulated pursuant to the Clean Water Act discharged in concentrations in
excess of applicable pretreatment standards or the City's pollutant discharge
limits, whichever is more stringent. Wastes prohibited include those that alone
or in combination with other waste substances, may create a hazard for humans,
animals or the local environment; interfere with or disrupt wastewater
treatment processes, operations or sludge use or disposal; cause or contribute
to any violation of the City's HCTP-NPDES Permit; or cause a public nuisance or
cause any hazardous condition to occur in the wastewater system.
   (j)   Unpolluted water. Any unpolluted water including, but not limited to,
rainwater, street or yard drainage, roof drainage, swimming pool drainage,
groundwater or subsurface drainage or any other uncontaminated water
sufficiently pure so that it can be discharged into available natural water
courses or storm drains, except as approved by the Public Works Director.
   (k)   Colored material. Any waste which causes discoloration of treatment
plant effluent.
   (l)   Corrosive wastes. Any wastes which will generate abnormal sulfide
levels, cause corrosion, or deterioration in the wastewater system or injure
City personnel.
   (m)   Dilution water. Any water added for the purpose of diluting wastes
which would otherwise exceed applicable constituent concentration limitations.
   (n)   Saline wastes.
   (1)   Regenerating wastes from an ion exchange water treating device. A
self-regenerating ion exchange treating device shall not be installed,
enlarged, used or regenerated in the City or on any property connected to the
wastewater system of the City unless such a device is located on a property for
which a permit has been obtained from the Public Works Director prior to
October 10, 1969 or for which an industrial waste discharge permit has been
obtained and complied with as provided in this title. It shall be a misdemeanor
for anyone to offer home-regenerated softeners for use in the City's wastewater
service area, or to solicit an owner or occupant of a property in the City
wastewater service area to purchase such a unit, or to install a softener with
provisions for on-site regeneration except where the purchaser holds a valid
permit from the City for such installation.
   (2)   Discharges from saltwater chlorine generating swimming pools that
contain pollutants in excess of the City's HCTP-NPDES Permit as specified in
the uncodified ordinance setting fees and discharge limits for City wastewater.
   (o)   Trucked or hauled waste. Any trucked or hauled waste, except as
approved by the Public Works Director.
   (p)   Heat. Heat in amounts that will cause the temperature of the
wastewater at the treatment plant to exceed forty (40°) degrees C (one hundred
four (104°) degrees F), or interferes with the operation of the treatment plant
or the collection system.
   (q)   Others. Any wastes which may impair the collection system or treatment
process, including materials such as enzymes, bacterial agents or toxic root
control products. As specified in Section
10-1.602(s), no User shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW
any pollutant or wastewater which causes Pass Through or Interference.
   The discharge or deposit of any of the above listed substances shall be a
violation of this Code and punishable pursuant to Chapter 2, Title 1 of this
Code.
   Where any of the above pollutants, as noted in sub-paragraphs above,
contributed by users cause or significantly contribute to a recurring violation
of the City's wastewater discharge permit for its treatment facilities, the
City will ensure renewed compliance with its permit by (1) imposing specific
effluent limits on any users as appropriate; (2) making modifications to the
treatment plant's facilities or operation, or (3) a combination of the above.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.502. Reserved.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009, and repealed by § 1, Ord. 1737-NS, eff.
September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.503. Reserved.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009, and repealed by § 1, Ord. 1737-NS, eff.
September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.504. Reserved.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009, and repealed by § 1, Ord. 1737-NS, eff.
September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.505. Emergency discontinuances.
   The Public Works Department shall have the right to discontinue wastewater
service to any customer or premises or in any part of the service area as long
as necessary without notice to customers in case of emergency. In cases of
nonemergency and in cases of extensions or connections, the Public Works
Department shall make a reasonable effort to deliver a notice of the
discontinuance of service to the customer.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.506. Reserved.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009, and repealed by § 1, Ord. 1737-NS, eff.
September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.507. Right of entry.
   (a)   Authorized inspectors, agents and employees of the Public Works
Department shall have the right of entry and access, at all reasonable times,
in, to and upon any and all customers' buildings, grounds, or premises, or any
part thereof (including any and all plumbing, fixtures, or connections located,
used, maintained, or operated therein or thereon), for the purpose of:
   (1)   Determining the existence, operation, maintenance and/or use in, on or
about such buildings, grounds or premises of any plumbing which may now or
hereafter cause or create other conditions affecting, or likely to affect, the
operation of the wastewater system;
   (2)   Facilitating the enforcement, from time to time, of any and all of the
Public Works Department's applicable laws, rules and regulations and policies.
   (b)    Such authorized representatives of the City shall be furnished with,
and upon the request of any occupant or property owner, shall display,
appropriate evidence of identification.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.508. Reserved.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009, and repealed by § 1, Ord. 1737-NS, eff.
September 26, 2025)
Article 6. Sewer Use Regulations
General Provisions
Sec. 10-1.601. Purpose.
   This Article sets uniform requirements for users of the Publicly Owned
Treatment Works (POTW) for the City of Thousand Oaks (City) and enables the
City to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including, but not
limited to, the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code [USC] section 1251 et
seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (Title 40 of the Code of Federal
Regulations [40 CFR] Part 403). The purpose of this Article is:
   (a)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will
interfere with its operation;
   (b)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will pass
through the POTW inadequately treated into receiving waters, or otherwise be
incompatible with the POTW;
   (c)   To protect both POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and
sludge, and the general public;
   (d)   To promote reuse and recycling of wastewater and biosolids from the
POTW; and
   (e)   To enable the City to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permit conditions, biosolids use and disposal
requirements and any other federal or state laws to which the City or POTW is
subject.
   This Article shall apply to all Users of the POTW. This Article authorizes
the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring,
compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review
procedures; and requires User reporting.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.602. Severability.
   If any provision of this Article is invalidated by any court of competent
jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected and shall continue
in full force and effect.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.603. Administration.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, the Public Works Director (Director)
shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this Article. Any
powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Director may be delegated by the
Director to a duly authorized City employee.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.604. Abbreviations and acronyms.
   The following abbreviations, when used in this Article, shall have the
designated meanings:
   BOD      5-day biochemical oxygen demand
   BMP      Best Management Practice
   BMR      Baseline monitoring report
   CFR      Code of Federal Regulations
   CIU      Categorical industrial users
   COD      Chemical oxygen demand
   CURFFL   California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law
   FOG      Fats, Oils, and Grease
   FSE      Food Service Establishment
   gpd      Gallons per day
   IU      Industrial user
   LEL      Lower explosive limit
   mg/L      Milligrams per liter
   mgd      Million gallons per day
   NIOSH   National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health
   NPDES   National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
   NSCIU   Non-significant categorical industrial user
   O&M      Operations and maintenance
   POTW      Publicly owned treatment works
   RCRA      Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
   SIC      Standard Industrial Classification
   SIU      Significant industrial user
   SNC      Significant non-compliance
   SWDA      Solid Waste Disposal Act
   TDS      Total dissolved solids
   TSS      Total suspended solids
   TTO      Total toxic organics
   USC      United States Code
   USEPA   United States Environmental Protection Agency
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.605. Definitions.
   Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this Article, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated.
   (a)   Act or the Act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC section 1251 et seq.
   (b)   Approval Authority: California Regional Water Quality Control Board,
Los Angeles Region, Los Angeles, California.
   (c)   Authorized or Duly Authorized Representative of the User: An
Authorized Representative of a User may be:
      (1)   If the User is a corporation:
         (i)   The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
         (ii)   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management
decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having
the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure
long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can
ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather
complete and accurate information for wastewater discharge permit requirements;
and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the
manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
      (2)   If the User is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general
partner or proprietor, respectively.
      (3)   If the User is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their
designee.
      (4)   The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (3), above, may
designate a duly authorized representative if the authorization is in writing,
the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the
overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the
written authorization is submitted to the Director.
   (d)   Best Management Practice (BMP): The schedule of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to implement the prohibitions listed in Sections 10-1.606(a) and (b)
of this Article. BMPs include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and
practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste
disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
   (e)   Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation or organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
for five (5) days at twenty (20°) degrees centigrade expressed as a
concentration (e.g., milligrams per liter [mg/l]).
   (f)   Categorical Pretreatment Standards or Categorical Standards: Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by USEPA in
accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C.
section 1317) that apply to a specific category of Users and that appear in 40
CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, or as amended.
   (g)   Categorical Industrial User (CIU): Any industrial User subject to a
categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard.
   (h)   Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD): A measure of oxygen required to oxidize
all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water.
   (i)   City: The City of Thousand Oaks.
   (j)   Compliance Determination: Sampling and analysis conducted on specific
wastes to ascertain compliance with this Article.
   (k)   Compliance Period: The time period allowed by the City in which a User
shall comply with permit conditions or discharge requirements.
   (l)   Composite Sample: A sample resulting from the combination of
individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment
of either flow or time.
   (m)   Daily Maximum: The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a
pollutant collected during a calendar day.
   (n)   Daily Maximum Limit: The maximum allowable discharge limit of a
pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in
units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course
of the day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a
concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the
pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day.
   (o)   Director: The Public Works Director of the City of Thousand Oaks.
   (p)   Domestic wastewater: Liquid or water-borne waste derived from or
equivalent to that of ordinary residential living processes.
   (q)   Existing Source: Any source of discharge that is a not a New Source.
   (r)   Fats, Oils, and Grease (FOG): Any substance such as vegetable or
animal product that is used in, or is a byproduct of, the cooking for food
preparation process, and that turns or may turn viscous or solidifies with a
change in temperature or other conditions.
   (s)   Food Service Establishment (FSE): Facilities defined in California
Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law (CURFFL), California Health and Safety Code
Section 113785 et seq., as amended from time to time, and any commercial entity
within the boundaries of the City, operating in a permanently constructed
structure such as a room, building or place, or portion thereof, maintained,
used or operated for the purpose of storing, preparing, serving, or
manufacturing, packaging, or otherwise handling food for sale to other
entities, or for consumption by the public, its members or employees, and which
has any process or device that uses or produces FOG, or grease vapors, steam,
fumes, smoke or odors.
   (t)   Grab Sample: A sample which is taken from a waste stream without
regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period not to exceed fifteen
(15) minutes.
   (u)   Grease Interceptor: A multi-compartment device that is constructed and
generally required to be located, according to the California Plumbing Code,
underground between an FSE and the connection to the sanitary sewer system.
These devices primarily use gravity to separate FOG from wastewater as it moves
from one compartment to the next.
   (v)   Grease Trap: A grease control device, including at least one removable
lid for access, inspection, and maintenance, that is used to serve individual
fixtures, including by way of example sinks, and is designed to remove or trap
FOG while allowing the balance of waste to discharge to the sanitary sewer
system by gravity.
   (w)   Indirect Discharge or Discharge: The introduction of pollutants into
the POTW from any non-domestic source.
   (x)   Industrial Wastewater or Waste: Wastewater excluding domestic and
pollutant-free wastewater that includes, but is not limited to, wastewater from
any producing, manufacturing, processing, institutional, commercial,
agricultural, or other operation which contains characteristics unlike that of
domestic wastewater.
   (y)   Instantaneous Limit: The maximum concentration or load of a pollutant
allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any
discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the flow rate and the
duration of the sampling event.
   (z)   Interference: A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its
treatment processes or operations, or its sludge treatment processes, use or
disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the City’s NPDES permit
(including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the
prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the
following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder
the, or any more stringent state or local regulations: section 405 of the Clean
Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), including Title II commonly
referred to a Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state
regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to
Subtitle D of SWDA; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and
the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
   (aa)   Local Limit: Specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the
City upon users to implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions
listed in 40 CFR Part 403.5(a)(1) and (b).
   (bb)   Mass Emission Rate: The weight of materials discharged to the POTW
over a time interval. Unless otherwise specified, the mass emission rate shall
mean pounds per day of a particular pollutant or combination of pollutants.
   (cc)   Medical Waste: Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and
blood byproducts, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, fomites, etiological
agents, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated
laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.
   (dd)   Monthly Average: The sum of all daily discharges measured during a
calendar month divided by the number of daily discharges measured during that
month.
   (ee)   Monthly Average Limit: The highest allowable average of daily
discharges over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all daily discharges
measured during a calendar month divided by the number of daily discharges
measured during that month.
   (ff)   National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit: A
permit issued to the City pursuant to section 402 of the Clean Water Act that
regulates operations of the POTW and discharge of treated effluent to Waters of
the United States.
   (gg)   New Source:
      (1)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there
is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants and was constructed after the
publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the
Clean Water Act that will be applicable to such source if said standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
         (i)   The building, structure, facility, or installation is
constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or
         (ii)   The building, structure, facility, or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
         (iii)   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, shall
be considered.
      (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the
criteria of section (gg)(1)(ii) or (gg)(1)(iii) above but otherwise alters,
replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.
      (3)   Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
         (i)   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite
construction program:
            (aa)   Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
            (bb)   Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which
is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source
facilities or equipment; or
         (ii)   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation
within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be
terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility,
engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation
under this paragraph.
   (hh)   Noncontact Cooling Water: Water used for cooling which does not come
into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product,
or finished product.
   (ii)   Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User (NSCIU): a CIU that never
discharges more than one hundred (100) gpd of total categorical wastewater
(excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater),
unless specifically included in the pretreatment standard and the following
conditions are met:
      (1)   The User, prior to the City’s finding, has consistently complied
with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards and requirements;
      (2)   The User annually submits the certification statement required in
Section 10-1.643(b) of this Article together with any additional information
necessary to support the certification statement; and
      (3)   The User never discharges any untreated concentrated wastewater.
   (jj)   Pass Through: A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of
any requirement of the City’s NPDES permit, including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation.
   (kk)   Person: An individual, firm, partnership, or corporation, and their
heirs, assigns or agents.
   (ll)   pH: The measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution expressed
in standard units.
   (mm)   Pollutant: Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes,
industrial wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked
or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, agricultural and industrial
wastes, and the characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, total
suspended solids [TSS], turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, odor).
   (nn)   Pretreatment: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to or in lieu of introducing such pollutants into a
POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or
biological processes, process changes, or other means, except by diluting the
concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment
standard.
   (oo)   Pretreatment Requirements: Any substantive or procedural requirement
related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard, imposed on a User.
   (pp)   Pretreatment Standards: Prohibited standards, categorical
pretreatment standards, and local limits.
   (qq)   Prohibited Discharge Standards: Absolute prohibitions against the
discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in Section 10-1.606
of this Article.
   (rr)   Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW): A treatment works, as defined
by section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. section 1292), which is owned by the City.
This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage,
treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes
of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes, and other conveyances only
if they convey wastewater to a wastewater treatment plant.
   (ss)   Septic Tank Waste: Any sewage from holding tanks, such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
   (tt)   Sewage: Human excrement and gray water (household showers,
dishwashing operations, etc.).
   (uu)   Significant Industrial User (SIU): Except as provided in paragraphs
(3) below or (ii) above, an SIU is:
      (1)   A User subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
      (2)   Any User that:
         (i)   Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons
per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary,
noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); or
         (ii)   Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five (5)
percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the
wastewater treatment plant; or
         (iii)   Is designated as such by the City on the basis that it has
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
         (iv)   Is not a NSCIU as defined in paragraph (ii).
      (3)   Upon a finding that a User meeting the criteria in subsection (2)
above has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation
or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the City may at any
time on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from an
industrial user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR Part 403.8(f)(6),
determine that such user should not be considered an SIU.
   (vv)   Slug Load or Slug Discharge: Any discharge at a flow rate or
concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge
standards in Section 10-1.606 of this Article. A slug discharge is any
discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an
accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge, which has a reasonable
potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate
the City’s regulations, local limits, or NPDES permit conditions.
   (ww)   Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code: A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the U.S.
Office of Management and Budget.
   (xx)   Stormwater: Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting from such precipitation including snowmelt.
   (yy)   Total Dissolved Solids (TDS): Matter dissolved in water that will
pass through a filter.
   (zz)   Total Suspended Solids (TSS): The total suspended matter that floats
on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and
which is removable by laboratory filtering.
   (aaa)   United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA): The United
States Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate, the Regional
Water Management Division Director, the Regional Administrator, or other duly
authorized official of said agency.
   (bbb)   User: A source of indirect discharge including an industrial user.
   (ccc)   Wastewater: Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage
from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.
   (ddd)   Wastewater Treatment Plant: That portion of the POTW which is
designed to provide treatment of sewage and industrial waste. For the City,
this is the Hill Canyon Treatment Plant.
   (eee)   Waters of the State: All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, water
courses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems,
drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface, or
underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained
within, flow through, or border upon the State or any portion thereof.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
General Sewer Use Requirements
Sec. 10-1.606. Prohibited discharge standards.
   (a)   General Prohibitions: No User shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes Pass Through
or Interference. These general prohibitions apply to all Users of the POTW
whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any
other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
   (b)   Specific Prohibitions: No User shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW the following:
      (1)   Pollutants, substances, or wastewater that alone or in conjunction
with other pollutants, substances, or wastewater, which create a fire or
explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with
a closed-cup flashpoint of less than one hundred and forty (140) degrees
Fahrenheit (sixty [60] degrees Celsius) using the test methods specified in 40
CFR Part 261.21. Closed-cup flashpoint values may be found in the National
Institute of Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) Pocket Guide to Chemical
Hazards.
      (2)   Wastewater having a pH of less than 6.0 standard units or greater
than 11.5 standard units, or otherwise cause corrosive structural damage to the
POTW or equipment.
      (3)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction
of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case solids
greater than one-quarter (0.25) inch in mean diameter.
      (4)   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference
with the POTW.
      (5)   Wastewater having a temperature greater than one hundred and forty
(140) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty [60] degrees Celsius), or which will inhibit
biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no
case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the
treatment plant to exceed one hundred and four (104) degrees Fahrenheit (forty
[40] degrees Celsius).
      (6)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through.
      (7)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems.
      (8)   Trucked or hauled pollutants, substances, or wastewater, except at
discharge points designated by the Director in accordance with Section 10-1.612
of this Article.
      (9)   Noxious or malodorous solids, liquids, gases, vapors, or fumes,
which either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are capable of
creating a public nuisance, hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the POTW
for maintenance or repair.
      (10)   Regenerating wastes from an ion exchange water treatment device. A
self-regenerating ion exchange treatment device shall not be installed,
enlarged, used, or regenerated in the City or on any property connected to the
POTW of the City unless such a device is located on a property for which a
permit has been obtained from the City prior to October 10, 1969 or for which a
wastewater discharge permit has been obtained and complied with as provided in
this Article. It shall be a misdemeanor for anyone to offer home-regenerated
softeners for use in the City’s wastewater service area or to solicit an owner
or occupant of a property in the City’s wastewater service area to purchase
such a unit, or to install a softener with provisions for on-site regeneration
except where the purchaser holds a valid permit from the City for such
installation.
      (11)   Discharges from saltwater or chlorine generating swimming pools
that contain pollutants in excess of the City’s NPDES permit as specified in
the uncodified ordinance setting fees and discharge limits for wastewater.
      (12)   Radioactive wastes or isotopes not complying with applicable
federal and state regulations.
      (13)   Discharge from a chemical toilet except privately-owned
recreational vehicles that use non-toxic chemical agents.
      (14)   Quantities of pollutants or rates of flow which overload the POTW,
cause excessive City collection and/or treatment costs, use a disproportionate
share of the City’s facilities, inhibit or disrupt wastewater treatment
operations, or cause or contribute to a violation of any requirement of the
City’s NPDES permit. Any discharges of flow that exceed normal operating
discharge pattern in either volume or concentration of pollutants in the
discharge shall be prohibited unless such discharge receives prior approval
from the Director.
      (15)   Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, non-contact
cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater unless specifically authorized by the
Director.
      (16)   Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited, to dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color on the POTW’s effluent,
thereby violating the City’s NPDES permit.
      (17)   Waste from septic tanks and cesspool cleaning.
      (18)   Waste from garbage grinders except when generated in preparation
of food in a residence.
   Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section, shall not
be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the
POTW.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.607. National categorical pretreatment standards.
   Users must comply with the categorical pretreatment standards found at 40
CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, or as amended.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.608. State pretreatment standards.
   Users must comply with applicable state pretreatment standards (California
Water Code 13370.5).
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.609. Local limits.
   The City is authorized to establish local discharge limits pursuant to 40
CFR Part 403.5(c) to protect against Pass Through and Interference. The City
Council adopts local limits by resolution. Local limit concentrations apply at
the point where the waste is discharged into the POTW. The City may impose
limitations on the mass emission rates in addition to or in place of the
concentration-based limitations.
   The City may develop BMPs by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits,
to implement local limits and the requirements of this section.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.610. City’s right of revision.
   The City reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater
discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to
the POTW consistent with the purpose of this Article.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.611. Dilution.
   No User shall increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to
dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment
to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized
by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The City may impose
limitations on mass emission rates on Users found to be using dilution to meet
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the
imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.612. Hauled or trucked waste.
   Hauled or trucked waste shall not be accepted into the POTW without written
approval from the Director. The Director may require that the waste hauler
obtain a wastewater discharge permit prior to discharging waste to the POTW.
Hauled or trucked waste may only be discharged at specified locations pursuant
to the written approval. The Director may require sampling of hauled or trucked
waste prior to disposal to ensure compliance with applicable standards. Hauled
and trucked waste operators must provide a waste-tracking form for every load.
This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the waste
hauler, City permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of
sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste constituents, and
whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes or hazardous waste as defined in
22 CCR section 66261.3.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Pretreatment of Wastewater
Sec. 10-1.613. Pretreatment facilities.
   Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this
Article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set forth in Section
10-1.606 of this Article within the time limitations specified by USEPA, the
State, or the City, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for
compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the User’s expense.
Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be
submitted to the City for review; and shall be approved by the Director before
such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating
procedures shall in no way relieve the User from the responsibility of
modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the
City under the provisions of this Article.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.614. Interceptors, clarifiers and traps.
   Interceptors, clarifiers and traps shall be required for the following
facilities generating sand/silt/solids and FOG.
   (a)   Facilities required to install interceptors, clarifiers or traps
include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Food Service Establishments (FSEs). An FSE or other establishment
discharging wastewater containing FOG shall install and regularly maintain an
interceptor or trap to prevent excessive discharges of FOG into the POTW. The
type and size shall be regulated by the building provisions of the Municipal
Code or as required by the City.
      (2)   Vehicle Service Stations or Garages. Service stations or garages
with non-domestic fixtures or floor drains connected to the POTW shall be
required to install and regularly maintain a clarifier designed to prevent the
discharge of sand, silt, oil and grease to the POTW. The type and size shall be
regulated by the building provisions of the Municipal Code or as required by
the City.
      (3)   Other facilities deemed to require an interceptor, clarifier or
trap by the City.
   (b)   If a required interceptor, clarifier or trap is incapable of
adequately retaining sand/silt/solids or FOG in wastewater discharged into the
POTW, the City may require that the owner install a new interceptor, clarifier
or trap within sixty (60) days to meet discharge requirements.
   (c)   Any required interceptor, clarifier or trap shall be readily
accessible with at least one inspection hatch and properly maintained by the
property owner, operator, and/or occupant to assure that the accumulations of
sand/silt/solids and FOG do not impair the efficiency of or exit the
interceptor, clarifier or trap in concentrations exceeding discharge
limitations. All required interceptors, clarifiers or traps shall have a record
of every time it was cleaned. This record shall include the date, name of the
pumper or person who cleaned it, state registration number, and the signature
of the person responsible for the facility and shall be reviewed by the City
during each inspection. An interceptor, clarifier or trap shall not be
considered properly maintained if sand/silt/solids and/or FOG accumulations
total more than twenty-five (25%) percent of the operating fluid capacity. If
it is found that an interceptor, clarifier or trap is improperly maintained or
adequate records are not being kept, the City may conduct enforcement according
to Section
10-1.646 through Section
10-1.657 of this Article.
   (d)   An existing interceptor, clarifier or trap legally and properly
installed at a vehicle service station, car wash establishment, or FSE shall be
acceptable provided it is capable of removing sand/silt/solids and FOG so that
the discharge does not exceed the limitations adopted by the City Council and
is installed such that it can be inspected and properly maintained.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.615. Additional pretreatment measures.
   (a)   Whenever deemed necessary, the City may require Users to restrict
their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be
discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of
discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and
such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the
User’s compliance with the requirements of this Article.
   (b)   The City may require any person discharging into the POTW to install
and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and
flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge
permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.616. Accidental discharge/slug discharge control plans.
   The Director shall evaluate whether each SIU needs an accidental discharge/
slug discharge control plan or other action to control slug discharges. The
Director may require any User to develop, submit for approval, and implement
such a plan or take other such action that may be necessary to control slug
discharges. Any required accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan shall
include, at a minimum, the following:
   (a)   Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges;
   (b)   Description of stored chemicals;
   (c)   Procedures for immediately notifying the Director of any accidental or
slug discharge as required by Section
10-1.634 of this Article; and
   (d)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.617. Wastewater analysis.
   When requested by the Director in writing, a User must submit information on
the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within thirty (30) days of the
request. The Director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may
periodically require Users to update this information.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.618. Wastewater discharge permit requirements.
   (a)   The following categories of Users must obtain a wastewater discharge
permit prior to discharging into the POTW:
      (1)   Tier I Significant Industrial Users – SIUs are defined in Section
10-1.605(tt) of this Article;
      (2)   Tier II Non-Significant Industrial Users – Non-SIUs are defined as
any user that meets any of the following criteria:
         (i)   Is not required to obtain a Tier I permit; or
         (ii)   Has discharge characteristics greater than domestic wastewater;
or
         (iii)   Discharges industrial or commercial wastewater which may have
the potential to impact the POTW; or
         (iv)   Has reasonable potential to violate any local limit,
pretreatment standard, or pretreatment requirement;
      (3)   Tier III Temporary Wastewater Dischargers – Temporary wastewater
dischargers are defined as users that require permission to temporarily
discharge into the POTW. Examples of temporary dischargers include, but are not
limited to, dewatering operations and groundwater remediation sites.
   (b)   The Director may require the following categories of Users to obtain a
wastewater discharge permit prior to discharging into the POTW:
      (1)   Tier IV Food Service Establishments – FSEs are defined in Section
10-1.605(s) of this Article.
      The Director may require any User to obtain a wastewater discharge permit
as necessary to carry out the purposes of this Article. Any violation of the
terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a
violation of this Article and shall subject the permittee to the sanctions set
out in Section
10-1.646 through Section
10-1.657 of this Article. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not
relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state
pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of
federal, state, and local law.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.619. Wastewater discharge permitting: existing connections.
   Any User required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit under this Article
who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of
this Article and who wishes to continue such discharges shall within sixty (60)
days of said date, apply to the Director for a wastewater discharge permit in
accordance with Section
10-1.621 of this Article. Such Users shall not cause or allow discharges to the
POTW to continue after sixty (60) days of the effective date of this Article
except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the Director.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.620. Wastewater discharge permitting: new connections.
   Any User required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to
begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to
the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. The application for the
wastewater discharge permit must be filed at least ninety (90) days prior to
the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.621. Wastewater discharge permit application contents.
   (a)   All Users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit
a permit application. The Director shall require Users to submit the following
relevant information as part of a permit application.
      (1)   Identifying information.
         (i)   The name and address of the facility, including the name of the
operator and owner as well as landowner;
         (ii)   Contact information, facilities, and plant production processes
on the premises;
      (2)   Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility;
      (3)   Description of operations.
         (i)   A brief description of the nature, average rate of production
(including each product produced by type, amount, process, and rate of
production), and standard industrial classification(s) of the operation(s)
carried out by the User. This description must include a schematic process
diagram, which indicates the point(s) of discharge into the POTW from the
regulated processes.
         (ii)   Types of waste generated, and a list of all raw materials and
chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or
intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;
         (iii)   Number and type of employees, hours of operation (or proposed
hours of operation);
         (iv)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum
per day);
         (v)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and
details to show all sewer, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location,
and elevation, and all point(s) of discharge;
      (4)   Time and duration of discharges;
      (5)   The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the permit;
      (6)   Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily
and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day (gpd), to the POTW from regulated
processes streams and other streams as necessary.
      (7)   Measurement of pollutants.
         (i)   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process and any new categorically regulated processes for existing
sources.
         (ii)   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration and/or mass, where required by the pretreatment standard or by
the City, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process.
         (iii)   Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average
concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported.
         (iv)   The sample shall be representative of daily operations and
shall be sampled and analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in Sections
10-1.638 and
10-1.639 of this Article. Where the pretreatment standard requires compliance
with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the User shall submit
documentation as required by the City or the applicable pretreatment standards
to determine compliance with the pretreatment standard.
      (8)   Any requests for a monitoring waiver (or a renewal of an approved
monitoring waiver) for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present
in the discharge based on Section
10-1.632(b) of this Article (40 CFR Part 403.12(e)(2)).
      (9)   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the Director to
evaluate the permit application.
   (b)   All wastewater discharge permit applications must be signed by an
Authorized Representative of the User and contain the certification in Section
10-1.643(a) of this Article. If the Authorized Representative of the User has
changed, the new written authorization must be submitted to the Director prior
to or together with any report requiring signature of the Authorized
Representative.
   (c)   Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will
be returned to the User for revision.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.622. Wastewater discharge permit decisions.
   The Director will evaluate the data furnished by the User and may require
additional information. Within sixty (60) days of the receipt of a complete
permit application, the Director will determine whether to issue a wastewater
discharge permit. The Director may deny any application for a wastewater
discharge permit based on the information provided on the application.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.623. Wastewater discharge permit duration.
   A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period,
not to exceed five (5) years from the effective date of the permit. A
wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five (5) years
at the discretion of the Director. Permit duration shall be dependent upon
User-specific criteria. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a
specific date upon which it will expire.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.624. Wastewater discharge permit contents.
   A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as deemed
reasonably necessary by the City to prevent pass through or interference,
protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant’s effluent,
protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal,
and protect against damage to the POTW.
   (a)   Wastewater discharge permits shall contain:
      (1)   A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit issuance
date, expiration date, and effective date.
      (2)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable.
      (3)   Effluent limits, including BMPs, based on applicable pretreatment
standards.
      (4)   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and
recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification
of pollutants (or BMP) to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency,
and sample type based on federal, state, and local law.
      (5)   The process for seeking a waiver from monitoring for a pollutant
neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge in accordance with
Section
10-1.632(b) of this Article.
      (6)   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance
beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law.
      (7)   Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the City
to be necessary.
      (8)   A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all
applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which
become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit.
      (9)   Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the City must be included as
a condition in the User’s permit.
   (b)   Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to,
the following conditions:
      (1)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization.
      (2)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to
reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW.
      (3)   Requirements for the development and implementation of spill
control plans or other special conditions including management practices
necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine
discharges.
      (4)   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW.
      (5)   The unit charge or schedule of User charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW.
      (6)   Requirements for the installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment, including flow measurement devices.
      (7)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the City to ensure
compliance with this Article and state and federal laws, rules, and
regulations.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.625. Wastewater discharge permit modification.
   The City may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including,
but not limited to, the following reasons:
   (a)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
   (b)   To address significant alterations or additions to the User’s
operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of the
wastewater discharge permit;
   (c)   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
   (d)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge permit poses a
threat to the City’s POTW, personnel, or the receiving waters;
   (e)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge
permit;
   (f)   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; or
   (g)   To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge
permit.
   Users shall be notified thirty (30) days prior to implementation of such
modification, except in such emergency situations as would require immediate
implementation.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.626. Wastewater discharge permit transfer.
   Any attempt to transfer, assignment, or other alteration shall render the
wastewater discharge permit void. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a
specific User for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not
be reassigned, transferred, or sold, to a new owner, new User, new operator,
different premise, or a new or changed operation.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.627. Wastewater discharge permit revocation.
   The City may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including,
but not limited to, the following reasons:
   (a)   Failure to notify the Director of significant changes to the
wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
   (b)   Failure to provide prior notification to the Director of changed
conditions pursuant to Section
10-1.633 of this Article;
   (c)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application;
   (d)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports and/or certification statements;
   (e)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
   (f)   Refusing to allow the City timely access to the facility premises and/
or records;
   (g)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
   (h)   Failure to pay fines;
   (i)   Failure to pay sewer charges;
   (j)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
   (k)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge
permit application; or
   (l)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of
the wastewater discharge permit or this Article.
   All wastewater discharge permits are void upon the issuance of a new
wastewater discharge permit to that User.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.628. Wastewater discharge permit reissuance.
   A User with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for a permit
reissuance by submitting a complete application in accordance with Section
10-1.621 of this Article. The wastewater discharge permit application shall be
submitted a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the User’s
existing wastewater discharge permit.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Reporting Requirements
Sec. 10-1.629. Baseline monitoring reports.
   Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a
categorical pretreatment standard or final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 CFR Part 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later,
existing CIUs currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW
shall submit to the Director, a report containing information listed below.
   At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new
sources and sources that become CIUs subsequent to the promulgation of an
applicable standard, shall submit to the Director a report which contains the
information listed below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment
it intends to use to meet the applicable categorical standards. A new source
also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to
be discharged.
   Users described in the preceding paragraphs shall submit the information set
forth below.
   (a)   All information required in Sections 10-1.621(a)(1)(aa), 10-1.621(a)
(2), 10-1.621(a)(3)(aa), and 10-1.621(a)(6) of this Article.
   (b)   Measurement of pollutants.
      (1)   The User shall provide the information required in Section 10-1.621
(a)(7) of this Article.
      (2)   The User shall take a minimum of one (1) representative sample to
compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this paragraph.
      (3)   Samples shall be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment
facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process
if no pretreatment exists.
      (4)   Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with Section
10-1.638 of this Article.
      (5)   The Director may allow the submission of a baseline report which
utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information
sufficient to determine the need for pretreatment measures.
      (6)   The baseline report shall indicate the time, date, and place of
sampling and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and
analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant
discharges to the POTW.
   (c)   Compliance Certification. A statement, reviewed by the User’s
Authorized Representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating
whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and if not,
whether additional operations and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
   (d)   Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the
User will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M must be provided. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule
pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set forth in Section 10-
1.630 of this Article.
   (e)   Signature and Report Certification. All baseline monitoring reports
must be certified in accordance with Section 10-1.643(a) of this Article and
signed by an Authorized Representative of the User.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.630. Compliance schedule progress reports.
   The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by
Section
10-1.629(d) of this Article:
   (a)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction
and operation of additional pretreatment required for the User to meet
applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components,
commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine
operation);
   (b)   No increment referred to in a paragraph (a) shall exceed nine (9)
months;
   (c)   The User shall submit a progress report to the Director no later than
fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date of
compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps
being taken by the User to return to the established schedule; and
   (d)   In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such
progress reports to the Director.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.631. Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard
deadline.
   Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any
User subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the
Director a report containing the information in Sections
10-1.621(a)(6),
10-1.621(a)(7), and
10-1.629(b)(2) of this Article. All compliance reports must be signed and
certified in accordance with Section
10-1.643(a) of this Article. All sampling will be done in conformance with
Section
10-1.638 of this Article.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.632. Periodic compliance reports.
   (a)   Except as specified in Section
10-1.632(c) of this Article, all Users must, at a frequency determined by the
Director stated in the wastewater discharge permit, submit no less than twice
per year (e.g., July and January) reports indicating the nature, concentration
of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and
the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting
period. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a BMP
or pollution prevention alternative, the User must submit documentation
required by the Director or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine
the compliance status of the User.
   (b)   The City may authorize a User subject to a categorical pretreatment
standard to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated by a categorical
pretreatment standard if the User has demonstrated through previous sampling
and other technical factors that the pollutant is neither present nor expected
to be present in the discharge, or is present only at background levels from
intake water and without any increase in the pollutant due to activities of the
User. This authorization is subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   The waiver may be authorized where a pollutant is determined to be
present solely due to sanitary wastewater discharged from the facility provided
that the sanitary wastewater is not regulated by an applicable categorical
standard and otherwise includes no process wastewater.
      (2)   The monitoring waiver is only valid for the duration of the
effective period of the wastewater discharge permit, but in no case longer than
five (5) years. The User must submit a new request for the waiver for each
subsequent wastewater discharge permit.
      (3)   In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the User
must provide data from at least one sampling of the facility’s process
wastewater prior to any treatment present at the facility that is
representative of all wastewater from all processes.
      (4)   The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed by a Duly
Authorized Representative of the User and include the certification statement
in Section
10-1.643(c) of this Article.
      (5)   Non-detectable sample results may be used only as a demonstration
that pollutant is not present if the USEPA approved method from 40 CFR Part 136
with the lowest minimum detection level for that pollutant was used in the
analysis.
      (6)   Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the City must be included as
a condition in the User’s wastewater discharge permit. The reasons supporting
the waiver and any information submitted by the User in its request for the
waiver must be maintained by the City for three (3) years after expiration of
the waiver.
      (7)   Upon approval of the monitoring waiver and revision to the User’s
wastewater discharge permit by the City, the User must certify on each report
with the statement in Section
10-1.643(c) below that there has been no increase in the pollutant in its
wastestream due to activities of the User.
      (8)   In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or
expected to be present because of changes that occur in the User’s operations,
the User must immediately: notify the Director and comply with permit
monitoring requirements or other more frequent requirements imposed by the
City.
      (9)   This provision does not supersede certification processes and
requirements established in categorical pretreatment standards, except as other
specified in the categorical pretreatment standard.
   (c)   The City may reduce the requirement for periodic compliance reports to
a requirement to report no less frequently than once per year, unless required
more frequently by the pretreatment standard or by USEPA, where the User’s
total categorical wastewater flow does not exceed any of the following:
      (1)   Five thousand (5,000) gallons per day as measured by a continuous
effluent flow monitoring device unless the User discharges in batches;
      (2)   0.01 percent of the design dry weather organic treatment capacity
of the wastewater treatment plant;
      (3)   0.01 percent of the maximum allowable headworks loading for any
pollutant regulated by the applicable categorical pretreatment standard for
which approved local limits were developed in accordance with Section
10-1.609 of this Article.
   Reduced reporting is not available to Users that have in the last two (2)
years been in significant non-compliance. In addition, reduced reporting is not
available to a User with daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant
levels that vary so significantly that decreasing the reporting requirement for
this User would result in data that are not representative of conditions
occurring during the reporting period.
   (d)   All periodic compliance reports must be signed by the Authorized
Representative of the User and certified with the statement found in Section
10-1.643(a) of this Article.
   (e)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the User’s discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly
operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The
failure of a User to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall
not be grounds for the User to claim that sample results are not representative
of its discharge.
   (f)   If a User subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more
frequently than required by the City, using the procedures prescribed in
Section
10-1.638 of this Article, the results of this monitoring shall be included in
the report.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.633. Reports of changed conditions.
   A User must notify the Director of any significant changes to the User’s
operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its
wastewater at least thirty (30) days before the change.
   (a)   The Director may require the User submit such information as may be
deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of
a wastewater discharge permit application.
   (b)   The Director may issue a wastewater discharge permit or modify an
existing wastewater discharge permit in response to the changed conditions or
anticipated changed conditions.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.634. Reports of potential problems.
   (a)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a
noncustomary batch discharge, a slug discharge or slug load, that might cause
potential problems for the POTW, the User shall telephone and notify the
Director of the incident within twenty-four (24) hours. This notification shall
include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume,
if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.
   (b)   Within five (5) days following such discharge, the User shall, unless
waived by the Director, submit a detailed written report describing the cause
(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the User to prevent
similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the User of any
expense, loss, damage, or other liability which might be incurred as a result
of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or
property; nor shall such notification relieve the User of any fines, penalties,
or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this Article.
   (c)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the User’s bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a
discharge described in Section
10-1.634(a). Employers shall ensure that all employees, who cause such a
discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedures.
   (d)   SIUs are required to notify the Director immediately of any changes at
its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.635. Reports from unpermitted users.
   All Users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide
appropriate reports to the Director as may be required.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.636. Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting.
   If sampling performed by a User indicates a violation, the User must notify
the Director within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation.
The User shall also repeat the sampling and analysis at the frequency stated in
the wastewater discharge permit and submit the results of the repeat analysis
to the Director within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.637. Notification of discharge of hazardous waste.
   (a)   Any User that commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify
the Director, the USEPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and
California hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the
POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste
under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous
waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the USEPA hazardous waste number, and
the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the User discharges
more than one hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the
POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information: an
identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an
estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste
stream discharged during the calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of
constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following
twelve (12) months. All notifications must take place no later than one hundred
and eighty (180) days after the discharge commences. Any notification under
this paragraph needs to be submitted only once for each hazardous waste
discharged. However, notification of changed conditions must be submitted under
Section
10-1.633 of this Article. The notification requirement in this section does not
apply to pollutants already reported by Users subject to pretreatment standards
under the self-monitoring requirements of Sections
10-1.629,
10-1.631, and
10-1.632 of this Article.
   (b)   Discharges are exempt from the requirements of Section 10-1.637(a) of
this Article, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than
fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR Parts 261.30(d) and 261.33(e).
Discharge of more than fifteen (15) kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in
a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in
40 CFR Parts 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification.
Subsequent months during which the User discharges more than such quantities of
any hazardous waste do not require additional notification.
   (c)   In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the User must notify the Director,
the USEPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and California
hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety
(90) days of the effective date of such regulations.
   (d)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the User
shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity
of hazardous wastes generated.
   (e)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this Article, a permit issued
thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.638. Analytical requirements.
   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as
part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed
in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments
thereto, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment
standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques
for the pollutant in question, or where USEPA determines that 40 CFR Part 136
sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in
question, sampling and analyses shall be performed by using validated
analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures,
including procedures suggested by the Director or other parties approved by
USEPA.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.639. Sample collection.
   Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be obtained through
appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the
report and representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period.
   (a)   Except as indicated in Sections
10-1.639(a) and (b) of this Article, the User must collect wastewater samples
using 24-hour flow-proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time-
proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the City.
Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by
the City, the samples must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols
(including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and
appropriate USEPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during the 24-hour
period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total
phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the
field; for volatile organic compounds and oil and grease, the samples may be
composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected
by the compositing procedures as documented in approved USEPA methodologies may
be authorized by the City, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be
required to demonstrate compliance with instantaneous limits.
   (b)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols,
sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection
techniques.
   (c)   For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and ninety
(90)-day compliance reports, a minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used
for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organic
compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for
facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the City may
authorize a lower minimum.
   For reports required by Sections
10-1.629 and
10-1.631 of this Article, the User is required to collect the number of grab
samples necessary to assess and assure compliance with the applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.640. Date of receipt of reports.
   Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports, which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt by
the Director of the report shall govern.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.641. Recordkeeping.
   Users subject to the reporting requirements of this Article shall retain,
and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information
obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this Article, any
additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities
undertaken by the User independent of such requirements, and documentation
associated with BMPs. Records shall include: the date, exact place, method, and
time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates
analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical technique
(s) or method(s) used; and the results of these analyses. Records must be
maintained for a minimum of three (3) years. These records shall remain
available for the duration of any litigation concerning the User or the City,
or where the User has been specifically notified of a longer retention period
by the Director.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.642. Confidential information.
   Information and data on a User obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater
discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring
programs, and from the City’s inspection and sampling activities shall be made
available to the public without restriction as required by law, unless the User
is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City, that the release of
such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production
entitled to protection as trade secrets as an exemption to release under
applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of
submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the
User furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the
portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes
shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made
available immediately upon request to government agencies for uses related to
the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report. If City withholds such information
and suit is filed to obtain such information, User shall defend City in any
litigation. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent
data, as defined in 40 CFR Part 2.302, shall not be recognized as confidential
information and shall be available to the public without restriction.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.643. Certification statements.
   (a)   The following certification statement is required to be signed and
submitted by Authorized Representative of the User submitting the following
documents: permit applications, initial monitoring waivers, baseline monitoring
reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard
deadlines, required periodic compliance reports, or submitting an initial
request to forego sampling of a pollutant:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system,
of those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true,
accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations.
   (b)   The following annual certification statement is required to be signed
and submitted by an Authorized Representative of the User for a facility
determined to be an NSCIU must be included with the alternative report required
by the Director:
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing
compliance with the categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR Part ____,
I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, that during the period
from [month, date, year] to [month, date, year]:
      (1)   The facility described as [facility name] met the definition of a
Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User as described in Section 10-1.605
(tt)(3) of the City of Thousand Oaks Municipal Code;
      (2)   The facility complied with all applicable pretreatment standards
and requirements during this reporting period; and
      (3)   The facility never discharged more than one hundred (100) gallons
of total categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting period.
   (c)   Users that have an approved monitoring waiver based on this section
must certify on each report with the following statement that there has been no
increase in the pollutant in its waste stream due to activities of the User:
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing
compliance with the pretreatment standard for 40 CFR Part ____, I certify that,
to the best of my knowledge and belief, there has been no increase in the level
of [pollutant(s)] in the wastewater due to the activities of this facility
since the filing of the last compliance report under Section 10-1.643(c) of the
City of Thousand Oaks Municipal Code.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Compliance Monitoring
Sec. 10-1.644. Right of entry: inspection and sampling.
   Pursuant to the authority granted under the General Pretreatment Regulations
(Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations [40 CFR] Part 403), the City shall
have the right to enter the premises of any User to determine whether the User
is complying with all requirements of this Article and any wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow ready access to all parts
of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination
and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.
   (a)   Where the User has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the User shall
make necessary arrangement with its security staff so that, upon presentation
of suitable identification, the City shall be permitted to enter without delay
for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
   (b)   The City shall have the right to set up on the User’s property, or
require the installation of, such devices as necessary to conduct sampling and/
or monitoring of the User’s operations.
   (c)   The City may require the User to install monitoring equipment as
necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained
at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the User at its own
expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be
calibrated according to the manufacturer’s specifications to ensure their
accuracy.
   (d)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the User
at the written or verbal request of the City and shall not be replaced. The
costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the User.
   (e)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the City access to the User’s premises
shall be a violation of this Article.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.645. Inspection warrants.
   If the City has been refused access to a building, structure, or property,
or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate that there may be a violation
of this Article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program of the City designed to verify
compliance with this Article or any wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the
community, the City may seek issuance of an inspection warrant from the
Superior Court of Ventura County.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Administrative Enforcement Remedies
Sec. 10-1.646. Significant non-compliance.
   A User which has violated a pretreatment standard or requirement according
to the following is in significant non-compliance:
   (a)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those in
which sixty-six (66%) percent or more of all measurements for the same
pollutant parameter taken during a six- (6) month period exceeded (by any
magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits;
   (b)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those in which
thirty-three (33%) percent or more of the wastewater measurements taken for
each pollutant parameter during a six- (6) month period equal or exceed the
product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits, multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS,
fats, oils, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
   (c)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined in Section
10-1.606, General Sewer Use Requirements, (e.g., daily maximum, long-term
average, instantaneous limit, narrative standard) that the City determines has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass
through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general
public;
   (d)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the City exercising
emergency authority to halt or prevent such discharge;
   (e)   Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;
   (f)   Failure to provide within forty-five (45) days after the due date, any
required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance
with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
   (g)   Failure to accurately report non-compliance; or
   (h)   Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of BMPs, which
the City determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of
the City’s Pretreatment Program.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.647. Notice of violation.
   When the City finds that a User has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this Article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the City may
serve upon the User a written Notice of Violation. Within fifteen (15) days of
the receipt of such notice, the User must provide an explanation of the
violation and plan for the satisfactory correction of and prevention of future
violations to the City. Submission of such plan in no way relieves the User of
liability for any violations occurring before or after the receipt of the
Notice of Violation. The City may proceed to take any action, including
emergency actions or other enforcement action, whether or not the City has
issued a Notice of Violation prior to any action undertaken.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.648. Consent order.
   The City may enter into a Consent Order, assurances of compliance, or other
similar documents establishing an agreement with any User responsible for non-
compliance. Such document shall include specific action to be taken by the User
to correct the non-compliance within a time period specified by the document.
Such document shall have the same force and effect as a Compliance Order or
Cease and Desist Order and shall be judicially enforceable.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.649. Compliance order.
   When the City finds that a User has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this Article, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the City may
issue an order to the User responsible for the discharge directing that the
User come into compliance within a specified time. If the User does not come
into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued
unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances
are installed and properly maintained. A Compliance Order may also contain
other requirements to address the non-compliance, including additional self-
monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of
pollutants discharged to the POTW. A Compliance Order may not extend the
deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement,
nor does a Compliance Order relieve the user of liability for any violation,
including any continuing violation. Issuance of a Compliance Order shall not be
a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the User.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.650. Cease and desist order.
   When the City finds that a User has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this Article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the
User’s past violations are likely to recur, the City may issue an order to the
User directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the
User to:
   (a)   Immediately comply with all requirements; and
   (b)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventative action as may be needed
to properly address a continuing threatened violation, including halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge.
   Issuance of a Cease and Desist order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the User.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.651. Administrative fines.
   When the City finds that a User has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this Article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, an administrative
fine in an amount not to exceed One Thousand and no/100ths ($1,000.00) Dollars
for each day in which such violation occurs may be levied against any violating
User. Such fines shall be assessed on a per-violation, per-day basis. In the
case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be
assessed for each day during the period of violation.
   Issuance of an Administrative Fine shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the User.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.652. Emergency suspensions.
   The Director may immediately suspend a User’s discharge, after notice to the
User, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened
discharge, which reasonably appears to present, or cause an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The Director may
also immediately suspend a User’s discharge, after notice and opportunity to
respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which
presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment.
   (a)   Any User notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately
stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a User’s failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Director may take
such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving water, or
endangerment to human health. The Director may allow the User to recommence its
discharge when the User has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Director
that the period of endangerment has passed unless the termination proceeding in
Section 10.1-653 of this Article has been initiated against the User.
   (b)   A User that is responsible, in whole, or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement,
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence, to the Director prior to the date of any
termination hearing under Section 10-1.653 of this Article.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.653. Termination of discharge.
   In addition to the provisions of Section 10-1.627 of this Article, any User
who commits the following violations is subject to discharge termination:
   (a)   Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
   (b)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
   (c)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
   (d)   Refusal of reasonable access to the User’s premises for the purpose of
inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
   (e)   Violation of the pretreatment standards in General Sewer Use
Requirements section of this Article.
   Such User will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and
be offered an opportunity to appeal to the City under the provisions of Section
10-1.655 why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option
by the City shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the User.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.654. Publication of users in significant non-compliance.
   Pursuance to the requirements of 40 CFR Section 403.8, the City shall
publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation that provides
meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions served by the City, a list of
Users which, at any time during the previous twelve (12) months, were in
significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.655. Appeals.
   Any User, wastewater discharge permit applicant, or wastewater discharge
permit holder affected by any decision, action, or determination, including
administrative enforcement remedies made by the City in interpreting or
implementing the provisions of this Article or any permit issued herein, may
file with the City Manager a written request for reconsideration, within not
more than ten (10) calendar days after the date of the decision, action or
determination or notice thereof, and as soon as possible where the decision,
action or determination is to be implemented immediately, summarily setting
forth in detail the facts and reasons supporting the User's request for
reconsideration. The City Manager shall render a decision on the request in
writing, within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the request. If the ruling
is contested, the person requesting reconsideration may, within ten (10) days
after notification of the City Manager's decision, file a written appeal with
the City Council which sets forth in full the facts, reasons and grounds for
the appeal. The written appeal shall be heard by the City Council within thirty
(30) days from the date of filing. The City Council shall make the final ruling
on the appeal within sixty (60) days from the date of filing.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Judicial Enforcement Remedies
Sec. 10-1.656. Injunctive relief.
   When the City finds that a User has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this Article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the City may
petition the Superior Court of Ventura County through the City Attorney for
issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which
restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge
permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this Article on the activities
of the User. The City may also seek other such action as is appropriate for
legal and/or equitable relief, including requirement for the User to conduct
environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a User.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.657. Civil penalties.
   Pursuant to Section 309 of the Clean Water Act, a User who has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this Article, a wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement shall be liable to the City for a maximum civil penalty up to ten
thousand dollars ($10,000) per violation, per day. In case of a monthly or
other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day
during the period of the violation. The City may recover reasonable attorneys’
fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities,
including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages
incurred by the City.
   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a User.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.658. Criminal prosecution.
   (a)   A User who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this
Article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000) per violation, per day, or imprisonment, or both. Imprisonment shall
not exceed six (6) months per Thousand Oaks Municipal Code Section
1-2.03(b).
   (b)   A User who willingly or negligently introduces any substance into the
POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be
guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of at least the maximum
fine allowable under state law, or be subject to imprisonment, or both. This
penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury
or property damage available under state law.
   (c)   A User who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or
certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation
filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this Article, wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or
knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring devices or method required under
this Article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than the
maximum allowable under state law per violation, per day, or imprisonment, or
both.
   (d)   In the event of a second conviction, a User shall be punished by a
fine of not more than the maximum fine allowable under State law per violation,
per day, or imprisonment, or both.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.659. Remedies non-exclusive.
   The remedies provided for in this Article are not exclusive. The City may
take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a non-compliant
User. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance
with the City Enforcement Response Plan. However, the City may take other
action against any User when the circumstances warrant. Further, the City is
empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant
User.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.660. Upset.
   (a)   For the purposes of this section, upset means an exceptional incident
in which there is unintentional and temporary non-compliance with categorical
pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the
User. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by
operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper
operation.
   (b)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought
for non-compliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements
of Section
10-1.660(c) of this Article are met.
   (c)   A User who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other
relevant evidence that:
      (1)   An upset occurred and the User can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
      (2)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
      (3)   The User submitted the following information to the Director within
twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset. If this information was
initially provided orally, a written follow up submission must be provided
within five (5) days:
         (i)   A description of the discharge and cause of noncompliance;
         (ii)   The period of non-compliance, including exact dates and times
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
         (iii)   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the non-compliance.
   (d)   In any enforcement proceedings, the User seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
   (e)   City enforcement personnel shall review any claims that noncompliance
was caused by an upset. No determinations made in the course of the review
constitute final City action subject to judicial review. Users shall have the
opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an
enforcement action brought for non-compliance with categorical pretreatment
standards.
   (f)   Users shall control production or all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Sec. 10-1.661. Bypass.
   (a)   For the purposes of this section:
      (1)   Bypass means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any
portion of a User’s treatment facility.
      (2)   Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become
inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can
reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property
damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
   (b)   A User may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause a violation
of pretreatment standards or requirements, but only if it is also necessary for
essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not
subject to the provisions of Sections
10-1.661(c) and (d) of this Article.
   (c)   Bypass Notifications:
      (1)   If a User knows in advance of the need for a bypass, User shall
submit notice to the Director at least ten (10) days before the date of the
bypass.
      (2)   A User shall submit oral notice to the Director of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty-four (24)
hours from the time User becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission
shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the User becomes aware
of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass
and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times,
and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected
to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
reoccurrence of the bypass. The Director may waive the written report on a
case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty-four (24)
hours and contains sufficient information.
   (d)   Prohibition of Bypass:
      (1)   Bypass is prohibited, and the Director may take enforcement action
against a User for a bypass, unless:
         (i)   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury,
or severe property damage;
         (ii)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is
satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and
         (iii)   The User submitted notices as required under Section
10-1.661(c).
      (2)   The Director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering
its adverse effects, if the Director determines that it will meet the three
conditions listed in Section 10-1.661(d)(1).
(§ 2, Ord. 1737-NS, eff. September 26, 2025)
Article 7. Charges
Sec. 10-1.701. Wastewater connection charge.
   (a)   Charge basis. Prior to receiving wastewater service for any residence,
building or parcel of land, a connection charge shall be paid. The connection
charge shall be in addition to the requirements for construction of or payments
towards wastewater main pipeline systems. The owner of the property shall be
responsible for payment of all unpaid charges not collected, or collectable
from the developer, user or occupant.
   (b)   Connection charge rate. The amount of the wastewater connection charge
shall be as set by Council action.
   (c)   Calculation of connection charge. A plumbing fixture unit shall be as
defined in the current edition of the Plumbing Code. Only those fixtures that
contribute wastes to the wastewater system shall be counted and charged. Any
fixture not listed in the applicable section of the Plumbing Code to be
installed shall be given a unit count by the Public Works Director. The total
plumbing fixture unit count for each application/location shall not be less
than that of a single family residence. Private plumbing fixtures are those
plumbing fixtures enclosed within the area of a single business, company or
organization intended for the use of employees only. Public plumbing fixtures
are those plumbing fixtures that are provided for use by employees, customers,
guests and/or the general public, including those fixtures intended for use by
two or more tenants in a multi-tenant building. The charges set forth in this
section shall apply, except for those buildings with a total floor area equal
to or greater than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet where the
provisions of subsection (e) of this section may apply as determined by the
Public Works Director. Motels, hotels and any other buildings on a parcel of
land with a common ownership that cannot at some future date be divided shall
be considered on an overall basis, and the minimum charge shall not apply to
each individual building.
   (d)   Escalation. All wastewater connection charges shall be adjusted
biennially and by Council action by a factor based upon the increase or
decrease in the Engineering News Record (ENR)’s Construction Cost Index for Los
Angeles based upon the change from the preceding two (2) years’ July-to-July
period.
   (e)   Special situations. For special situations such as combined use
buildings, multiple occupant developments, or any other facilities where the
computed connection charge does not, in the opinion of the Public Works
Director, result in an equitable connection charge, the actual charge shall be
determined based on criteria such as, but not limited to: environmental impact;
National Pollution Discharge Elimination System requirements, water
consumption; peak loading; residential equivalency; treatment plant capacity
and capital costs. However, in no event shall the minimum rates be altered.
   (f)   Submittals. Commercial and industrial projects shall submit building
and/or plumbing plans for the Public Works Department's permanent records in
sufficient detail to allow the determination of the number of fixture units and
the appropriate connection charge.
   (g)   Time of Payment. No parcel of property shall be connected to the
wastewater system and receive permanent wastewater service from the City until
a the appropriate wastewater connection charge has been paid. The connection
charge shall be paid prior to, or concurrent with, the issuance of a building
permit.
   Payment of connection fees cannot be made earlier than the following:
   (1)   For tract/subdivision projects, no sooner than recordation of the
tract or parcel map;
   (2)   For other projects, no sooner than:
   (i)   Approval of wastewater system drawings,
   (ii)   At the time of application for a wastewater permit, which should
coincide with finalization of documents necessary for a building permit for
approved projects, which must be accepted for plan check by the Department.
   For affordable housing projects, payment of connection charges may be
delayed until such time as the applicant makes a request to the Public Works
Department for occupancy clearance. All charges must be paid in full prior to
issuance of an occupancy permit by the Public Works Department. The amount paid
shall be based on the charges in effect at the time the wastewater permit for
construction of the project was issued.
   (h)   Installment payments. Where an individual property owner has been
required to connect an existing housing unit to the public wastewater system,
and where payment of the wastewater connection fee would present an undue
hardship to the property owner, and where the City's interest is best served by
the properties being connected to the public wastewater system, the Public
Works Director may approve payments of the wastewater connection fee on an
installment basis. Payments shall be subject to a written and recorded
agreement between the City and the property owner, and shall include, in
addition to the principal connection fee amount, payment of interest charges as
determined by the Finance Department. The agreed-to-payment amounts shall be
billed separately from the property owner's regular wastewater billing and are
subject to interest and penalties as allowed by Council action. The agreement
shall be recorded at the Office of the Ventura County Recorder to provide
beneficial notice to any future purchaser of the property. If full payment of
the wastewater billing becomes more than sixty days delinquent, the City, at
its option, may require payment in full of the entire amount still owing on the
connection fee.
   (i)   Credits for prior payment of wastewater connection fee. A parcel or
other division of property having paid a connection charge shall be credited
with current value service units paid. The credit may not be transferred or
conveyed to another parcel, except to transfer to another public agency, where
the facilities previously using the credit were removed and/or destroyed and
cannot be reused again the future, subject to the approval of the Public Works
Director. In the case of non-residential condominiums, the Property Owner
Association shall have managing authority upon fixture credits as specified in
Section
10-1.303.
   (j)   Termination of service and impact on connection charges. A property
which terminates service will be credited with a charge as determined herein.
If the property is then reconnected at a later date, then the then-current
connection charge shall be due and payable, less the credit amount.
   (k)   Changed uses: Additional charges. If a building or the use of a parcel
of property is enlarged, altered or changed, including the addition of an
accessory dwelling unit, a new connection charge is greater than that credited
to the parcel of property, the difference (based on fixture units or equivalent
service units) shall be paid to the City. The payment is due before the
issuance of a plumbing permit or building permit, as appropriate. The
provisions of this subsection shall not apply, however, to the enlargement of a
single family dwelling.
   (l)   Reduced uses. If a building or the use of a parcel of property is
diminished, altered or changed in any way that would reduce the connection
charge, no refund shall be made; but the credit given shall remain a credit to
that property against any future facilities.
   (m)   Subdivision of parcels. If a parcel of property having a connection
charge credit is divided, that connection charge credit may be divided also in
any way that the owner instructs the City in writing; provided, however, the
credit remaining with any parcel connected to the wastewater system shall not
be less than the amount that would be required as a connection charge for that
parcel using current rates. In the absence of written instructions, the Public
Works Director may divide the credit.
   (n)   Non-residential Condominium.
   Each detached building shall pay for a minimum of twenty (20) fixture units
at the time of building permit issuance or prior to condominium map
recordation. Each condominium unit shall pay connection fees as specified in
the current User Fee Ordinance.
   Wastewater fixture units paid for shall be attached to the parent property
and may be transferred between buildings or separate ownerships within the
parent property at the discretion of the Property Owners Association. Pursuant
to Section
10-1.701 (k) and (l), all fixture units within the parent property shall be
assigned to common area fixtures or assigned to member condominiums prior to
purchasing additional fixture units for the property. Purchases of additional
fixture units shall be made solely by the Property Owners Association. The City
reserves the right to, at its sole discretion, redistribute the fixture units
in a manner it determines to be in the best interest of the City.
   It is the intent of this provision to ensure that a minimum of twenty (20)
fixture units remain permanently assigned to each building. Fixture units in
excess of the minimum of twenty (20) may be transferred by the Property Owners
Association, upon approval of the Public Works Department, to another building
which is lacking an adequate fixture unit count for the proposed use.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009, as amended by § 8, Ord. 1631-NS, eff. July
14, 2017, and § 2, Ord. 1695-NS, eff. March 1, 2022)
Sec. 10-1.702. Additional charges for capital improvements.
   The City may charge an additional amount under the following circumstances
providing that an area of benefit or benefiting properties are identified along
with the capital improvement cost:
   (a)   Where a specific wastewater pipeline project benefits an identifiable
area by providing needed capacity or correcting a substandard condition.
   (b)   Where the costs associated with a specific City improvement project
such as a major pipeline project exceed that which normally could be collected
via the wastewater connection charge.
   (c)   Where the city has entered into a reimbursement agreement with a
developer or landowner for a capital improvement project installed by the
latter.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.703. Wastewater service charges.
   (a)   General policy. No part of the wastewater system of the City shall be
used or taken advantage of free of charge by any person, persons, association,
firm or public agency, including the United States of America, the State or any
public corporation, political subdivision, including City, County and district
agencies. If the wastewater service is provided outside the City limits, the
service charge shall be further increased over and above the in-City charge in
an amount set by Council action. All properties with buildings, houses, etc.,
wherein there is a capability of generating and discharging wastewater to the
public wastewater system shall pay a wastewater service charge irrespective of
the occupancy/vacancy status of the property.
   Individual portions of a common property such as stalls, office spaces and
others where it is determined by the Public Works Director that independent
discharge to the wastewater system can be made, shall pay a wastewater service
charge.
   (b)   Charges. Monthly wastewater service charges shall be as set by Council
action.
   (c)   Combined water and wastewater charges. Where the City provides both
wastewater and water service to properties and the wastewater service charges
are not collected via direct assessment on the Ventura County property tax
roll, a combined bill will be prepared. In all such cases, the City shall have
the right to discontinue water service to any person or property whose combined
water and wastewater bill/invoice is delinquent.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1684-NS, eff. May 28,
2021)
Sec. 10-1.704. Unauthorized use of the wastewater system.
   Any person or organization using the City wastewater system without having
received prior approval shall be charged for the estimated wastewater charges
applicable for the period used. In addition, such use shall be terminated by
said person or organization immediately and an application for service shall be
submitted and approved prior to further use of the wastewater system.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.705. Miscellaneous repair and/or maintenance costs.
   When Public Works Department crews are involved in repairs or maintenance
wherein such work is done for the protection of the Public Works Department's
system or where the work is a result of damage to the Public Works Department's
facilities by a private individual or company, then the City shall charge that
individual or company. Such charges shall include materials, equipment, labor,
all as determined by the Public Works Department and overhead at a rate set by
Council action.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.706. Other fees and charges covered by Council action.
   In addition to those discussed above, various fees and charges shall be
adopted by Council action including the following: administrative fees for plan
check, inspection, easements and other legal documents, quitclaim and special
agreements, reproduction charges, and industrial waste permit charges,
interest, penalties, and other similar charges.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Article 8. Main Line Extension and Oversizing Agreements
Sec. 10-1.801. Reimbursement Agreement - General.
   A developer or owner may request reimbursement for a portion of the cost
associated with the installation of a wastewater facility, typically a
pipeline. Any reimbursement shall be by agreement and pursuant to the
requirements outlined in this article.
   The City may require, or a developer may elect to construct, an off-site
wastewater main which may, in the opinion of the Public Works Director, qualify
for reimbursement subject to payback through a reimbursement agreement. Where a
wastewater line must be extended to serve a property, the wastewater line
extension normally shall be constructed by the property owner requesting
service. That portion of the project costs, as approved by the Public Works
Director, which benefits other properties may be subject to payback through a
reimbursement agreement. To qualify, there must be (1) benefiting properties
which have agreed to participate or that can be required to participate through
normal City procedures, and (2) improvements which provide a substantial
benefit to those properties.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.802. Main line extension.
   (a)   General. Each reimbursement agreement shall state the total dollar
amount which is subject to reimbursement and shall identify the wastewater line
(s) which are the subject of the agreement and the entire area benefitted by
the extension or oversizing of such wastewater line(s). Preparation of and
entering into a reimbursement agreement typically would occur at or near the
conclusion of construction of the project so that costs can be compiled.
Methods of determining the pro-rata shares may be: (1) by area of the
benefiting properties; (2) by the number of benefiting properties, if that is
judged by the City to be more equitable; (3) by the number of single family
dwellings; or (4) any other method approved by the Public Works Director. The
methodology used to determine benefit and the selection of the properties which
are considered to benefit shall be at the sole discretion of the City.
   (b)   Eligible and Ineligible Project costs. The eligible project costs may
consists of the construction contract price, including all labor and materials
costs incurred for the construction of the wastewater line(s), engineering
design and surveying costs, bond issuance costs, fees paid to the City, such as
for plan check, inspection, encroachment permits, easement documents, and other
costs approved to be eligible. Ineligible costs shall include attorney fees,
interest paid on construction loan financing, and contract administration costs
in excess of ten (10%) percent of total construction costs. Only that portion
of the project cost which benefits other properties, as approved by the Public
Works Director, shall be subject to payback through a reimbursement agreement.
The reimbursement agreement shall be based upon actual constructed costs, not
estimates. Documentation of costs shall be provided to the City in the form of
signed, executed contracts, and certified payroll sheets showing the names of
employees, their wages and all deductions for state and federal taxes, health
benefits, workers' compensation, union dues (if applicable), social security
and any other standard deductions. In a case where an applicant is personally
involved in the construction of the improvements (such as operation of a
backhoe or other equipment), the hourly charges for said person may not exceed
the prevailing wage rate for operation of said piece of equipment, and shall be
approved by the Public Works Director.
   (c)   Reimbursement payments. Each reimbursement agreement shall include
provision for the amount and timing of payments to the developer, its
successors or assigns as received by the City from benefiting properties. The
maximum duration of the agreement shall be ten (10) years commencing on the
date of City Council acceptance of the mainline extension or the date of
approval of the reimbursement agreement by City Council, whichever comes first.
The applicant shall be responsible for providing a current mailing address to
the city over the life of the reimbursement agreement. The City's
responsibility for making reimbursement payments to the applicant shall be
limited to mailing such reimbursements to the last known address provided by
the applicant. Where reimbursement payments are returned to the City as
undeliverable, the City will disburse said monies to applicant upon
notification by the applicant of a new mailing address without benefit of
paying accrued interest of such monies. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the
event the City has retained any returned funds, those funds shall be returned
to the participating property owner after six months, and the applicant shall
have no recourse to said funds from the City after this time period. If
collected monies are returned to the City as undeliverable from applicant and
participating property owner, City may retain such funds for its own use. Any
direct collection of funds/monies by the applicant from participating property
owners shall nullify and void the agreement.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.803. Oversizing agreement.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions to the contrary, the City, by written
agreement, may provide for a method of reimbursement or other paybacks to
developers or private parties of the actual costs for the design and
construction of special facilities such as transmission line(s) of twelve (12")
inches or greater in diameter, pumping stations, and the like. The procedures
contained in Section
10-1.802 shall apply to an oversizing agreement.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Article 9. Billing and Payment
Sec. 10-1.901. Billing - General.
   The Public Works Director and Finance Director are primarily responsible for
the issuance of wastewater bills and for direct assessments of single-family
residential wastewater service charges via Ventura County's property tax roll.
Within the City, the Finance Department provides customer service functions
associated with the preparation, issuance, and receipt of wastewater bills and
revenue.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1684-NS, eff. May 28,
2021)
Sec. 10-1.902. Due dates.
   Except for wastewater service charges collected via a direct assessment on
the Ventura County property tax roll or those covered under “Miscellaneous Uses
and Special Services,” all wastewater service charges shall become due and
payable upon presentation. Such bills shall have a due date of twenty-one (21)
days and become delinquent and subject to penalty charges in an amount set by
City Council action if not paid in full on or before twenty-eight (28) days
after the billing date. Payment shall be made to the City of Thousand Oaks
Finance Department.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009, as amended by § 4, Ord. 1684-NS, eff. May 28,
2021, and § 2, Ord. 1721-NS, eff. January 1, 2024)
Sec. 10-1.903. Due dates for miscellaneous uses and special services.
   All bills for miscellaneous wastewater system use and special services and
treatment costs or expenses, and the like furnished during any calendar month
shall be due and payable upon presentation and shall become delinquent twenty-
one (21) days after the date the billing was prepared. Such bills shall be
delinquent and subject to penalty charges in an amount set by City Council
action if not paid in full on or before twenty-eight (28) days after the
billing date.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1721-NS, eff. January
1, 2024)
Sec. 10-1.904. Overpayments.
   In the event of payments in excess of the billed amount, the City shall
credit the amount of overpayment thereof upon the next ensuing wastewater
service charge bill issued to the same property.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.905. Underpayments.
   Any underpayment of a wastewater service charge bill shall be deemed as
nonpayment. In all cases, the amount of nonpayment or underpayment shall be
subject to a penalty. Any underpayment on a combined water and wastewater bill
shall be subject to discontinuance of water service.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.906. Errors: Adjustments.
   (a)   A recipient of wastewater service charge billing who has a complaint
or question concerning his bill, shall have the opportunity to review the
problem with the Customer Service section of the Finance Department during
regular business hours. The Customer Service section shall have the authority
to correct any errors on such bills.
   (b)   Adjustments may be made on wastewater service charge billings by the
Public Works Director. Where adjustments are necessary, the City shall evaluate
the adjustment using past data and other factors necessary to make an
adjustment.
   Adjustments due to an overcharge situation may also consider any
undercharged periods within the past.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.907. Blockage in lateral: Adjustments.
   In the event there is a blockage in the lateral, no adjustment in billing
will be made. It shall be the property owner's responsibility to maintain his
own system.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.908. Liability for payment.
   (a)   The property owner shall be responsible for payment. The current owner
of a property shall be responsible for payment of all unpaid fees and charges
not collected, or collectable, from the applicant, user, or occupant on the
parcel. If more than one occupant or tenant on a commercial, industrial, or
multi-family parcel of property is served, then the City shall render a single
bill to the property owner. In the event of nonpayment, the property owner
shall be liable for payment.
   (b)   Non-residential and apartment property owners and/or occupants may, if
they wish, make special arrangements with the Finance Department for the
purpose of sending the bill to the occupant of the property rather than to the
property owner. In such a case, the property owner shall be liable for any
nonpayment.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009, as amended by § 5, Ord. 1684-NS, eff. May 28,
2021)
Sec. 10-1.909. Delinquencies: Penalties.
   Except for those wastewater service charges are assessed on the Ventura
County property tax roll, in the case of payments not received on or before
twenty-one (21) days from the billing date, a reminder notice shall be mailed
notifying the customer that the bill shall be delinquent and subject to penalty
charges in an amount set by City Council action if not paid in full on or
before twenty-eight (28) days after the billing date. The amount due shall
consist of the entire unpaid balance. Such bills shall be delinquent and
subject to penalty charges, in an amount set by City Council Action, if not
paid in full on or before thirty (30) days after the billing date.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009, as amended by § 6, Ord. 1684-NS, eff. May 28,
2021, and § 4, Ord. 1721-NS, eff. January 1, 2024)
Sec. 10-1.910. Multiple-party applications: Liability.
   Two (2) or more parties who join in one application for service shall be
jointly and severally liable thereunder and shall be billed by means of single
periodic bills.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.911. City to use all necessary remedies.
   The City and its proper officers, agents or employees shall promptly,
efficiently and economically take all steps, actions or remedies necessary for
the collection of charges and the penalties thereon (including the enforcement
of the lien of such charges and penalties) which are now or may hereafter be
provided for in the Code or in the Revenue Bond Law, California Government
Code, commencing with Section 54300. Such remedies for collecting and enforcing
the rates and charges shall be cumulative and may be pursued alternately. As
determined by the City Treasurer, a list of delinquent charges shall be
recorded. If any one (1) remedy provided for in this section is held to be
invalid, all valid remedies shall remain effectual.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009, as amended by § 5, Ord. 1721-NS, eff. January
1, 2024)
Sec. 10-1.912. Property liens for delinquencies.
   The City Treasurer shall record with the County Recorder a list of all
delinquent charges, and the penalties thereon, and shall include in each such
list the amount of each charge and the penalty thereon, a description of the
real property upon which the same is a lien, and the name of the City, all as
provided in the Revenue Bond Law, California Government Code, commencing with
Section 54300, as the same now exists or as hereafter amended. All delinquent
charges and penalties, when so recorded, shall constitute a lien upon the real
property served by the enterprise (except that no such lien shall be created
against any property owned by a public corporation or as the result of
delinquent charges accrued by a tenant or lessee of the property), and each
such lien shall have the force, effect, priority and duration, and any real
property subject to any such lien may be discharged therefrom, and each such
lien shall be enforced as provided in the Revenue Bond Law, California
Government Code, commencing with Section 54300, as the same now exists or as
hereafter amended. Payment of all charges and liens shall be the property
owner's responsibility.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-1.913. Termination of service.
   In the event all structures in which wastewater is produced are removed,
abandoned or uninhabitable on a property served by the wastewater system, the
Public Works Director may terminate service to the property after receiving a
written request from the property owner. The termination shall not be effective
until all charges and expenses are first paid.
   A property for which service has been terminated shall not be inhabited by
humans nor shall any wastewater be produced thereon until service has been
restored and any applicable connection charge paid. If the property is
inhabited by human beings or any wastewater is produced thereon before the
service has been restored, the Public Works Director shall have authority to
cap the service lateral of the property line and to disconnect the property
without notice.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
CHAPTER 2. WATER*
*   Chapter 2 entitled “Water system,” consisting of Article 1 entitled
“Definitions,” Article 2 entitled “Water Department,” Article 3 entitled “Water
Supply,” Article 4 entitled “Classes of Water Service,” Article 5 entitled
“Service Connections,” Article 6 entitled “Meters,” Article 7 entitled
“Applications for Service,” Article 8 entitled “Billing and Payment,” Article 9
entitled “Charges,” Article 10 entitled “Local Systems,” and Article 11
entitled “Service Rules,” codified from Ordinance Nos. 242, 261-NS, 512-NS, and
588-NS, as amended by Ordinance Nos. 249, 165-NS, 193-NS, 261-NS, 397-NS, 466-
NS, 500-NS, 512-NS, 530-NS, 551-NS, 565-NS, 573-NS, 588-NS, 595-NS, 597-NS,
635-NS, 641-NS, 650-NS, 681-NS, 682-NS, 715-NS, 731-NS, 761-NS, and 790-NS,
repealed by Ordinance No. 826-NS, effective February 2, 1983, as amended by
Ordinance Nos. 923-NS, 931-NS, 946-NS, 1087-NS, 1095-NS, 1100-NS, 1129-NS,
1133-NS, 1144-NS, 1374-NS, 1437-NS. Subsequently repealed and replaced by Ord.
1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009.
Article 1. General Provisions
Sec. 10-2.101. Public Works Department.
   The Public Works Department shall administer the water properties,
facilities and services of the City and shall exercise powers and perform the
duties set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.102. Service area.
   The area in which service is or will be furnished is as shown on the maps
available for inspection at the Public Works Department.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.103. City responsibility.
   The City shall exercise reasonable diligence and care to:
   (a)   Endeavor to furnish at all times a safe and potable supply of water
for domestic services:
   (b)   Endeavor to maintain adequate service pressures as further defined in
the City's Water Design and Construction Standards to those properties located
within the water system. In the event that any customer or the City deems that
the pressure is inadequate, then the customer shall furnish and maintain at his
expense whatever devices are necessary to boost the pressure for his premises.
In the event water pressures are deemed to be excessive by either the customer
or the City, then the customer shall furnish and maintain at his own expense
such devices as may be required to protect his plumbing and/or to reduce the
pressures:
   (c)   Endeavor to provide adequate flow to its customers from fire hydrants
for fire protection within the City service area:
   (d)   Construct, maintain and operate the City's system of reservoirs,
pumping stations, and transmission and distribution pipelines with the City's
responsibility extending to the water meter. All items between the water meter
and the premises being served shall be the responsibility of the customer/
owner.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.104. Liability limitations.
   The City shall not be liable for:
   (a)   Interruptions of service or a shortage or inadequacy of supply. The
City shall have the right to discontinue water service to any customer or
premises or in any part of the distribution system as long as necessary without
notice to customers in case of emergency. In the event of an interruption in
service, the City shall not be liable for any loss or damage caused thereby.
The causes for temporary suspension of service shall be removed by the City
without unreasonable delay.
   (b)   Damages to building plumbing or premises as a result of the customer's
failure to maintain the pipes and protection devices on the customer's side of
the water meter.
   (c)   Variations in either the taste, color or odor of the water wherein
such variation is either:
   (1)   Typical for potable water supplies, meeting the requirements of public
agencies setting standards for such items:
   (2)   A result of corrosion or input of deleterious material or chemicals on
the customer's side of the meter.
   (d)   Inadequate fire protection where caused by actual fire flow
requirements exceeding the stipulated or conditioned fire flow requirements,
failure of the owner or his/her engineer to properly design a system, loss of
water due to circumstances beyond City's control, failure of owner to maintain
any installed on-site fire protection system or other cause as determined to be
beyond the City's reasonable control.
   (e)   All representations made by the City as to the sufficiency of its
water system or as to the necessity of the construction of additional
facilities or the payment of fees by any applicant/developer are specifically
made subject to the ability of the City to secure water from sources which are
beyond the boundaries of the City and in the control of other governmental
entities or private companies.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.105. Application and use of design and construction standards.
   All water transmission, distribution and related facilities shall be
designed and constructed in complete conformity with the Water Design and
Construction Standards and approved plans and specifications (as appropriate).
These standards are adopted by Council action and cover such topics as: design
criteria, materials, plan preparation, administrative requirements,
construction, testing and disinfection, certain aspects of cross connection and
backflow prevention, reservoirs and pumping stations, and wells. All engineers
designing water facilities and contractors constructing such facilities shall
have obtained the Water Design and Construction Standards prior to their
activities.
   Water facilities not covered by the Water Design and Construction Standards
shall be designed and constructed in conformity with all applicable
requirements and standards of governmental agencies having jurisdiction within
the City's service area.
   The Water Design and Construction Standards may be revised with such
revisions being adopted by the City Council via a resolution. Copies of the
standards are available for purchase in the office of the Public Works
Department.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.106. Administration of developer projects.
   Most administration requirements are set by the Water Design and
Construction Standards with fees set by Council action. Other administrative
requirements shall be established by the Director of the Public Works
Department.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.107. General meter policies.
   (a)   Each parcel of property and each house, building or dwelling unit of
separate ownership shall be provided with its own service line and meter. This
policy also pertains to townhouse, condominium and/or mobile home projects
wherein each owner shall have a separate meter, although a common association
may have a meter(s) for irrigation, recreation and/or pool purposes, or other
purposes. More than one meter may be permitted to a building where judged
necessary, such as a commercial building housing various users. The requirement
for each separate ownership unit to have its own separate meter shall also
pertain to condominium conversion projects, unless an exemption is requested by
the applicant and approved by the Public WorksDepartment Where this provision
is exempted the plant investment fee due the City shall be as set by Council
action. Unless otherwise approved by the Public Works Department, separate
buildings within a commercial or industrial project shall have separate meters.
A non-residential condominium shall have a minimum of two separate meters, one
solely for determining the volume of common area irrigation or landscaping
water used, and the other solely for determining the volume of domestic water
used within the building or buildings. Additional irrigation and/or domestic
meters may be installed, if approved or required by the Public Works
Department. Applicable fees for water shall be charged based on the size of
each of the meter(s) installed as set by Council action.
   (b)   When property provided with a service connection is portioned, split
or otherwise divided, the existing service connection shall be assigned to the
lot or parcel nearest the meter unless the City at its option decides to have
it relocated to the other parcel. Additional meter(s) shall be installed to the
other parcel(s) or building(s).
   (c)   A service connection (meter) shall not be used to supply adjoining
property of a different owner or to supply property of the same owner on
opposite sides of a public street or alley.
   (d)   All irrigation meters require payment of a plant investment fee,
regardless of whether or not a public agency is or may become the eventual
owner of the meter. For industrial projects and selected commercial projects,
the Public Works Department may require that the outside water use (irrigation)
be metered separately from the use within the buildings.
   (e)   A separate water meter shall be installed to measure the volume of
water used exclusively for landscape purposes where the water service
connection serves property with more than five thousand (5,000) square feet of
irrigated landscape. This requirement for a separate meter shall apply to
property where water service has not been previously provided.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.108. Other applicable codes or policies.
   The provisions in this Title shall be used in conjunction with the Water
Design and Construction Standards, pertinent City Council resolutions and
ordinances, other sections of the Municipal Code, Public Works Department
policies as well as the codes and policies of other public agencies having
jurisdiction on a particular subject matter. In case of conflict, the Public
Works Director shall review the matter and render a decision based upon an
interpretation which is most consistent with this Title.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Article 2. Definitions
Editor’s Note: Section numbers, as established in Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 15,
2009 have been modified as necessary, for the purpose of continuity.
Sec. 10-2.201. Applicant.
   "Applicant" means a person, firm or company that submits a written
application for any type of water service.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.202. Approved water supply.
   "Approved water supply" means any water supply approved by, or under the
public health supervision of a public health agency of the State or its
political subdivisions. In determining what constitutes an approved water
supply, the Department of Public Health of the State reserves final judgment as
to its safety and potability.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.203. Automatic fire sprinkler service.
   "Automatic fire sprinkler service" refers to a service line whose sole
purpose is to provide water for fire protection through an automatic sprinkler
system within a building.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.204. Auxiliary supply.
   "Auxiliary supply" means any water supply on or available to the premises
other than the public water supply.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.205. Backflow prevention.
   "Backflow prevention" refers to the equipment and technology necessary to
prevent potential contamination from cross connection.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.206. Billing period.
   "Billing period" means the time interval between two (2) consecutive water
meter readings which are taken for billing purposes.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.207. Billing unit.
   "Billing unit" means one hundred (100) cubic feet (hcf) of water, equivalent
to seven hundred forty-eight (748) gallons.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.208. City.
   For purposes of this chapter relating to water systems, the term "City" may
be used interchangeably with the Water Public Works Department.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.209. Council action.
   "Council action" means a resolution or ordinance adopted by the Thousand
Oaks City Council approving fees, charges, standards or other provisions
referenced in this Title.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.210. Cross connection.
   "Cross connection" means any unprotected connection between any part of a
water system used or intended to supply water for drinking purposes and any
source or system containing water or substances that are not or cannot be
approved as safe, wholesome, and potable for human consumption. The term is
used in conjunction with backflow prevention.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.211. Customer.
   "Customer" means a person, firm or company which has an approved application
for water service or who has received such service without an application.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.212. Customer hand valve.
   "Customer hand valve" means that valve generally located within the meter
box and on the customer's side of the meter which can be used to shut off or
turn on the water flow.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.213. Domestic service.
   "Domestic service" means service that can be used for potable service
regardless of whether the actual use is for same. For purposes of defining the
class of service, irrigation meters are within the domestic class.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.214. Dwelling unit.
   "Dwelling unit" means any residential unit including but not limited to,
single family homes, condominiums, townhouses and mobile homes.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.215. Fire flow.
   "Fire flow" means the flow from one or more fire hydrants, usually expressed
in gallons per minute. Adequate fire flow is available when the fire flow
equals or exceeds the fire flow required for a particular project or property.
For fire flow requirements, refer to the Water Design and Construction
Standards.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.216. Fire flow surcharge.
   "Fire flow surcharge" means a fee levied against development projects based
upon the fire flow as required by the Ventura County Fire Department.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.217. Historical base period.
   "Historical base period" means the full twenty-four (24) month billing
period which precedes the month when a water shortage condition is first
declared by the City Council. The historical base period shall be used for the
duration of the declared water shortage condition.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.218. Irrigation service or meters.
   "Irrigation service or meters" refers to the portion of the water system
specifically used for the irrigation of landscape, greenbelt or parkway areas
or similar areas.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.219. Lang Ranch zone.
   The area generally known as “Lang Ranch” shall include the area north of
Tracts 1585, 1093 and 1123 east of Route 23, Conejo Creek Freeway, and south of
Improvement Zone 2, Sunset Hills, and east to the City limits as shown on
Exhibit A. (See Ordinance)
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.220. Local share.
   "Local share" means a contribution made by an owner or company towards an
improvement constructed by others where the parcel or property in question is a
beneficiary of that improvement. The term is also referred to as a "pro-rata"
share.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.221. Main line extension agreement.
   "Main line extension agreement" means an agreement for extension of the City
pipeline system and may or may not involve reimbursement to the developer/
owner.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.222. Plans.
   "Plans" refers to the drawings of water facilities prepared by a California
registered civil engineer and approved by the Public Works Department.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.223. Plant investment fee.
   "Plant investment fee" means a fee which reflects as nearly as possible the
cost increment necessary to serve a new customer who is asking to connect to
the existing water system. This cost increment represents capital costs
exclusive of in-tract facilities, such as service mains, fire hydrants, service
connections and water meters. Capital costs include reservoirs, transmission
mains ten (10") inches and larger, pumping stations, turnout connections from
Calleguas Municipal Water District, water wells, treatment facilities,
telemetering, and other facilities required to provide source water.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.224. Plumbing Code.
   "Plumbing Code" means the "City of Thousand Oaks Plumbing Code" as defined
in Title 8 of the City of Thousand Oaks Municipal Code or as thereafter
amended.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.225. Potable water.
   "Potable water" means water supplied which is considered satisfactory for
domestic consumption.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.226. Pressure zone.
   "Pressure zone" refers to the zone of service as determined by the elevation
of the regulating reservoir or system.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.227. Public water main or system.
   "Public water main or system" refers to a water pipeline or associated
system including reservoirs and pumping stations dedicated for public use and
owned by the City and available to receive connections for service.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.228. Public Works Director.
   "Public Works Director" means the Director of the Public Works Department or
an authorized representative, also referred to as the Public Works Department
when discussing water matters.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.229. Pumping lift charge.
   "Pumping lift charge" means a charge for water on a quantity basis for
customers requiring that the water be pumped to their service zone. The pumping
lift charge is a surcharge above the base and standard quantity rates.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.230. Purveyor.
   "Purveyor" means the agency or company providing potable water service to
any property in the City of Thousand Oaks.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.231. Reimbursement agreement.
   "Reimbursement agreement" means an agreement entered into by and between the
City and an individual or company per the provisions of this Code where the
City agrees to collect and transfer to the individual or company funds from
other benefiting properties as reimbursement for a water facility originally
installed by the individual or company.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.232. Reservoir.
   "Reservoir" means a storage facility for water which within the City's
system generally refers to steel or concrete tanks.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.233. Reservoir storage fee.
(Ord. 826-NS, eff. February 24, 1983, repealed by § 2, Ord. 923-NS, eff. June
17, 1986 and Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.234. Service line.
   "Service line" means the small diameter line between the street main and the
customer's meter.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.235. Service zone.
   "Service zone" refers to the zone of service as identified by all those
customers being served from one or more reservoirs at a particular elevation.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.236. Special facilities surcharge.
   "Special facilities surcharge" means a special fee which reflects the
additional cost above the plant investment fee necessary to provide reservoir,
pipeline and pump station facilities within a particular water service zone.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.237. Unmetered water.
   "Unmetered water" refers to water made available to a developer or owner
through the City's water system but before an application is made for a meter.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.238. Water Design and Construction Standards.
   "Water Design and Construction Standards" refers to those standards
governing the design and construction of water facilities as adopted by Council
action and which are available for inspection and/or purchase at the Public
Works Department.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.239. Water main.
   "Water main" means a pipeline within the water system serving one or more
customers, fire sprinkler lines, and/or fire hydrants and generally being four
(4") inches or larger in diameter.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.240. Water service.
   "Water service" means the works and facilities for the storage and
distribution of water from the source of supply to the point of connection to
the customer's facilities.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.241. Water shortage condition.
   "Water shortage condition" means a determination by the City Council
following notification from the Metropolitan Water District of Southern
California or the Calleguas Municipal Water District that deliveries of potable
water supplies have reached a level such that each member agency of the
Metropolitan Water District is being directed to reduce the use of water by a
given amount.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.242. Will-serve letter.
   "Will-serve letter" is a document in which the Public Works Department
certifies that an applicants property lies within the City's water service area
and that the City is able to provide water service to the property, subject to
certain terms, conditions and limitations. A will-serve letter is typically not
provided by the City until such time as all fees have been paid and the terms
and conditions for City service have been met to the satisfaction of the Public
Works Department.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.243. Zone.
   "Zone" refers to the geographical area of water service corresponding to
service from a particular reservoir or reservoirs of common elevation.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Article 3. Classes of Service
Sec. 10-2.301. Domestic service.
   Domestic water service is that general metered water class including
residential, commercial, industrial and irrigation customers. This class is
intended for consumption as potable water. The general meter policy is per
Article 1 and the service regulations are per Article 5.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.302. Construction water.
   It is the intention by providing this class of service that all construction
water be metered. All persons, firms, corporations and public agencies desiring
to use water through fire hydrants owned or controlled by the City for purposes
other than extinguishing fires shall first sign an application for a fire
hydrant permit and for the installation of a construction meter and shall pay
for the water used as determined by the meter. The applicant shall specify the
location of the fire hydrant to be used and shall make a deposit for a
construction meter before the meter is installed. City personnel will move the
meter from one fire hydrant to another upon request.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.303. Unmetered water.
   This is the class of service furnished to a property after the water system
has been installed and is available for use including water to individual lots,
houses or buildings but before the customer has signed an application for
metered service at which time the regular service charges apply. Unmetered
charges shall be assessed after the water system is operational and has been
accepted by the City Council. Unmetered charges may be assessed whether or not
there is a dwelling unit or building on a particular lot/property unless waived
or delayed in writing by the Public Works Director. Once started for tract
projects, the responsibility for payment of unmetered charges shall be that of
the developer until the application for service is received and approved unless
the responsibility for payment has been transferred to a successor of interest
as in the case of custom lot developments and the successor in interest has
acknowledged his responsibility.
   Once significant water use occurs, either within the house or building or on
irrigated land or slopes, a meter application shall be made since the unmetered
charge is not intended for those uses.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.304. Automatic fire sprinkler service.
   This class covers installations of and provision of water to fire sprinkler
systems within buildings so protected. The installation does not normally
include a meter since the water use is strictly limited to fire protection.
   However, if water is used through an automatic fire sprinkler service
connection for any purpose other than the extinguishing of fires or a related
purpose, the City shall have the right either to place a meter on the automatic
fire sprinkler service connection at the customer's expense, and to charge at
metered rates for all water used, or to shut off the entire supply of water to
the premises through such service connection.
   All automatic fire sprinkler service connections shall be equipped with a
backflow prevention device pursuant to the provisions of Article 6 all at the
expense of the customer.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.305. Private fire hydrant service.
   All fire hydrants and associated lines shall be publicly dedicated. All
existing private fire hydrant systems require installation of backflow
prevention equipment in accordance with the Water Design and Construction
Standards. Additionally, all private fire hydrant systems shall be maintained
pursuant to all standards and codes applicable to public systems. The
provisions of this class of service are the same as for those of the automatic
fire sprinkler service. Private fire hydrant charges shall be set by Council
action.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.306. Temporary service connections.
   (a)   At the discretion of the Public Works Department, a temporary service
connection can be provided where (1) such service is outside the City's service
area or (2) some features of the connection are substandard pending other
improvements, and (3) a standard service connection is not available or
desired. Such connections, if granted, shall be disconnected and terminated
within one year after their installation unless an extension of time is granted
by the City after written application by the customer.
   (b)   The charge and associated fees for the installation of a temporary
service connection shall be the same as for a regular service connection.
   (c)   Where the construction of a temporary service connection conforms to
the standard requirements of a permanent service connection installation, the
temporary connection may be designated as a permanent service connection at any
time provided all the charges for the permanent service are paid and other
Public Works Department requirements are satisfied.
   (d)   When temporary service connections are disconnected, the full cost to
the City for such disconnection shall be paid by the customer.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Article 4. Connection Rules
Sec. 10-2.401. General.
   Installation of all water meters shall be by the City following receipt and
approval of the application and payment of all applicable fees. Where a
developer/owner has installed a main pipeline and appurtenances thereto, these
facilities shall have been accepted by the City Council before the meter is
installed unless administratively waived by the Public Works Director. However,
the Public Works Director may order that a meter be installed prior to City
Council acceptance of the system if slope or landscape irrigation is required
prior to the City Council acceptance of the water system or as otherwise deemed
appropriate by the Public Works Director.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.402. Application.
   The application for water service shall:
   (a)   Include the name and address of the applicant and person responsible
for paying the water bill, location of the service, meter size, and whether or
not the applicant is the owner, tenant or lessee.
   (b)   Include an agreement by the applicant to abide by all laws, rules and
regulations relating to the water system and supply.
   (c)   Include the signature of the property owner.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.403. Requirement to apply for and install meter.
   (a)   If the water supply to a premises has been shutoff or discontinued,
the person in possession or person taking possession shall make a proper
application to the City to have the water supply turned on.
   If a water service or supply is turned on without application, the owner
will be held liable for all charges for the water service rendered at double
the applicable water, rates, either by the meter reading or on the basis of the
estimated consumption; at the election of the City, for the length of time
service was received by the customer prior to the customer's making a proper
application.
   (b)   When the City finds that water is being used without a proper
application, the customer shall be notified, and if an application for such
service is not made promptly thereafter and the City immediately compensated
for water already used, the supply shall be shut off without further notice.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.404. Facilities responsibility.
   The installation, maintenance, repair or replacement of service line
fittings, connections and other facilities beyond the City's meters shall be
solely the property and complete responsibility of the customers and property
owners. The City's property and responsibility shall cease at the place where
the City's water meter is installed, and beyond that point the customer shall
by their application for water service agree to defend, hold the City harmless
and indemnify the City in the event of judgment, including a reasonable
attorney fee, for any and all claims or damage or liability to persons or
property arising or occurring beyond the point where the City's water meter is
installed.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.405. Size and location.
   The City reserves the right to determine the size and location of the
service line and meter box in relation to the boundaries of the premises to be
served. The customer's pipe to the customer's side of the meter shall not be
laid until the service connection is installed unless waived by the Public
Works Director. In the event the customer's pipe is laid to that location prior
to the time the service connection is installed, and its location at the curb
does not correspond with that of the service connection at the curb, the
customer shall bear the additional cost and obligation of connecting the
service connection with the customer's pipe.
   The meter shall be sized in accordance with the guidelines within the Water
Design and Construction Standards. Meters found to be consistently operating in
the upper portion of their range may be required to be replaced with a larger
meter with payment of the then applicable fees and replacement charges in
effect at the time of replacement.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.406. Valves within meter box.
   Each service connection shall have at least two control valves within the
meter box. One will be a control valve on the customer's side of the meter also
referred to as the "customer hand valve." This valve may be used by the
customer to turn the water on and off.
   The other valve shall be on the City's side of the meter also referred to as
an "angle meter stop" or "curb stop."
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.407. Curb stops or angle meter valve.
   Every service connection installed by the City shall be equipped with an
angle meter valve on the inlet side of the meter. It is intended for the
exclusive use of the City in controlling the use of water through the service
connection and/or meter. If it is damaged by the customer to an extent
requiring its replacement, the customer shall bear the cost for such
replacement.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.408. Customer building control valve.
   The customer's service line shall have a gate valve with a wheel control
placed at the building to control the supply to the building.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.409. Alterations to water system.
   All changes to the City's water system including changing the meter size or
service line size, relocating of any facilities, raising or lowering any
facilities, addition of fire hydrants, etc., must be done with approval of the
Public Works Department and following payment of applicable fees.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.410. Connections.
   (a)   The City may either make the connection between the existing water
system of the City and the system installed by the private contractor/customer
or may elect to have the developer/contractor perform the work under inspection
by the Public Works Department. Such connections shall not be deemed as a
permanent service connection until the water system constructed by the private
contractor has been accepted by the City, all service charges have been paid,
and the system has been offered for dedication to the City.
   (b)   The City shall operate all valves, remove the plugs from existing
fittings and install the valves on fittings furnished by the private contractor
between the existing system of the City and the system installed by the private
contractor. The charges for such service with the exception of operating valves
shall be based on cost, plus an amount set by ordinance for overhead. The
applicant shall furnish all materials, excavate and backfill the pit, and
perform all resurfacing and other work necessary to produce a finished result.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.411. Extension of water system.
   The City shall not be obligated to extend water services to those areas
beyond existing City water mains and/or off the public rights-of-way, nor shall
it have an obligation to provide service where adequate fire protection as
defined by the ISO guidelines or pressure is not available.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.412. Dedication of facilities.
   As a condition precedent to receiving water services for each subdivision or
parcel of land, the owner shall furnish, install and offer for dedication to
the City all necessary local system improvements as required by the City,
designed and constructed according to the Water Design and Construction
Standards and subject to approval and acceptance by the City. Unless otherwise
approved by the Public Works Director, no occupancy of newly completed tracts
or projects shall be permitted until the City accepts such dedication and the
developer has satisfied all other applicable portions of this Code.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.413. Acceptance of water facilities.
   City Council acceptance of water facilities shall only follow completion of
the physical improvements as well as administrative items as required by the
Water Design and Construction Standards, Municipal Code, or as deemed necessary
by the Public Works Director. Acceptance of water facilities may be delayed
until substantial use is either present or anticipated as evidenced by the
construction of buildings/houses and occupancy of those units. Acceptance may
be delayed until at least seventy-five (75%) percent of the buildings/houses
are under construction or at least fifty (50%) percent of the buildings/houses
are occupied.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.414. Calleguas requirements.
   No permits for connection or approvals for construction of water facilities
associated with development projects shall be approved or otherwise granted
until the applicant or customer has first satisfied the requirements of the
Calleguas Municipal Water District's Ordinance covering capital facilities
charges. The requirement to satisfy said ordinance is first the obligation of
the applicant or customer regardless of whether or not initiated at the City's
request. No will-serve letter shall be issued until the Calleguas requirement
is met.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Article 5. Service Regulations
Sec. 10-2.501. City responsibilities for maintenance.
   The maintenance and operation of the City's water system including all
reservoirs, pumping stations, main public pipelines, service lines, water
meters, fire hydrants and appurtenances shall be the sole responsibility of the
City or its agents.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.502. Operation of City valves and fire hydrants.
   Only City personnel or authorized agents shall be allowed to operate City
valves. This also pertains to contractor work involved with connections to the
City system.
   Only authorized City or County of Ventura Fire Department personnel are to
operate any fire hydrant valves unless otherwise approved. In the case of the
latter, the Public Works Department shall first be notified of any requirements
to operate fire hydrants for training purposes. Where construction meters are
installed, City personnel shall be notified when the installation is required
or when discontinuance or a change in location is desired.
   Where the valve(s) on any fire hydrant must be opened or closed, only
approved fire hydrant wrenches shall be used.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.503. Domestic meters.
   (a)   Setting. The City shall purchase and install all meters and shall be
the owner of all meters and associated appurtenances.
   (b)   Reading. Under ordinary conditions, each continuous service meter
shall be read monthly or bimonthly on approximately the same day of the month.
   (c)   Testing. Upon making a written application and paying a deposit, as
set by Council action, any customer may have the meter accuracy tested through
which water is being furnished to his premises. If the meter flow rate is found
to register more than two (2%) percent in excess of the actual quantity of
water passing through, correction shall be made by the City and the deposit
shall be refunded to the customer.
   (d)   Change of location or site. When a smaller or larger meter than the
existing meter is to be installed on an existing service connection, the work
shall be done by the City and the cost of the installation of the service and
the new meter shall be borne by the customer. Likewise, when the location of a
meter or service is changed, the cost of making such change shall be borne by
the customer. In the case of a larger meter, an additional plant investment fee
will be due with a credit for the previous meter. In the case of a smaller
meter, no credit will be given for payment of the plant investment fee for the
prior larger meter.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.504. Water pressure.
   The City shall not be responsible for maintenance of water pressure at all
times nor maintenance of water pressure for customers located at high
elevations beyond normal City water pressure. The customer shall be responsible
for the following:
   (a)   Operation and maintenance for any on-site pumping booster equipment
where such equipment is on the customer's side of the meter and is intended to
boost the water pressure;
   (b)   The setting and maintenance of the pressure regulator that is normally
installed by the contractor in the areas of high pressure to protect house/
building plumbing. In general, such a device shall be installed wherever the
service pressure exceeds eighty (80) pounds per square inch (psi);
   (c)   Designing landscape irrigation and building plumbing systems for
reasonable expected pressures after consideration of the City's master plans
for water systems. Unless specific information is known to the contrary, those
customer systems should be designed to operate properly at a minimum of forty-
five (45) psi.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.505. Emergency discontinuances.
   The City shall have the right to discontinue water service to any customer
or premises or in any part of the distribution system as long as necessary
without notice to customers in case of emergency.
   In cases of non-emergency and in cases of extensions or connections, the
City shall make a reasonable effort to deliver a 48-hour notice of the shutoff
to the customer, or to some responsible interested person on the premises, or
by a notice of publication in the local newspaper. The City shall not assume
any liability for the failure of the customer to receive or to understand such
notice. Customers having any devices requiring a continuous water supply should
take all necessary steps to prevent damages to, or the causing of injury by,
such devices as a result of the shutting off of the water supply.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.506. Tampering with Public Works Department property.
   (a)   No person shall tamper, interfere with, or damage any City property.
No person other than an authorized agent or employee of the City shall open any
street hydrant, open or close any valve, or interfere with any water service or
any water meter attached to any service pipe connected with the City's main
pipes. No person shall deposit, or cause to be deposited, any substance or
liquid in any water main or pipe of the City, or do anything which might cause
any water supplied or furnished by, or belonging to the City to become
polluted, or take water from any service without first securing permission from
the City.
   (b)   Any person and/or company responsible for tampering, interfering with
or damaging Public Works Department property shall be guilty of a violation of
this Code pursuant to Chapter 2, Title 1 of this Code.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.507. Right of entry.
   (a)   Authorized inspectors, agents and employees of the Public Works
Department shall have the right of entry and access, at all reasonable times,
in, to and upon any and all customers' buildings, grounds or premises, or any
part thereof (including any and all plumbing, water piping, fixtures, or
connections located, used, maintained or operated therein or thereon), for the
purpose of:
   (1)   Determining the existence, operation, and/or use in, on, or about such
buildings, grounds, or premises for:
   (i)   Any plumbing or water piping which may now or hereafter cause, create,
or permit backflow, back-siphonage, or any other condition affecting or likely
to affect the purity and/or potability of the water supply furnished by the
City;
   (ii)   Any source such as hot water which could damage City equipment such
as meters;
   (iii)   Any source of water supply which may now or hereafter be connected
with the water supply system of the City;
   (iv)   Any source of pressure, vacuum, contamination or pollution (including
any and all equipment, fixtures or appliances connected or used therewith or
therefore) affecting or likely to affect the purity and/or potability of the
water supply for the City; and
   (2)   Facilitating the enforcement, from time to time, of any and all of the
Public Works Department's applicable laws, rules and regulations.
   (b)   Such authorized representatives of the City shall be furnished with
and upon the request of any consumer, shall display appropriate evidence of
identification.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.508. Easements.
   The property owner shall be responsible for maintaining public easements
within their property such that the City has access at all times. No permanent
improvements such as buildings, block walls, iron fences, large trees and
shrubs and the like shall be placed over the easement without prior written
approval from the City. Where the City must perform maintenance and/or
construction activity within the easement, it shall not be responsible for
replacing said permanent facilities or other structures prohibited by this
section.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.509. Customer piping responsibilities.
   (a)   All piping and appurtenances installed by the customer on his premises
shall remain the property of the customer and the maintenance and care thereof
his sole responsibility. The City's control and responsibility shall end at the
customer's side of the meter. The City shall in no case be liable for damages
caused by, or in any way arising out of, the running or escape of water from
open faucets, burst pipes, or faulty fixtures on the premises.
   (b)   Every service connection shall be equipped with a control valve on the
inlet side of the meter (City side) which valve may not be used by the customer
when it becomes necessary to shut off the water supply to the entire premises.
Standards normally require a customer hand valve within the meter box which is
on the customer side of the meter and can be shut off by the customer. Upon
request, for emergency purposes, the City may, without charge, shut off its
control valve with the understanding that the City or other authorized person
will turn on the water after repairs have been made.
   (c)   The customer shall be responsible for the cost of repairing and/or
changing any meter damaged by hot water or steam emanating from or about the
premises.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.510. Conditions affecting the purity and potability of water.
   If or when the City ascertains that a condition affecting the purity and
potability of the water supply of the City exists in, on, or about any
building, grounds or premises in violation of any health law, rule, and
regulation of the State, or any health ordinance or the code of the County, or
any law, or rule, or regulation of the City, the City shall;
   (a)   Immediately notify the person owning and/or controlling such building,
grounds or premises of the existence of such condition; and
   (b)   Require such person to comply within a reasonable time (as stated in
such notice) with any such law, ordinance, code, rule or regulation.
   (c)   Depending upon the nature and severity of the problem, the City may
require that service be discontinued immediately and that it not be restored
until acceptable compliance is demonstrated by the customer.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.511. Cross connection and backflow prevention.
   This subject is covered under Article 6.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.512. Water shortages.
   (a)   If the Public Works Director determines that over consumption of
water, loss of pressure in a system, breakdown, or any similar occurrence
requires emergency restrictions upon the use of water from any system, he shall
order such restrictions, and then shall obtain authorization from the Council
at its first meeting following such restriction order.
   (b)   Such order may restrict the use of water for irrigation, sprinkling,
manufacturing or nonessential uses. The use of water for particular purposes
may be limited to specified days or hours of a day or altogether prohibited,
except that the use of water for drinking, cooking and sanitary purposes shall
not be prohibited.
   (c)   Any such order shall be communicated by the Public Works Department
either in writing or orally to customers served by the affected system. The
water supply to any premises upon which the use of water is being made in
violation of an order of the Public Works Director may be summarily shut off.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.513. Large increases in water use.
   Nonresidential customers making any change in operations on their premises
requiring substantial increases in the rates of water flow through the City's
facilities shall immediately give the City written notice of the nature of the
proposed change.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.514. Presumptions and penalties involving theft of water services.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person with intent to obtain for himself or
herself water services without paying the full lawful charge therefore, or with
intent to enable another person to do so, or with intent to deprive the Public
Works Department of any part of the full lawful charge for water services it
provides, to commit, authorize, solicit, aid or abet any of the following:
   (1)   Divert or cause to be diverted water services, by any means
whatsoever;
   (2)   Prevent or alter any water meter, or other device used in determining
the charge for water services, from accurately performing its measuring
function by tampering or by any other means;
   (3)   Tamper with any water line, meter, or other property owned by or used
by the Public Works Department to provide water services;
   (4)   Make or cause to be made any connection with or reconnection with
property owned or used by the Public Works Department to provide water services
without the authorization or consent of the Public Works Department;
   (5)   Use or receive the direct benefit of water services with knowledge, or
any reason to believe that an unauthorized diversion, tampering or connection,
existed and was being utilized to receive that water, or that the use or
receipt was otherwise without the authorization or consent of the Public Works
Department.
   (b)   The presence of any of the following objects, circumstances or
conditions in the public service easement area adjoining the customer's
property or on premises controlled by the customer or by the person using or
receiving the direct benefit of all or a portion of water services obtained in
violation of this section shall permit an inference that the customer of person
intended to and did violate this section:
   (1)   Any instrument, apparatus or device primarily designed to be used to
obtain water services without paying the full lawful charge therefore;
   (2)   Any meter that has been altered, tampered with or bypassed so as to
cause no measurement or inaccurate measurement of water services.
   (c)   Any violation of this section may be prosecuted by the City by means
of a criminal infraction or misdemeanor and/or civil filing, as deemed
appropriate by the City Attorney.
   (d)   This section shall not be construed to preclude the applicability of
any other provision of the criminal law of this State.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Article 6. Cross Connection and Backflow Prevention
Sec. 10-2.601. Cross Connections - General.
   Cross connection can be defined as any unprotected connection between any
part of a water system used or intended to supply water for drinking purposes
and any source or system containing water or substances that are not or cannot
be approved as safe, wholesome, and potable for human consumption. The term is
used in conjunction with backflow prevention. Bypass arrangements, jumper
connections, removable sections and other devices through which backflow can
occur are considered cross connections. Backflow is the physical process by
which contaminants can enter the potable water supply.
   No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained
by the Public Works Department unless the water supply is protected as required
by said State regulations and the provisions of this section.
   The purposes of the provisions in this section are to:
   (a)   Protect the public water supply against actual or potential cross
connections by isolating within the premises contamination and pollution that
may occur because of some undiscovered or unauthorized cross connection on the
premises;
   (b)   Eliminate known cross connections.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.602. Other applicable codes or standards.
   (a)   All regulations of the Department of Public Health of the State, Title
17 of the California Administrative Code are adopted and made a part of this
section by reference or other applicable codes and/or standards.
   (b)   Section 12 of the Water Design and Construction Standards shall apply
and supplement the information contained herein. That section of the Standards,
defines various types of backflow prevention as well as presents the list of
approved devices.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.603. Cross Connection Control Officer.
   The Cross Connection Control Officer for the City is appointed by the Public
Works Director and is responsible for overseeing that backflow prevention
devices are properly installed, maintained and tested. The area of
responsibility for the Cross Connection Control Officer shall be limited to the
City's water service area.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.604. Backflow prevention devices.
   (a)   Approval and installation. Both the selection and installation of
backflow prevention devices required by the provisions of this section shall be
approved by the City and shall be installed by and at the expense of the
customer.
   (b)   Testing and maintenance. The devices shall be tested annually by a
certified tester with repairs and maintenance as needed. Records of such tests
and repairs shall be kept by the customer and made available to the Cross
Connection Control Officer. All of the above shall be at the sole cost of the
customer. A property owner failure or refusal to have a device tested, or take
corrective action to repair any backflow device which has failed its annual
test is a public nuisance under TOMC Section
1-6.01 et seq. As additional to remedies provided therein, the City may hire a
company to perform the annual test and/or repair the failed device, and the
property owner shall be billed for all charges paid to said company, along with
any manpower or out-of-pocket costs or charges incurred by the City or any
other additional charges or fees as may be set by the Council action. As an
alternative, with an owner who refuses to repair a failed backflow device, the
City may, after giving thirty (30) days written notice to the property owner,
shut off the domestic water supply to the premises which is to be protected by
said backflow device until such time as the device has been repaired by the
property owner.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.605. Requirement to comply.
   Service of water to any premises may be discontinued by the Public Works
Department if a required backflow preventive device is not installed,
inspected, tested, properly operating and maintained, or if it is found to have
been removed or bypassed, or if unprotected cross connections exist on the
premises. In such cases, service shall not be restored until such conditions or
defects are corrected to the satisfaction of the Cross Connection Control
Officer.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.606. Where devices are required.
   Backflow devices are required at or near the point of service from the
public potable water system to any location:
   (a)   Having an auxiliary supply, including a groundwater well;
   (b)   Where chemicals are manufactured or processed or are used within the
premises that could be potentially harmful;
   (c)   Where hospitals or doctors' offices, either for humans or animals,
with medical and surgical facilities are maintained;
   (d)   Where oils and gasses are produced or developed;
   (e)   Where there is a mortuary;
   (f)   Where there is food processing;
   (g)   Where there is a landscape irrigation system;
   (h)   Where natural and synthetic rubber, rubber goods and tires are
manufactured;
   (i)   Where a brewery is operated;
   (j)   Where the use within the building might impart an objectionable taste,
odor or color;
   (k)   Where there is a wastewater treatment facility or pumping station;
   (l)   Where there is need for a backflow prevention device for protection of
the public potable system.
   Backflow prevention devices fall into the following categories: Reduced
pressure principle device (RP), double check detector valve, air gap, pressure
vacuum breaker, and atmospheric vacuum breaker. The specific device required
for a particular location shall be per the Water Design and Construction
Standards or as required by the Cross Connection Control Officer.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.607. Device requirements.
   The following rules are to be used in conjunction with those rules contained
in Title17 of the California Administrative Code and Section 12 of the Water
Design and Construction Standards as well as the judgment of the Cross
Connection Control Officer. These rules are aimed at protecting the City's
water system near the water meter as opposed to internal protection within a
building where such internal protection is provided and is approved by the
City's Cross Connection Control Officer, protection at the meter may not be
required.
   (a)   Requirement for devices. Any service connection to the public water
system from a premises having a potential for harmful or objectionable
substances to enter the public water system through backflow cross connections
shall be protected.
   (b)   Auxiliary water supply. Whenever a building or premises has a
connection to both the public water system and an auxiliary water supply, the
latter shall be protected with either a reduced pressure device or a double
check valve depending upon the potential and severity of the cross connection,
unless the system was accepted by the City as an additional source of public
system water.
   (c)   Air gaps. Are required at the service connection to any premises on
which any material dangerous to health or toxic in nature may be handled under
pressure. Also, air gaps shall be used to protect the potable system at
wastewater treatment or pumping facilities. The air gap shall be located as
close as practicable to the service cock. Other types of devices would only be
approved if the air gap is not physically possible.
   (d)   Reduced pressure principle devices. Are required at industrial and/or
commercial facilities using potentially harmful chemicals, hospitals, doctor's
offices, irrigation systems (unless protected by air gap or pressure vacuum
breaker), fire sprinkler systems using chemical additives, mortuaries, and as
required by the Cross Connection Control Officer.
   (e)   Double check valve assemblies. Are required where products used within
the building or premises might impact an objectionable taste, odor or color but
would not be hazardous.
   (f)   Double check detector valves. Are required where there is no other
meter between the water source and the building such as a fire service line for
building.
   (g)   Whenever it is not practical to protect drinking water systems on
premises against the entry of water from a source or piping system or equipment
that cannot be approved as safe or potable for human use, an entirely separate
potable water system shall be installed to supply water at points convenient
for consumers.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.608. Fire systems.
   Water systems for fighting fire, derived from a supply not approved as safe
for potable use shall be kept wholly separate from the potable system. In cases
where the domestic water system is used for both drinking and firefighting
purposes, approved backflow prevention devices shall be installed to protect
the domestic system. Fire protection classes and required devices are as
follows:
   (a)   Classes I and II. Direct connections from the public water mains only;
no tanks, reservoirs, or physical connection from other water supplies, no
anti-freeze or, other additives, no booster pumps creating less than a positive
ten (10) psi suction pressure; all outlets discharging to atmosphere.
Generally, Classes I and II do not require backflow prevention devices (i.e.,
at fire hydrants connected to public main).
   (b)   Class III. Direct connection from public water system plus either
elevated storage tank, fire pumps taking suction from such tanks/reservoirs, or
pressure tanks. The water in the storage tanks shall be potable. Generally,
Class III requires only double check valves to prevent stagnant waters from
backflowing into the potable system.
   (c)   Classes IV, V and VI. Like Class I and II, but with an auxiliary water
supply within one thousand two hundred (1,200') feet of the pumper connection.
This class requires a reduced pressure device or double check valve depending
upon the quality of the auxiliary water supply. If auxiliary supply is
nonpotable source such as contaminated water, industrial water systems or
contains chemical additives, an air gap may be required.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.609. Process waters.
   Potable water pipelines connected to equipment for industrial processes or
operations shall be disconnected therefrom if practicable. Where disconnection
is not practicable, a suitable backflow prevention device located beyond the
last point from which drinking water may be taken shall be provided on the feed
line to process piping or equipment. In the event the particular process liquid
is especially corrosive or apt to prevent reliable action of the backflow
prevention device, air gap separation shall be provided.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.610. Marking safe and unsafe water lines.
   Where the premises contain dual or multiple water systems and piping, the
exposed portions of pipelines shall be painted, banded, or marked at sufficient
intervals to distinguish clearly which water is safe and which is not safe. All
outlets from secondary or other potentially contaminated systems shall be
posted as being contaminated and unsafe for drinking purposes. All outlets
intended for drinking, purposes shall be plainly marked to indicate that fact.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.611. Building plumbing.
   All building plumbing and fixtures shall be per the requirements of the
California Plumbing Code as amended by the City. The Public Works Department
shall have the primary responsibility to prevent water from unapproved sources,
or any substance, from entering the public water system. The Community
Development Department shall also have jurisdiction over the plumbing on the
customer's side of the backflow prevention device. The Cross Connection Control
Officer shall also have access to the on-site facilities to determine if the
potable system is adequately protected.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.612. Premises water supervisor.
   Each premises having potential cross connections or requiring backflow
prevention and where deemed necessary by the Cross Connection Control Officer
shall have a designated person responsible for the installation and maintenance
of backflow prevention equipment.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.613. No introduction of chemicals into water supply.
   No person shall install, maintain, or use any water treatment mechanism,
device, or contrivance on any domestic water supply line, or introduce any
chemical into any domestic water supply line to or within any consumer
premises, in any manner without the prior written approval and authorization of
the Health Department and the water purveyor. In the event of any violation of
the provisions of this subsection, the water purveyor shall notify the owner,
or authorized agent of the owner, of the violating premises of such violation.
The water purveyor shall set a reasonable time, not to exceed ten (10) days,
for the owner to have the violation removed or corrected. Upon the failure of
the owner to have the violation corrected by the end of the specified time
interval, the water purveyor, if in his judgment an imminent health hazard
exists, may cause the water service to the building or premises to be
terminated until the violation is corrected as provided in this subsection.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.614. Fees.
   Fees for plan checking for backflow devices, for the initial inspection and
testing of backflow devices, and for yearly testing (where done by the City)
shall be set by Council action.
(Ord. 1515-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Article 7. Charges
Sec. 10-2.701. Plant investment fee.
   (a)   Fee basis. Prior to receiving water service for any residence,
building, irrigation meter or parcel of land, a plant investment fee shall be
paid. The plant investment fee shall be in addition to the requirements for
construction of or payments towards service mains and connections and water
meters. All requests for irrigation meters shall be accompanied with payment of
the plant investment fee, regardless of whether or not such facilities will
eventually be dedicated to the City or another public agency. The owner of a
property or the owner at the time the charge was generated shall be responsible
for payment of all unpaid charges not collected or collectable from the
applicant, user or occupant. Payment(s) of plant investment fees are not
transferable from one property to another, except to another public agency,
where operations and other onsite plumbing revisions have altered water demand,
subject to the approval of the Public Works Director.
   (b)   Fee amount. The amount of the plant investment fee shall be based upon
the size of the required meter and shall be as set by Council action. For
special situations where, in the opinion of the Public Works Director, the
calculation of the plant investment fee does not result in an equitable charge,
such fee shall be determined in accordance with best available information and
professional engineering practices. All fee amounts shall correspond to the
amount currently in effect at the time payment is made.
   (c)   Time of payment. No parcel of property shall be connected to the water
system until all water connection fees have been paid. The water connection
fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of a building permit.
   Payment of water connection fees cannot occur earlier than the following:
   (1)   For tract/subdivision projects, no sooner than recordation of the
tract map;
   (2)   For other projects, no sooner than:
   (i)   Approval of water system drawings.
   (ii)   Recordation of a parcel map.
   (iii)   At the time of application for a water permit, which should coincide
with finalization of documents necessary for a building permit for approved
projects, which must be accepted for plan check by the Public Works Department.
   (d)   Escalation. All plant investment fees, special facilities surcharge
fees, and fire flow surcharges shall be adjusted biennially and by Council
action by a factor based upon the increase or decrease in the Engineering News
Record (ENR)’s Construction Cost Index for Los Angeles based upon the change
from the preceding two (2) years’ July-to-July period.
   (e)   Credits or refunds for prior payment of plant investment fee. When a
larger service (meter) is requested than that which was previously paid for,
then the credit shall be for the current value of the plant investment fee for
the meter size previously paid. When a smaller service (meter) is desired there
shall be no refund for the previous over payment. However, these shall remain a
credit to the property for the larger water service (meter).
   (f)   Subdivision of parcels. If a parcel of property having a plant
investment fee credit is divided, that credit may be divided also in any way
that the owner instructs the City in writing provided, however, the credit
remaining with any parcel connected to the water system shall not be less than
the amount that would be required as a plant investment fee for that parcel
using current rates. In the absence of written instructions, the Public Works
Director may divide the credit
   (g)   Non-residential Condominiums. The Property Owners Association, or
property management firm acting on behalf of the Property Owners Association,
encompassing a single building or a group of buildings or individual ownerships
on the parent property, shall be billed and shall pay for monthly water use
charges of all users within the parent property. Each individual ownership
shall be a member of the Property Owners Association.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1646-NS, eff. August
10, 2018, and § 2, Ord. 1694-NS, eff. March 1, 2022)
Sec. 10-2.702. Special facilities surcharge.
   In selected water service zones where the collection of plant investment
fees would not allow for construction of necessary water improvements, as
determined by the City Council, a special facilities surcharge shall be
assessed. The amount of the fee shall be as set by Council action. The fee
shall be due and payable concurrent with or prior to payment of the plant
investment fee. The fee shall be assessed on a building by building basis where
a parcel contains more than one building. Where there is a changed use on the
property such that the formula for the facilities surcharge yields a higher
amount, the incremental difference shall be due and payable.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.703. Fire flow surcharge.
   In recognition that a significant portion of the water system capital cost
is attributable to the provision of fire protection, there shall be a fire flow
surcharge based upon the approved fire flow requirement as set by the Ventura
County Fire Department. Said surcharge amounts shall be as set by Council
action. The fee shall be due and payable concurrent with or prior to payment of
the plant investment fee. Where there is a changed use on the property such
that the fire flow surcharge amount is increased, the incremental difference
shall be due and payable.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.704. Additional charges for capital improvements.
   The City may charge an additional amount under the following circumstances
providing that an area of benefit or benefiting properties are identified along
with the capital improvement cost:
   (a)   Where a specific improvement such as a pipeline has been or will be
constructed by the City wherein such a project is of a localized nature meaning
that the number of benefiting properties is relatively few and identifiable;
   (b)   Where the costs associated with a specific City improvement project
exceed that which normally could be covered by the plant investment fee;
   (c)   Charges levied for improvement projects already constructed may not be
deferred and are payable concurrent with payment of the plant investment fee or
prior to issuance of the building permit, whichever comes first;
   (d)   Where the City has entered into a reimbursement agreement with a
developer or landowner for a capital improvement project installed by the
latter, wherein the City shall collect "pro-rata" shares from benefiting
properties.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.705. Domestic use rates.
   The charges for water used through domestic meters including irrigation
meters and Fire Department connections, shall include a fixed charge for a
minimum or base rate plus a charge for the quantity of water used. In addition,
those customers which require the water to be pumped to a higher pressure or
service zone shall be charged a pumping lift rate. The component parts of the
domestic use rates shall be determined as follows:
   (a)   Base or minimum rate. Shall be determined by Council action.
   (b)   Quantity Rate. Shall be in addition to the base or minimum rate and
shall be a cost per one hundred (100) cubic feet of water as read on the meter
for the billing period. The quantity rate shall be set by Council action.
   (c)   Adjustments to domestic use rates for wholesale cost of water and for
energy charges. Adjustments in the cost to the City for these two expense
categories will normally be considered as "pass-through" items. Adjustments,
either in the form of an increase or a decrease in the domestic use rates, may
be made at any time as set by Council action.
   (d)   Pumping lift charge. Customers in service zones requiring that the
water be pumped (lifted) up to the zone shall be charged an amount per one
hundred (100) cubic feet per lift wherein a lift corresponds to each time the
water must be pumped by the City's water system to a higher elevation. The
charge so determined is in addition to the quantity rate discussed in (c)
above. The pumping lift charge shall be set by Council action.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.706. Groundwater use rates.
   The charges for customers utilizing groundwater shall be as set by the City
Council or as established by the Public Works Director, providing such charges
do not exceed the estimated reasonable cost of providing the services for which
the fees or charges are made.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.707. Construction water.
   The rate for construction water use, a deposit amount, and an installation
charge shall be set by Council action. A written statement shall be required
for the removal of a meter. All repair and replacement costs of construction
meters shall be charged to the water user. Requests for the removal of
construction meters shall be in writing, with the minimum rate applying until
such requests for removal are received.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.708. Unmetered water.
   Unmetered charges represent an availability charge after the public water
system has been accepted by the City Council but before water meter(s) are
installed. The charges are not intended to replace the installation of meters
where water use is required for domestic or irrigation purposes. Instead, the
charges are applicable to tracts or properties where water use is absent or
relatively minor and until such time as occupancy is requested or significant
water use is present.
   Unmetered water charges shall be as set by Council action.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.709. Unauthorized use of water.
   Any person or organization using City water without a meter where such use
has not received prior approval shall be charged for the estimated water use at
an amount double the normal applicable rates and such use shall be stopped
immediately.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.710. Street sweeping.
   Water for street sweeping operations within the City Water Service Area and
pursuant to a City franchise agreement shall be obtained from City-approved
fire hydrants and billed annually at a fixed rate. Payment shall be made in
advance of water use and the fixed rate shall be as set by City Council action.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1720-NS, eff. January
1, 2024)
Sec. 10-2.711. Service connections and meters.
   When installed by the Public Works Department, the charge for the
installation of a service connection shall be based on the prevailing costs of
materials and labor, plus an amount for overhead. The deposit amounts shall be
determined administratively by the Public Works Director and shall be required
prior to any installation of the meter and service. If the deposit amount
exceeds the actual cost of the work, a refund will be provided to the customer.
If the actual cost exceeds the deposit amount the customer shall be required to
pay the difference prior to receiving water service. The cost of the water
meter and installation costs shall be determined administratively by the Public
Works Department with the rate of overhead determined by Council action. Said
costs shall be the responsibility of the developer or owner.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.712. Miscellaneous repair and/or maintenance costs.
   Where City crews are involved in repairs or maintenance wherein such work is
either done on a private system at the request of the private party or for the
protection of the City's system or where the work is a result of damage to the
City facilities by a private individual or company, then the City shall charge
that individual or company. Such charges shall include materials, equipment,
labor, all as determined by the Public Works Department, and overhead at a rate
set by Council action.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.713. Automatic fire sprinkler service.
   The monthly charge shall be a fixed amount as set by Council action
dependent upon the size of the connection.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.714. Service disconnections and restoration (domestic).
   There shall be a charge for the disconnection of a service; there shall also
be a separate charge if service is restored between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m. on weekdays, or on Saturdays, Sundays or holidays. Both charges shall
be set by Council action.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.715. Miscellaneous charges.
   The Public Works Department shall prepare and collect charges for work
performed or damages incurred as follows where the charges shall be based upon
the costs incurred including an amount for overhead by Council action.
   (a)   Charges to change the size of a meter or the location of the meter;
   (b)   Charges for water meter testing;
   (c)   Charges to replace a damaged meter box where the party responsible for
the damage is known;
   (d)   Charges to replace meter box covers if requested by a customer or
damaged by the customer;
   (e)   Charges for damage to fire hydrants or any other public water
facilities where the responsible party is known. The damage can be either
accidental or a result of tampering. The responsible party shall be charged for
the costs of repairs plus the cost for any water lost or consumed. Unless the
charges are paid within the specified time period, the City may discontinue
water service to the customer and/or bring legal action for collection.
   (f)   Charges to a contractor with an encroachment permit when a water
system shutdown occurs more than one time during the permit period through no
fault of the City.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.716. Other fees and charges covered by Council action.
   In addition to those discussed above, various fees and charges shall be
adopted by Council action including the following: Administrative, fees such as
plan check, fire flow calculations, inspection, easements and other legal
documents, quitclaim and special agreements, reproduction charges, fire service
charges, back flow prevention charges, interest penalties and other similar
charges.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Article 8. Main Line Extension and Oversizing Agreements and Local Shares
Sec. 10-2.801. Reimbursement Agreement - General.
   A developer or owner may request reimbursement for a portion of the cost
associated with the installation of a water facility, typically a pipeline. Any
reimbursement shall be by agreement and pursuant to the requirements outlined
in this article.
   The City may require, or a developer may elect to construct, an off-site
water main which may, in the opinion of the Public Works Director, qualify for
reimbursement subject to payback through a reimbursement agreement. Where a
water main must be extended to serve a property, the main extension normally
shall be constructed by the property owner requesting service. That portion of
the project costs, as approved by the Public Works Director, which benefits
other properties may be subject to payback through a reimbursement agreement.
To qualify, there must be (1) benefiting properties which have agreed to
participate or that can be required to participate through normal City
procedures, and (2) improvements which provide a substantial benefit to those
properties.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.802. Main line extension.
   (a)   General. Each reimbursement agreement shall state the total dollar
amount which is subject to reimbursement and shall identify the water line(s)
which are the subject of the agreement and the entire area benefitted by the
extension or oversizing of such line(s). Preparation of and entering into a
reimbursement agreement typically would occur at or near the conclusion of
construction of the project so that costs can be compiled. Methods of
determining the pro-rata shares may be: (1) by area of the benefiting
properties; (2) by the number of benefiting properties if that is judged by the
City to be more equitable; (3) by the number of single-family dwellings; or any
other method approved by the Public Works Director. The methodology used to
determine benefit and the selection of the properties that are considered to
benefit shall be at the sole discretion of the City.
   (b)   Eligible and Ineligible Project costs. The eligible project costs may
consists of the construction contract price, including all labor and material
costs incurred for the construction of the water line(s), engineering design
and surveying costs, bond issuance costs, fees paid to the City, such as for
plan check, inspection, encroachment permits, easement documents, and other
costs approved to be eligible. Ineligible costs shall include attorney fees,
interest paid on construction loan financing, and contract administration costs
in excess of ten (10) percent of the total construction costs. Only that
portion of the project cost which benefits other properties, as approved by the
Public Works Director, shall be subject to payback through a reimbursement
agreement. The reimbursement agreement shall be based upon actual constructed
costs, not estimates.
   Documentation of costs shall be provided to the City in the form of signed,
executed contracts, and certified payroll sheets showing the names of
employees, their wages and all deductions for state and federal taxes, health
benefits, workers' compensation, union dues (if applicable), social security
and any other standard deductions. In a case where an applicant is personally
involved in the construction of the improvements (such as operation of a
backhoe or other equipment), the hourly charges for said person may not exceed
the normally accepted union rate for operation of said piece of equipment and
shall be approved by the Public Works Director.
   (c)   Reimbursement payments. Each reimbursement agreement shall include
provision for the amount and timing of payments to the developer, its
successors or assigns as received by the City from benefiting properties. The
maximum duration of the agreement shall be ten (10) years commencing on the
date of City Council acceptance of the mainline extension or the date of
approval of the reimbursement agreement by City Council, whichever comes first.
The applicant shall be responsible for providing a current mailing address to
the City over the life of the reimbursement agreement. The City's
responsibility for making reimbursement payments to the applicant shall be
limited to mailing such reimbursements to the last known address provided by
the applicant. Where reimbursement payments are returned to the City, the City
will deposit said monies in a holding account, and will disburse said monies
upon notification by the applicant, without benefit of paying accrued interest
of such monies. In the event the City has retained any returned funds, those
funds shall revert to the City six months after the expiration of said
agreement, and the applicant shall have no recourse to said funds after this
time period. Any direct collection of funds/monies by the applicant from
participating owner(s) shall nullify and void the agreement.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.803. Oversizing agreement.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions to the contrary, the City, by written
agreement, may provide for a method of reimbursement or other paybacks to
developers or private parties for the actual costs for the design and
construction of special facilities, such as transmission line(s) of twelve
(12") inches or greater in diameter, pumping stations, and the like. No
reimbursement or payback shall be made to a developer or private party until
benefitted properties pay their pro-rata share of the cost of the water
improvements to the City. Such reimbursement or payback agreement shall not
extend for a term in excess of ten (10) years.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Article 9. Billing and Payment
Sec. 10-2.901. General.
   The Public Works Director is primarily responsible for the issuance of water
bills. Within the City, the Finance Department provides customer service
functions associated with the preparation, issuance and receipt of water bills
and revenue. The Public Works Director may also designate other functions to
the Director of Finance such as billing adjustments for selected cases.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.902. Due dates.
   All water bills with the exception of those covered under “Miscellaneous
Uses” shall become due and payable upon presentation. Such bills shall have a
due date of twenty-one (21) days, and become delinquent and subject to penalty
charges in an amount set by City Council action if not paid in full on or
before twenty-eight (28) days after the billing date. Reminders shall be sent
to customers whose bills have not been paid within twenty-one (21) days to
advise them the account shall be subject to penalties after twenty-eight (28)
days and subject to discontinuance of service if not paid in full within sixty
(60) calendar days from the due date printed on the front of the bill. Payments
shall be to the City of Thousand Oaks Finance Department and may not be given
to or received by the field personnel.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009, as amended by Part 2, Ord. 1672-NS, eff.
February 14, 2020, and § 3, Ord. 1720-NS, eff. January 1, 2024)
Sec. 10-2.903. Due dates for miscellaneous uses.
   All bills for fire hydrant service, wastewater lines flushing service, water
for street washing and/or sprinkling, or water for flushing storm drains,
culverts and the like, as well as any charges for City-performed operations or
for unauthorized use of water issued during any calendar month shall be due and
payable on presentation and shall become delinquent twenty-one (21) days after
presentation.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009, as amended by § 4, Ord. 1720-NS, eff. January
1, 2024)
Sec. 10-2.904. Overpayments.
   In the event of payments in excess of the billed amount, the City shall
credit the amount of overpayment to the next ensuing water bill issued to the
same account.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.905. Underpayments.
   Any underpayment of a water bill shall be deemed as nonpayment and service
may be discontinued. In all cases, underpayment or nonpayment shall be subject
to a penalty. Any underpayment on a combined water and wastewater bill shall be
subject to discontinuance of water service.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.906. Adjustments to water bills.
   (a)   A water customer who has a complaint or question concerning their bill
shall have the opportunity to review the problem with representatives of either
or both the Public Works Department or the Finance Department. Such review
shall normally occur during regular business hours and shall unless otherwise
indicated by the City follow submittal of a written request for the review. The
Directors of Public Works and Finance shall establish administrative policies
as necessary to implement the intent of this section.
   (b)   Adjustments in the opening and closing dates of an account shall not
be made unless approved by the Public Works Director or the Director of
Finance. With respect to opening dates, the date on the application shall
control unless otherwise approved.
   (c)   Adjustments to correct an error in the billing may be made by either
the Public Works Director or the Director of Finance. Allowable adjustments in
this category include, but are not limited to, incorrect meter reading(s),
inaccurate meter(s) and miscalculation. In making such adjustments, the City
may consider the usage within previous billing periods and other factors as
deemed appropriate to evaluate the amount of the adjustment.
   (d)   Adjustments may be made by the Public Works Directors the Director of
Finance on a once per life of an account basis where there is an unusually high
water usage due to either unexplained causes or a leak within the customer's
property. In the event of the latter case, the leak must be corrected prior to
any adjustment. To qualify, the applicant's water usage must be more than twice
the reasonably expected bill for the period involved as evaluated by the City.
Any adjustment shall be in accordance with administrative or guidelines
developed by the City.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.907. Breaks in service lines: Adjustments.
   In the event there is a break in the service line on the property owner's
side of the meter, no adjustment in billing will be made. It shall be the
property owner's responsibility to maintain his own water system.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.908. Liability for payment.
   (a)   Water bills are sent to the owner of the property served and he shall
be responsible for payment. The current owner of a property shall be
responsible for payment of all unpaid fees and charges not collected, or
collectable, from the applicant, user or occupant on the parcel. If more than
one occupant or tenant on a parcel of property is served, then the City shall
render a single bill to the property owner. In the event of nonpayment, the
property owner shall be liable for payment.
   (b)   Property owners and/or occupant may, if they wish, make special
arrangements with the Finance Department for the purpose of sending the bill to
the occupant of the property rather than to the property owner. In such a case,
the occupant and property owner shall be liable for any nonpayment.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.909. Delinquencies: Penalties.
   Unless the payment of the water service billing is received on or before
twenty-one (21) days from the billing date, a reminder notice shall be mailed
notifying the customer that the bill shall be delinquent and subject to penalty
charges in an amount set by City Council action if not paid in full on or
before twenty-eight (28) days after the billing date. Furthermore, water
service shall be subject to discontinuation if not paid in full within sixty
(60) calendar days from the due date printed on the front of the bill. The
amount due shall consist of the entire unpaid balance. Unless the payment of
the entire unpaid balance is made within such time period, arrangements for an
alternative payment plan are made, or exemption criteria are met, water service
may be discontinued to the premises, whether or not the customer is present. In
the event payment is not made within such period and water service has been
discontinued, a service charge as set by City Council action shall be applied
to the bill. Penalty fees for delinquent payments shall be assessed in an
amount set by City Council action.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009, as amended by Part 3, Ord. 1672-NS, eff.
February 14, 2020, and § 5, Ord. 1720-NS, eff. January 1, 2024)
Sec. 10-2.910. Multiple party applications: Liability.
   Two (2) or more parties who join in one application for service shall be
jointly and severally liable thereunder and shall be billed by means of single
periodic bills.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.911. City to use all necessary remedies.
   The City and its proper officers, agents, or employees shall promptly,
efficiently, and economically take all steps, actions or remedies necessary for
the collection of charges and the penalties thereon (including the enforcement
of the lien of such charges and penalties). Such remedies for collecting and
enforcing the rates and charges shall be cumulative and may be pursued
alternately. As determined by the City Treasurer, a list of delinquent charges
shall be recorded. If any one remedy provided for in this section is held to be
invalid, all valid remedies shall remain effectual.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009, as amended by § 6, Ord. 1720-NS, eff. January
1, 2024)
Sec. 10-2.912. Property liens for delinquencies.
   The City Treasurer shall record with the County Recorder a list of all
delinquent charges, and the penalties thereon, and shall include in each such
list the amount of each charge and the penalty thereon, a description of the
real property upon which the same is a lien, and the name of the City. All
delinquent charges and penalties, when so recorded, shall constitute a lien
upon the real property served by the enterprise (except that no such lien shall
be created against any property owned by a public corporation or as the result
of delinquent charges accrued by a tenant or lessee of the property), and each
such lien shall have the force, effect, priority and duration of a tax lien.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 10-2.913. Closing bills.
   A customer vacating any premises shall immediately give notice to the City
so that water service may be discontinued as requested, and a closing bill will
be prepared and sent to the customer at his new mailing address. In the event
the customer has made a deposit, the balance, if any, shall be returned after
the deduction of any unpaid bill. Until such notice of vacating the premises is
given, the premises shall be deemed occupied by the customer, and his liability
as well as that of any owner or applicant shall continue for unpaid water
bills.
(Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009)
Article 10. Groundwater Wells*
*   Article 10, entitled Groundwater Wells, codified from Ordinance No. 826-NS,
repealed by Section 2, Ord. 1133-NS, effective March 4, 1992. Subsequently
repealed and replaced by Ord. 1516-NS, eff. June 5, 2009, then repealed and
replaced by Ord. 1613-NS, eff. April 22, 2016.
Sec. 10-2.1001. Purpose.
   It is the purpose of this article to provide, in cooperation with the County
of Ventura, for the protection of groundwater quality and supply and quantity
by regulating the construction, maintenance, operation, use, repair,
modification, and destruction of wells and engineering test holes (soil
borings) in such a manner that the groundwater of the County will not be
contaminated or polluted, and that water obtained from wells will be suitable
for beneficial use and will not jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the
people of Thousand Oaks.
   This ordinance does not preclude or supplant any other agency-specific well
permitting that may be necessary in addition to County of Ventura well
permitting.
(Part 2, Ord. 1613-NS, eff. April 22, 2016)
Sec. 10-2.1002. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
   (a)   "Abandoned well" means an abandoned well is any of the following:
   (1)   A water well used less than eight hours in any twelve month period.
   (2)   A monitoring well from which no monitoring data has been taken for a
period of two years.
   (3)   A well which is in such a state of disrepair that it cannot be made
functional for its original use or any other use regulated by this article
within six months or such other shorter or longer period as determined by the
Director depending on well condition and risk to the aquifer.
   (4)   An engineering test hole after 24 hours has elapsed after construction
and testing work has been completed on the site.
   (5)   A cathodic protection well which is no longer used for its intended
purpose.
   (6)   A water well for which annual reports of well usage pursuant to
Section 10-2.1025 have not been submitted.
   (b)   "Acre-foot" means the volume of water necessary to cover one acre to a
depth of one foot; equal to 43,560 cubic feet or 325,851 gallons.
   (c)   "Active well" means a water well that has operated for at least eight
hours during a calendar year, a monitoring well from which data has been
collected at least once during the past two years, or a cathodic protection
well maintained and utilized for its intended purpose.
   (d)   "Applicant" means the well owner or the well owner's authorized
representative.
   (e)   "Aquifer" means a body of rock or sediment that is sufficiently porous
and permeable to store, transmit, and yield significant or economic quantities
of groundwater to wells and springs.
   (f)   "Aquitard" means a confining bed and/or formation composed of rock or
sediment that retards but does not prevent the flow of water to or from an
adjacent aquifer and that does not readily yield water to wells or springs but
stores groundwater.
   (g)   "Artesian pressure" means the Hydrostatic pressure of artesian water,
often expressed in terms of pounds per square inch, or the height, in feet
above land surface, of a column of water that would be
supported by the pressure and which pressure may cause water to flow from the
well.
   (h)   "Authorized inspector" means a person authorized by the Public Works
Director to inspect all work for which a permit is issued pursuant to this
article.
   (i)   "Backup well" or "Standby well" means a well that is not the primary
well, but is a well that is used to provide supplemental water when the primary
well is out of service or not fully functional. The backup well shall not be
used to initiate any new use or increased use of groundwater, and must meet the
minimum requirements for an active status well.
   (j)   "Basin" means a groundwater basin or sub-basin identified and defined
in the latest State of California Department of Water Resources' (DWR) Bulletin
No. 118.
   (k)   "Can't locate well" means a classification assigned to a well which
the owner cannot locate.
   (l)   "Can't locate well report" means a classification assigned to a well
for which the owner has conducted a well search according to County's Well
Location Procedures, and submitted a report documenting the search efforts and
results.
   (m)   "Cathodic protection well" means any artificial excavation in excess
of fifty (50') feet constructed by any method for the purpose of installing
equipment or facilities for the protection electrically of metallic equipment
in contact with the ground, commonly referred to as cathodic protection
(California Water Code Section 13711).
   (n)   "Certificate of exemption" means a certificate prepared by the City or
documenting that a well condition inspection has been conducted by an
authorized inspector and a well condition inspection report has been prepared
and deemed satisfactory by the City.
   (o)   "City" means the City of Thousand Oaks.
   (p)   "Community water supply well" means any water well which provides
water for community or public water systems as defined in Section 116.275,
subdivision(i) of the Health and Safety Code.
   (q)   "Completion operation" means any of the following work conducted after
excavation:
   (1)   Placement of a well casing.
   (2)   Gravel packing.
   (3)   Sealing.
   (4)   Perforation of a well casing.
   (5)   Any other work listed on a permit issued pursuant to this article as
being a required part of a completion operation.
   (r)   "Contaminant" means any substance or property preventing the use or
reducing the usability of water for ordinary purposes such as drinking,
preparing food, bathing, washing, recreation, and cooling, or any solute or
cause of change in physical properties that renders water unfit for a given
use.
   (s)   "Confined aquifer" means an aquifer that is bounded above and below by
formations of distinctly lower permeability than that of the aquifer itself, or
an aquifer containing confined groundwater.
   (t)   "De minimis extractor" means a person who extracts, for domestic
purposes, two acre-feet or less per year.
   (u)   To "Destroy" means to fill a well (including both interior and annular
spaces if the well is cased) completely in such a manner that it will not
produce water or act as a conduit for the transmission of water between any
water-bearing formations penetrated.
   (v)   "Director" means the Director of the City of Thousand Oaks Public
Works Department or his or her duly authorized representative, including but
not limited to, the County of Ventura.
   (w)   "Domestic well" means a water well used to supply water for the
domestic needs of an individual residence or a system of four or fewer service
connections.
   (x)   "Engineering test hole" means an uncased excavation used to determine
the engineering, geologic, and/or chemical properties of subsurface materials
by seismic investigation, direct observation, or any other means.
   (y)   "Exempt well" means an abandoned well for which a well condition
inspection report has been conducted and a certificate of exemption has been
approved by the City of Thousand Oaks.
   (z)   "Flowmeter" means a manufactured instrument for accurately measuring
and recording the volume of water pumped from a well or wells.
   (aa)   "Good state of repair" means a well whose condition is adequate to
perform its intended function without allowing contaminants to migrate between
zones of water bearing sediments where one or more zones contain water of
different quality and where the well has a physical barrier that prevents
surface water contaminants from entering groundwater.
   (bb)   "Groundwater" means water beneath the surface of the earth within a
zone below the water table in which the soil is completely saturated with
water, but does not include water that flows in known and definite channels.
   (cc)   "Groundwater basin" means an alluvial aquifer or a stacked series of
alluvial aquifers with reasonably well defined boundaries in a lateral
direction and having a definable bottom.
   (dd)   To "Inspect" means to personally witness, record, and certify work
pursuant to a condition or conditions of a valid permit.
   (ee)   To "Modify or repair" means to replace a well's casing in a manner
which involves removal or partial removal of the old casing, to re-perforate
the well, to install a seal, to change the depth of the well, or to install a
liner.
   (ff)   "Monitoring well" means any artificial excavation by any method for
the purpose of monitoring fluctuations in groundwater levels, quality of
underground waters, or the concentration of contaminants in underground waters
(California Water Code Section 13712).
   (gg)   "Non-compliant well" means an abandoned well for which the owner does
not repair and reuse, destroy or obtain a certificate of exemption.
   (hh)   "Owner of a well" person who is assessed as the owner of the well by
the County Assessor or, if the well is not separately assessed, the person who
owns the land upon which the well is located as shown on the latest equalized
assessment roll of the County Assessor.
   (ii)   "Person" means an individual, corporation, company, association,
partnership, limited liability company, municipality, public utility, or other
public body or institution (Health and Safety Code Section 116275(g)).
   (jj)   "Pollution" (of water) means the alteration of the physical,
chemical, or biological properties of water by the introduction of any
substance into water that adversely affects any beneficial use of water.
   (kk)   "Possess" means to be in actual possession of the well or to have a
legal right to the possession thereof.
   (ll)   "Registered inspector" means a Civil Engineer, a registered
Geologist, or a Certified Engineering Geologist possessing a current license or
registration in the State of California and approved by the Department.
Registered inspectors are required to inspect drilling and sealing operations
for engineering test holes and monitoring wells and for the determinations in
connection with a Certificate of Exemption. A technician trained and
experienced in drilling and sealing operations who is working under the direct
supervision of one of the aforementioned professionals may be deemed qualified
to perform required inspection(s) provided one of the aforementioned
professionals reviews the well condition inspection report and assumes
responsibility for the accuracy and completeness of the work by signing the
well condition inspection report.
   (mm)   "Replacement well" means a new well that replaces a well but does not
increase the former well's capacity. Well capacity means the name plate
performance rating for the existing well equipment or the well's documented
historical production.
   (nn)   "Unconfined aquifer" means an aquifer which is not bounded on top by
an aquitard and the upper surface of which is the water table.
   (oo)   "Unsaturated zone" means the zone below the land surface in which
pore space contains both water and air.
   (pp)   "Well" or "Water well" means any artificial excavation constructed by
any method for the purpose of extracting water from, or injecting water into,
the underground. This definition shall not include: (a) oil and gas wells or
geothermal wells constructed under the jurisdiction of the State of California
Department of Conservation, except those wells converted to use as water wells;
or (b) wells used for the purpose of (1) dewatering excavation during
construction, or (2) stabilizing hillsides or earth embankments. (California
Water Code Section 13710). Includes replacement, backup, or standby wells.
   (qq)   "Well completion report" means a required, confidential report
detailing the construction, alteration, abandonment, or destruction of any
water well, cathodic protection well, groundwater monitoring well, or
geothermal heat exchange well. The reports were called water well drillers'
reports prior to 1991 and are often referred to as "driller's logs." The report
requirements are described in California Water Code Section 13751.
   (rr)   "Well condition inspection report" means a report documenting the
integrity of a well and its associated components pursuant to Section
10-2.1013.
   (ss)   "Well field" means two or more water wells located in close proximity
or area, and that extract groundwater.
   (tt)   "Wellhead protection area" means the surface and subsurface area
surrounding a water well or well field that supplies a public water system
through which contaminants are reasonably likely to migrate toward the water
well or well field.
(Part 2, Ord. 1613-NS, eff. April 22, 2016)
Sec. 10-2.1003. Permit required.
   (a)   No person shall, within the incorporated area or boundaries of the
City of Thousand Oaks, construct, repair, modify, or destroy any cathodic
protection well which is over fifty (50') feet deep, any engineering test hole
which is over fifty (50') feet deep, any monitoring well, or any water well
unless such work is done pursuant to and in compliance with an unexpired
written permit for such work issued by the City as provided in this article.
Additionally, for any cathodic protection well or engineering test hole, if
groundwater is encountered (or expected to be encountered) shallower than fifty
(50') feet deep, a permit is required. A copy of the approved permit shall be
made available for inspection on the job site during any work authorized by the
permit.
   (b)   Types of Permits for Water Wells:
   (1)   Permits for construction, modification, replacement, and repair of all
water wells.
   (2)   Permits for destruction of all wells, except engineering test holes
which shall be destroyed immediately after completion of testing in compliance
with Section
10.2-1013(e).
   (3)   Annual permits for one or more engineering test holes which are over
fifty (50') feet deep and which are inspected by registered inspectors.
(Part 2, Ord. 1613-NS, eff. April 22, 2016)
Sec. 10-2.1004. Application for permit.
   (a)   Application for a permit shall be made to the City and shall include
the following:
   (1)   A vicinity map showing the location of the property on which the well
is located.
   (2)   A plot plan suitable for inclusion as part of the well record and
indicating the location of the well with respect to the following items within
a radius of five hundred (500') feet of the well:
   (i)   Property lines.
   (ii)   Sewage disposal systems or works carrying or containing sewage.
   (iii)   All intermittent or perennial, natural or artificial water bodies or
water courses.
   (iv)   Drainage pattern of the property.
   (v)   Existing wells of all types, regardless of whether they are subject to
regulation under this Article.
   (vi)   Access roads.
   (vii)   Name of the person who will perform the work on the well.
   (viii)   Name and affiliation of the Registered Inspector, when a Registered
Inspector will be utilized.
   (ix)   Proposed depth of well.
   (x)    Proposed use of well.
   (xi)   Proof that the person who will construct the well is in possession of
a valid license in accordance with the Contractors' State License Law.
   (xii)   Such other information as the City may deem necessary in order to
determine whether underground waters will be protected.
   (b)   Permit applications for monitoring and extraction wells used for
environmental cleanup as directed by local or regional regulatory agencies do
not need to be signed by the property owner provided an agreement has been
completed between the property owner and responsible party as defined by Title
23 of the California Code of Regulations. The agreement shall allow entry by
the appropriate parties for the purpose of environmental investigation and
cleanup activities. A copy of the agreement shall be submitted to the City with
the permit application.
   (c)   Permits shall be issued or denied within fifteen (15) days from the
day on which the completed application and fee are received by the City.
(Part 2, Ord. 1613-NS, eff. April 22, 2016)
Sec. 10-2.1005. Permit requirements and expiration.
   (a)   Permits shall require compliance with all applicable standards set
forth in Section
10-2.1010.
   (b)   A permit shall expire six months from the date of issuance unless it
is extended by the City. The City may grant one or more extensions of a permit,
each for a period not to exceed six months, provided the permittee proves to
the satisfaction of the City that circumstances beyond the control of the
permittee make it infeasible to complete the permitted work prior to the
expiration date. Annual permits for engineering test holes shall expire one
year from the date of issuance and shall not be extended.
(Part 2, Ord. 1613-NS, eff. April 22, 2016)
Sec. 10-2.1006. Time to complete permitted work and satisfy permit
requirements.
   The permittee shall complete work authorized by the permit and satisfy all
the requirements of the permit prior to the expiration date of the permit or
any extension.
(Part 2, Ord. 1613-NS, eff. April 22, 2016)
Sec. 10-2.1007. Guarantee of permitted work.
   Prior to the issuance of a well permit or any extension thereof, the
applicant may be required to post with the City a cash deposit or bond to
guarantee compliance with the provisions of this article and the applicable
permit, such cash or bond to be in an amount deemed necessary by the City to
remedy improper work, but not in excess of the total estimated cost of the
permitted work.
(Part 2, Ord. 1613-NS, eff. April 22, 2016)
Sec. 10-2.1008. License and registration of persons performing permitted work.
   No person shall perform any work, either on such person's own property or on
the property of another, for which a permit is required by this article unless
such person is in possession of a valid license appropriate to such work which
has been issued in accordance with the Contractors' State License Law (Chapter
9, commencing with Section 7000, of Division 3 of the Business and Professions
Code) and is registered with the City to perform work permitted by this
article. Licensed water well contractors (Class C-57) registered with the City
may perform all types of permitted work, while licensed engineering contractors
(Class A) and limited specialty contractors (Class C-61) registered with the
City may only perform the work permitted by their license. An application for
registration with the City shall include a copy of the applicable license and a
copy of a certificate of workers compensation insurance. The registration shall
expire automatically on the expiration date indicated on the copy of the
license or the expiration date indicated on the copy of the certificate of
workers' compensation insurance submitted with the application, whichever
expiration date is earlier.
(Part 2, Ord. 1613-NS, eff. April 22, 2016)
Sec. 10-2.1009. Suspension or termination of permit.
   Any permit issued pursuant to this article is subject to suspension or
termination prior to expiration as provided in this section.
   (a)   Grounds. Any of the following occurrences constitute grounds for
termination of a permit:
   (1)   Suspension, revocation or termination of the license, required by
Section
10-2.1003 of the person who is to perform the work.
   (2)   Failure of a permittee to comply with any provision of Section 3800 of
the Labor Code.
   (3)   Failure of a permittee, or of any person who owns or possesses the
well, to comply with any provision of this article, or any condition of a
permit issued pursuant to this article.
   (b)   Notice. To initiate proceedings to terminate a permit, the Director
shall send written notice to the person to whom the permit was issued. The
notice shall briefly describe the proposed grounds for termination, shall
specify a time and a place for a hearing at which such person shall be afforded
an opportunity to present evidence showing the proposed grounds for termination
do not exist, and shall state that failure to appear and present such evidence
may result in termination of the permit.
   (c)   Hearing. The Director shall conduct the hearing specified in the
notice. The hearing shall be informal and shall not be governed by rules of
evidence applicable to courts of law. The person to whom the permit was issued
and/or the owner of the well shall have the right to present relevant evidence
at the hearing. The Director may, but need not, permit other persons to present
relevant evidence. At the conclusion of the hearing, or within 30 calendar days
thereafter, the Director shall determine, based upon the preponderance of the
evidence presented at the hearing, whether there are grounds for suspension and
shall note the findings of fact upon which the determination is based. If it is
determined there are grounds for termination, the Director shall terminate the
permit; provided, however, that the Director shall have the discretion not to
terminate the permit if the Director determines that the occurrence which gave
rise to the grounds for termination was not willful, is not ongoing and is
unlikely to recur.
   (d)   Pre-Hearing Suspension. The Director may suspend a permit prior to the
hearing when the Director determines that such action is necessary to protect
the public health and safety or the environment from imminent danger. The
Director shall notify the person to whom the permit was issued of such
suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect until the Director makes a
final determination based upon the hearing; provided, however, that the
Director may rescind the suspension at any earlier time at which the Director
determines it is no longer necessary.
   (e)   This section shall not deprive the Director, the City, the authority
to pursue any other action or remedy otherwise available under the law.
(Part 2, Ord. 1613-NS, eff. April 22, 2016)
Sec. 10-2.1010. Standards.
   (a)   Standards for the construction, relocation, replacement, repair,
backup or standby modification or destruction of wells shall be those set forth
in the Department of Water Resources, California Well Standards Bulletins Nos.
74-81 and 74-90, and Ventura County Water Well Standards Bulletin No. 74-9.
   (b)   The Director may adopt additional or more stringent standards to be
applicable in any or all zones of the City as delineated in aforementioned
Bulletins.
   (c)   All community water supply wells and individual domestic wells shall
be constructed with a sounding tube, tap hole with plug, or similar access for
water level measuring equipment. For wells fitted with a well cap, the cap
shall have a removable plug for this purpose (State of California Department of
Water Resources' Bulletin No. 74-81). Well discharge piping shall contain a
water sampling port or valve for water quality sampling. Every new water well
shall be equipped with a flowmeter. This flowmeter requirement does not apply
to de minimis extractors. For those wells required to have flowmeters,
flowmeters will be calibrated and a report submitted to the City at a minimum
of every three years. The specifications for flowmeter calibration are set
forth in Appendix 1. Substitution of comparable flowmeter calibration
specifications may be approved upon review by the Director.
   (d)   All pump discharge pipes not discharging or open to the atmosphere
shall be equipped with an automatic device to prevent backflow and/or siphonage
into a well. Specific backflow prevention measures are required for drinking
water supply wells as prescribed in Title 17, Public Health, California Code of
Regulations (Sections 7583-7585 and 7601-7605), effective June 25, 1987 (State
of California Department of Water Resources' Well Standard Bulletin No. 74-90).
Irrigation well systems, including those used for landscape irrigation and
other well systems that employ, or which have been modified to employ, chemical
feeders or injectors, shall be equipped with a backflow prevention device
(State of California Department of Water Resources' Well Standard Bulletin No.
74-90). A check valve may also be utilized to meet this backflow prevention
requirement.
   (e)   All community water supply wells and individual domestic wells shall
be provided with a pipe or other effective means through which chlorine or
other disinfecting agents may be introduced directly into the well. If a pipe
is provided, it shall be installed at a height at or above the pump slab, shall
be kept sealed, and shall be provided with a threaded or other secure cap.
Equivalent protection for preventing contaminants from entering the well shall
be provided for subsurface pump discharge installations. If an air relief vent
is used, it shall terminate downward and be screened with 16 mesh screen to
prevent contaminants from entering the vent.
   (f)   Every new, repaired or modified community water supply well or
individual domestic water well, after construction, modification or repair, and
before being placed into service, shall be thoroughly cleaned of all foreign
substances and shall be thoroughly disinfected utilizing the procedures set
forth in Appendix C of the aforementioned Bulletin No. 74-81.
   (g)   For irrigation and industrial wells, chemicals of any type are not to
be injected, pumped or poured into the well, with the exception of
disinfectants following any well rehabilitation work. Rehabilitation work may
include use of chemicals to clean or remove scale from the well casing and
gravel pack (if installed). Chemicals used for disinfection of groundwater
extracted from the well shall be injected downstream from a backflow prevention
device. Continuous injection or drip of chemicals into the well is prohibited.
   (h)   Engineering test holes deeper than fifty (50') feet shall be destroyed
within one (1) working day upon completion of testing by completely filling
and/or sealing of the borehole in accordance with criteria established by the
City. The City may waive complete sealing if the permittee demonstrates to the
Director's satisfaction that the purpose of this article as set forth in
Section
10-2.1011 will be satisfied.
   (i)   No well, regardless of status, shall be left unattended without a cap
that has been constructed to prevent the accidental access to the well by a
person or animal, or have an opening that allows the well to be susceptible to
contaminants or pollution.
   (j)   All wells shall be located an adequate horizontal distance from
potential sources of contamination and pollution as specified in the Department
of Water Resources, California Well Standards Bulletins No. 74-81, Section 8.A.
(Part 2, Ord. 1613-NS, eff. April 22, 2016)
Sec. 10-2.1011. Log of well.
   (a)   Licensed water well contractors who have performed any work for which
a permit is required by this article and which work involves drilling, digging,
excavating or boring of a well, except for an engineering test hole, shall,
within 30 days of completion of such work, submit to the City an accurate and
complete well completion report.
   (b)   For the purpose of obtaining sealing requirements from the City,
geophysical well logs will be required as described in this article.
   (c)   Any permittee whose water well contractor fails to comply with this
provision shall be in violation of this article and shall not be granted any
new permits until the violation has been corrected. This shall not preclude the
application of other penalties for violation of this article. A well log shall
include, at a minimum, all of the following:
   (1)   A detailed record of the boundaries, character, size, distribution and
color of all lithologic units penetrated.
   (2)   The type and size of well casing.
   (3)   The location of perforations, sealing zones and existing seals.
   (4)   Report on the quantity and quality of groundwater.
   (5)   Any other data required by the City or Director as a condition of the
permit.
   (d)   Pursuant to Water Code Section 13752, well completion reports are
confidential and not available to the public, but may be available to
governmental agencies for use in making studies, or to any person who obtains a
written authorization from the owner of the well. The City is not authorized to
release well completion reports without written authorization from the
California Department of Water Resources.
(Part 2, Ord. 1613-NS, eff. April 22, 2016)
Sec. 10-2.1012. Flow Prevention Device.
   All wells having a history of flowing as a result of artesian pressure shall
be maintained and equipped to prevent flowing due to pressure in the aquifer
system. Wells without any history of flowing that begin to flow shall be
repaired, or retrofitted as necessary to prevent flowing. Such repair or
retrofit shall be completed within a period of thirty (30) days of notice by
County. This includes flowing as a result of a failed casing or other
deteriorated component, or the absence of a surface seal.
(Part 2, Ord. 1613-NS, eff. April 22, 2016)
Sec. 10-2.1013. Well Seal Inspection Reports.
   (a)   Well Construction Seal Inspection Report. An authorized inspector will
prepare a well seal inspection report for water wells and cathodic protection
wells constructed pursuant to and in compliance with an unexpired permit issued
under this article.
   (b)   Well Destruction Seal Inspection Report. An authorized inspector will
prepare a well seal inspection report for water wells and cathodic protection
wells destroyed pursuant to and in compliance with an unexpired permit issued
under this article.
   (c)   Monitoring Well/Engineering Test Hole Construction Seal Inspection
Reports. The Well Inspection Sealing Report for monitoring wells and
engineering test holes constructed pursuant to and in compliance with an
unexpired permit issued under this article shall be submitted by a Registered
Inspector within 30 days of sealing on a form satisfactory to the Director
(BuIletin 74-90 (DWR) requires that monitoring well construction, alteration,
and destruction reports be completed on forms provided by the California
Department of Water Resources), and shall include:
   (1)   Permit number.
   (2)   Date(s) of sealing work.
   (3)   Number of wells constructed under this permit.
   (4)   Diameter and depth of bore hole(s), diameter and depth of casing(s)
installed, depth to top and bottom of perforated interval(s), and depth(s) to
top of annular filter pack.
   (5)   Depth to water.
   (6)   Depth and type of sealing material(s).
   (7)   Method of placement of sealing material(s).
   (8)   Method of protection of wellhead or open (engineering test) bore hole
(Section
10-2.1006 requires that all engineering test holes be destroyed within one (1)
working day after completion of testing).
   (9)   Signature of registered inspector.
   (d)   Monitoring Well Destruction Seal Inspection Report. Seal inspection
report for monitoring wells and engineering test holes destroyed pursuant to
and in compliance with an unexpired permit issued under Section
10-2.1003 shall be submitted by a registered inspector within 30 days of
sealing on a form satisfactory to the Director (Bulletin 74-90 (DWR) requires
that monitoring well construction, alteration, and destruction reports be
completed on forms provided by the California Department of Water Resources),
and shall include:
   (1)   Permit number.
   (2)   Date(s) of sealing work.
   (3)   Number of wells destroyed under this permit.
   (4)   Diameter and depth of bore hole(s) and diameter and depth of casing(s)
installed (monitoring wells).
   (5)   Depth to water.
   (6)   Depth and type of sealing material(s).
   (7)   Method of placement of sealing material.
   (8)   Method of restoration of site area.
   (9)   Signature of registered inspector.
   (e)   Water Well Condition Inspection Report for Certificate of Exemption or
returning well to active status. Any person who owns or who possesses a water
well that is abandoned or about to become abandoned due to lack of use, but who
does not desire to destroy the well, may submit to the City a well condition
inspection report signed by a registered inspector pursuant to Section
10-2.1016. The report shall include:
   (1)   State well number.
   (2)   Driller's report.
   (3)   Assessor parcel number of the property on which the well is located.
   (4)   An accurate location description with respect to nearby wells, septic
systems, animal enclosures, roads, and property boundaries.
   (5)   Photographs of the well site, taken not more than six months prior to
application for a certificate of exemption.
   (6)   Video log of well casing, conducted not more than six months prior to
application for a certificate of exemption.
   (7)   A description of the well casing condition based upon a review of the
most recent video log of the well.
   (8)   An opinion that the well is, or is not, equipped with an annular seal
or seals to prevent the interchange of waters between water-bearing strata
penetrated by the well.
   (9)   A statement that the well is, or is not, protected from artesian flow
and from entry by surface waters.
   (10)   A description of any work necessary to assure the safety of local
groundwater supplies due to the continued existence of the well.
   (11)   A description of any repair work necessary to allow the well to
function for its intended purpose.
(Part 2, Ord. 1613-NS, eff. April 22, 2016)
Sec. 10-2.1014. Corrective Action.
   (a)   Any person who owns a well, or any person who is in possession of a
well, may be required to take corrective action with respect to the well as
provided in this section.
   (b)   Any of the following occurrences constitutes grounds for ordering
corrective action:
   (1)   Maintenance, operation, or use of the well in a manner that causes or
contributes to, or may result in a substantial risk of causing or contributing
to, the pollution of the groundwater, or allowing water to be wasted as a
result of artesian pressure.
   (2)   Construction, maintenance, repair, modification or destruction of the
well in a manner that violates any provision of this article.
   (c)   To initiate proceedings to order corrective action, the Director shall
send written notice to the person who owns the well and/or the person in
possession of the well. The notice shall briefly describe the grounds for
ordering corrective action, shall describe the proposed corrective action,
shall specify a time and place for a hearing at which such person will be
afforded an opportunity to present evidence showing that the grounds for
corrective action do not exist, or that the proposed corrective action is
inappropriate. The notice shall also state that failure to appear and present
such evidence may result in an order requiring such person to take some or all
of the proposed corrective action.
   (d)   The Director shall conduct the hearing specified in the notice. The
hearing shall be informal and shall not be governed by rules of evidence
applicable to courts of law. The person who owns the well or the person in
possession of the well shall have the right to present relevant evidence at the
hearing. The Director may, but need not, permit other persons to present
relevant evidence. At the conclusion of the hearing, or within 30 calendar days
thereafter, the Director will determine, based upon the preponderance of the
evidence presented at the hearing, whether there are grounds for ordering
corrective action, and, if so, whether the proposed corrective action is
appropriate. Such determination shall be in writing and shall contain a brief
statement of the findings of fact upon which the determination is based.
   (e)   If it is determined that there are grounds for ordering corrective
action and that some or all of the proposed corrective action is appropriate,
the Director may issue and serve upon the person or persons who were served
with the notice of the hearing a written order requiring such appropriate
corrective action. The order shall contain a deadline for commencing the
corrective action if such action is to be ongoing or shall contain a deadline
for completing the corrective action if such corrective action is not to be
ongoing. The order shall further state that, if the corrective action is not
taken in compliance with the order, such action may be taken by the County at
the expense of the person served with the order and, in addition, such person
may be subject to criminal prosecution.
   (f)   Any person who owns or is in possession of a well who is served with
such an order shall, on or before the deadline stated therein, commence every
corrective action described therein as being ongoing and complete every
corrective action described therein as not being ongoing. Any person who owns
or is in possession of a well served with such an order, and any person who
thereafter acquires ownership or possession of the well with actual or
constructive notice of the order, shall, for so long as such person owns or is
in possession of the well, continue to take every corrective action described
in the order as ongoing, until such time as the well is destroyed pursuant to
this article, or the Director states in writing that such ongoing corrective
action is no longer necessary.
(Part 2, Ord. 1613-NS, eff. April 22, 2016)
Sec. 10-2.1015. Destruction of Abandoned Wells.
   (a)   No person shall own or be in possession of an abandoned cathodic
protection well which is over fifty (50') feet deep, an abandoned monitoring
well, an abandoned engineering test hole which is over fifty (50') feet deep,
or an abandoned water well unless either such well has been destroyed pursuant
to this article or a current certificate of exemption has been issued for such
abandoned water well pursuant to Section
10-2.1016.
   (b)   Any down-hole explosive work shall be conducted by a state licensed
blaster who has obtained all appropriate city and county permits.
(Part 2, Ord. 1613-NS, eff. April 22, 2016)
Sec. 10-2.1016. Certificate of Exemption/Return to Active Status.
   (a)   Any person who owns or possesses a water well or monitoring well that
is abandoned or about to become abandoned, but who does not desire to destroy
the well, or a person who desires to return an abandoned well to active status,
may submit to the City a report prepared and signed by a registered inspector
as required by Section
10-2.1013(e). Recommendations for repair must be submitted for review and
approval of the City. If the City determines that the well would not result in
pollution of groundwater and would not create a hazard to health and safety,
the City may issue a certificate of exemption or may approve the well to be
returned to active status. Either alternative requires a satisfactory well
condition inspection report.
   (b)   A certificate of exemption shall expire five years after issuance and
may be terminated by the City at any time prior to expiration upon a
determination that destruction of the well is necessary to prevent pollution or
contamination of groundwater or to avoid a hazard to health or safety.
Successive certificates of exemption may be issued with respect to a well in
the same manner as the original certificate was issued. The well condition
inspection report shall only be valid when the report has been shown to meet
the requirements of Section
10-2.1013(e). The well condition inspection report will expire after 12 months
and a new well condition inspection report will be necessary for well status
changes.
(Part 2, Ord. 1613-NS, eff. April 22, 2016)
Sec. 10-2.1017. Fees.
   The fees for issuance of a permit, extension of a permit, a certificate of
exemption, or an appeal, pursuant to this article are in accordance with
similar fees adopted by the County of Ventura Board of Supervisors. The payment
of such fee, if any, established by such resolution, shall accompany the
application to which it pertains. If the application is withdrawn before
issuance of the permit, the cost of processing the application up to that point
shall be computed in accordance with the County's/City's standard cost
accounting procedures, and if such cost is less than the amount of the fee
paid, the difference remaining shall be refunded to the applicant.
(Part 2, Ord. 1613-NS, eff. April 22, 2016)
Sec. 10-2.1018. Inspection.
   The Director, and the authorized inspector may, at any and all reasonable
times, enter any and all places, property, enclosures and structures for the
purpose of making examinations and investigations to determine compliance with
this article. The Director may require that any work for which a permit is
required by this article be completed in stages and that each such completed
stage be inspected prior to any further work. Registered inspectors shall
inspect drilling and sealing operations for engineering test holes and
monitoring wells when required by conditions of any permit.
(Part 2, Ord. 1613-NS, eff. April 22, 2016)
Sec. 10-2.1019. Misdemeanor/Infraction.
   Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day
or portion thereof during which such violation is committed, continued or
permitted, and shall be subject to the same punishment for each such separate
offense as for the original offense. Notwithstanding the foregoing, where the
prosecuting attorney has determined that such action would be in the best
interests of justice, the prosecuting attorney may specify in the accusatory
pleading that the violation shall be an infraction and the violation shall then
be prosecuted as an infraction. The provisions of this section are in addition
to and independent of any other sanctions which are or may be imposed under
this article or any other provisions of law.
(Part 2, Ord. 1613-NS, eff. April 22, 2016)
Sec. 10-2.1020. Notice of Violation.
   (a)   Whenever the Director determines that any person who owns a well, or
any person who is in possession of a well or any other person is responsible
for violating any provision of this article, or that any requirement of any
permit issued pursuant this article is not being implemented or adhered to by
such person, the Director shall send such person a notice of violation. The
notice of violation shall be delivered in accordance with Section
10-2.1021.
   (b)   The notice of violation shall:
   (1)   Identify the provision of this article or the applicable permit which
has been violated;
   (2)   State how the violation may be corrected;
   (3)   Advise that if the violation is not corrected by a deadline to be
specified in the notice of violation, a notice of noncompliance may be recorded
against the property in the Office of the County Recorder;
   (4)   Advise that continued noncompliance may result in additional
enforcement actions against the owner, occupant and/or other person;
   (5)   Advise that administrative fines may be imposed pursuant to Section
10-2.1020; and
   (6)   Advise that the determination that a violation exists may be appealed,
but that the appeal must be filed in accordance with Section
10-2.1023.
   (c)   If the violation is not corrected pursuant to the notice of violation
as determined by the Director within the time allotted or if the violation is
upheld after an appeal pursuant to Section
10-2.1023, a notice of noncompliance may be recorded in the Office of the
County Recorder. The notice of noncompliance shall describe the property and
specify the Ordinance section or permit terms or conditions violated. The
Director shall record a release of notice of noncompliance with the Office of
the County Recorder only if and after the violations have been fully corrected
to the satisfaction of the Director and all County enforcement costs and fees
and administrative fines have been paid. The violator must pay a fee for
recordation of the release of notice of noncompliance as determined in the
adopted schedule of fees.
   (d)   If a notice of noncompliance is recorded in the Office of the County
Recorder, a notice of imposition of administrative fines shall be served upon
the violator. The notice of imposition of administrative fines shall describe
the property and state the following for each violation:
   (1)   The amount of the fine that will accrue per violation as determined
pursuant to Section 4823.3 of Chapter 8 of Division 4 of the Ventura County
Ordinance;
   (2)   The date the fine will begin accruing, which may be the same date the
notice is served;
   (3)   That additional fines may accrue until the violation is corrected as
determined by the Director;
   (4)   That the amount of the fine may be increased in the future if the
violation is not corrected;
   (5)   That the accrued fines are immediately due and owing and that the
notice of imposition of administrative fines may be recorded as a lien against
the property for all unpaid fines; and
   (6)   That the amount of the fines may be administratively appealed in
accordance with Section
10-2.1023 within thirty (30) days of the date of service of the notice of
imposition of administrative fines.
(Part 2, Ord. 1613-NS, eff. April 22, 2016)
Sec. 10-2.1021. Delivery of Notice.
   Any notice of violation or notice of imposition of administrative fines to
be delivered pursuant to the requirements of this article shall be subject to
the following:
   (a)   The notice shall state that the recipient has a right to appeal the
matter as set forth in Section
10-2.1023;
   (b)   Delivery shall be deemed complete upon:
   (1)   Personal service to the recipient;
   (2)   Deposit in the U.S. mail, postage pre-paid for first class delivery;
or
   (3)   Facsimile service with confirmation of receipt;
   (c)   If the recipient of notice is the owner, the address for notice shall
be the address from the most recently issued equalized assessment roll for the
property or as otherwise appears in the current records of the County; and
   (d)   If the owner or occupant of any private property cannot be located
after the reasonable efforts of the Agency, the notice shall be deemed
delivered ten (10) calendar days after posting on the property.
(Part 2, Ord. 1613-NS, eff. April 22, 2016)
Sec. 10-2.1022. Administrative Appeals.
   Any person receiving a notice of violation or notice of imposition of
administrative fines may appeal the matter by requesting an administrative
hearing.
   (a)   Request for Administrative Hearing. Any person appealing a notice of
violation or notice of imposition of administrative fines, shall, within thirty
(30) calendar days of receipt thereof, file a written request for an
administrative hearing, accompanied by an administrative hearing fee as
established by separate resolution, with the City Clerk, with a copy of the
request for administrative hearing mailed on the date of filing to the
Director. Thereafter, a hearing on the matter shall be held before the Hearing
Officer within forty-five (45) calendar days of the date of filing of the
written request unless, in the reasonable discretion of the Hearing Officer and
pursuant to a written request by the appealing party, a continuance of the
hearing is granted.
   (b)   Hearing Proceedings. The City or its authorized representative shall
appear in support of the notice of violation or notice of imposition of
administrative fines, and the appealing party shall appear in opposition to the
notice. The City shall have the burden of supporting the notice and any
enforcement or other action by a preponderance of the evidence. Each party
shall have the right to present testimony and other documentary evidence as
necessary for explanation of the case.
   (c)   Final Decision and Appeal. The final decision of the Hearing Office
shall be issued by mail within ten (10) calendar days of the conclusion of the
hearing. The final decision shall be delivered by first-class mail, postage
prepaid, to the appealing party at the address set forth in the request for an
administrative hearing. Pursuant to California Government Code Section 53069.4,
subdivision (b)(1), if the final decision is contested, review must be sought
in the Superior Court as a limited civil case within twenty (20) days after the
date of service of the final decision. A copy of the notice of appeal must be
served on the Director either in person or by first class mail. If no notice of
appeal is timely filed with the Superior Court, the final decision issued by
the Hearing Officer shall be deemed confirmed and final.
(Part 2, Ord. 1613-NS, eff. April 22, 2016)
Sec. 10-2.1023. Abatement.
   If any corrective action required by an order issued pursuant to Section 10-
2.1014 is not taken in full compliance with such order, the Director may cause
the corrective action to be taken by the City and all persons required by
Section
10-2.1014 to take such corrective action shall be jointly and severally liable
to the City for the cost of such action. In cases where the public health and
safety require emergency corrective action, the Director may cause the
emergency corrective action to be taken by the City without a prior order or
notice and all persons who own or are in possession of a well shall be jointly
and severally liable to the County for the cost of such action.
(Part 2, Ord. 1613-NS, eff. April 22, 2016)
Sec. 10-2.1024. Exemption.
   (a)   Leak Detection System. The foregoing provisions of this article do not
apply to any leak detection system installed or destroyed pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 6.7 (commencing with Section 25280) of Division 20 of the
Health and Safety Code or of Article 2 (commencing with Section 4521) of
Chapter 5 of Division 4 of the Ventura County Ordinance.
   (b)   Monitoring and Recovery Wells. The Director may waive permit
requirements for installation or destruction of monitoring and recovery wells
which are less than fifty (50') feet deep and which are constructed to
determine the extent of, or remove, pollution from underground storage tanks,
pursuant to requirements of the Ventura County Environmental Health Division,
provided the Director determines that the purpose of this article as set forth
in Section
10-2.1001 will be satisfied.
   (c)   Natural Gas Monitoring and Recovery Wells. The City may waive permit
requirements for installation or destruction of natural gas monitoring and
recovery wells which are less than fifty (50') feet deep, pursuant to
requirements by the Ventura County Environmental Health Division, provided the
Department determines that the purpose of this article as set forth in Section
10-2.1001 will be satisfied.
(Part 2, Ord. 1613-NS, eff. April 22, 2016)
Sec. 10-2.1025. Aquifer Protection Program.
   The purposes of this program are to allow retention of those wells that are
being used and are in good condition, and to require either repair or
destruction of those wells that are not usable and are causing groundwater
pollution.
   (a)   Water Wells. Beginning on January 1, 1999, and on each January first
thereafter, any person who owns a water well, or any person who is in
possession of a water well, except those wells for which a valid certificate of
exemption is in effect, shall submit to the City a report of the volume of
groundwater extracted, as measured by flowmeter if so equipped, or other
reasonable means, and the total time the well was operated within the preceding
12 months. In addition, for water wells constructed to allow access for water
level measuring, the static water level in each water well shall be measured
and reported annually. Any results from a completed aquifer pump test, or
groundwater quality data collected shall also be reported. This report shall be
submitted to the City prior February 1 of each year on a form approved by the
Director.
   (1)   If a well is classified as abandoned, as defined in Section
10-2.1002, a certificate of exemption shall be obtained or the well may be
returned to active status by completing a well condition inspection report in
the manner provided in Section 10-2.1016, or the well shall be destroyed as
required by Section
10-2.1015.
   (b)   Based upon the above information, all wells in the unincorporated
areas of Ventura County shall be classified as one of the following:
   (1)   Active;
   (2)   Abandoned with a valid certificate of exemption;
   (3)   Abandoned and requiring destruction;
   (4)   Non-compliant-abandoned;
   (5)   Non-compliant;
   (6)   Can't Locate; or
   (7)   Can't Locate Report.
   (c)   Applicants in violation of this article shall not be entitled to
further well permits or any land use entitlement until all violations of this
article are corrected.
(Part 2, Ord. 1613-NS, eff. April 22, 2016)
Sec. 10-2.1026. Liens Applied.
   Failure to comply with any section of this article may result in the City or
County placing a notice of non-compliance or a lien on the affected property to
cover the costs of managing and performing work deemed necessary, as well as
other remedies prescribed by this article.
(Part 2, Ord. 1613-NS, eff. April 22, 2016)
Sec. 10-2.1027. Appeals.
   Any person shall have the right to appeal the decision(s) of the Director to
the Thousand Oaks City Council, provided such appeal is made in writing within
twenty-one (21) days of the date of the decision and the applicable appeal fee
is paid. This right of appeal shall not apply to final decisions of the Hearing
Officer made pursuant to Section
10-2.1023.
(Part 2, Ord. 1613-NS, eff. April 22, 2016)
Article 11. Water Conservation
Sec. 10-2.1101. Established conservation measures and definitions.
   Mandatory water conservation measures are hereby established as set forth in
this article and correspond to the six levels mandated by state law. Each level
is based on available and forecast water supplies or emergency interruptions of
service.
   The following definitions apply to this Article.
   (a)   "Chemical or liquid pool cover" means an alcohol-based chemical
product designed to float on top of pool water and act as an evaporation
suppressant.
   (b)   "CII" means Commercial, Industrial, Institutional.
   (c)   "Climate-appropriate plants" means native plants and others that have
evolved to follow the typical seasonal rain pattern of this region, requiring
little water in summer and relying on natural rainfall the rest of the year.
   (d)   "Drip irrigation" means the application of irrigation water at low
pressure through a system of tubing or lateral lines fitted with perforations
or low-volume emitters that apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the
root zone of plants.
   (e)   "Functional turf" means turf regularly used for recreational purposes,
civic or community events
   (f)   "HOA" means Homeowner Association, the body that makes and enforces
rules for a subdivision, planned community, or condominium building and whose
members are residents.
   (g)   "Irrigation zone or station" means an irrigation zone is the
landscaped area that is connected to the same irrigation valve. All landscape
within a single zone will be on the same watering schedule (day, time, and
duration).
   (h)   "Low-volume or Low-flow irrigation" means an emission device intended
to discharge water in the form of drops or continuous flow at rates less than
30 gallons per hour at the largest area of coverage available for the nozzle
series when operated at 30 psi, except during flushing. Also known as micro-
emission device.
   (i)   "Low-volume or drip emitter" means a micro-irrigation emission device
with a flow rate less than or equal to 6.3 gallons per hour when operated at 30
psi, designed to dissipate pressure, and discharge a small uniform flow or
trickle of water at a constant discharge rate.
   (j)   "Microspray" means a micro-irrigation emission device with one or more
orifices to convert irrigation water pressure to water discharge with a flow
rate not to exceed 30 gallons per hour at the largest area of coverage
available for the nozzle series when operated at 30 psi. Microspray devices
include microbubblers, microspinners and microspray jets.
   (k)   "Non-functional turf" means turf that is ornamental and not regularly
used for recreational purposes, civic or community events.
   (l)   "Rotating or rotator sprinkler nozzles" means a sprinkler head that
applies water in a pattern by means of one or more rotating streams to a
defined landscape area in full or partial circles.
   (m)   "Spray sprinkler or spray nozzle" means a sprinkler using a spray or
pop-up head that continuously applies water in a pattern to a defined landscape
area through overhead delivery.
   (n)   "Sprinkler" means an emission device consisting of a sprinkler body
with one or more orifices to convert irrigation water pressure to high velocity
water discharge through the air, discharging a minimum of 0.5 gallons per
minute at the largest area of coverage available for the nozzle series when
operated at 30 psi or more with a full circle pattern.
   (o)   "Turf or Lawn" means a ground cover surface of mowed grass.
(§ 2, Ord. 1705-NS, eff. November 25, 2022)
Sec. 10-2.1102. Application.
   (a)   To the extent authorized by law, this article shall apply to all
customers and property within the City and the City's water service area, with
no distinction as to whether service is provided by the City or a private water
purveyor of potable water that operates water service systems within the City.
   (b)   The provisions of this article do not apply to uses of water necessary
to protect public health and safety or for essential health care or government
services such as police, fire, and other similar emergency services.
(§ 2, Ord. 1706-NS, eff. November 25, 2022)
Sec. 10-2.1103. General Prohibition: Enforcement, Penalties.
   (a)   No customer of the City water system or of a water purveyor serving
customers within the City shall make, cause, use, or permit the use of potable
water in a manner contrary to any provision of this article. Any violation of
the use restrictions set forth in this article shall be enforced by the water
purveyor serving that customer but upon failure of the water purveyor to act,
shall be enforced by City. Each customer shall be guilty of a separate offense
for each day during which such unauthorized use occurred.
   (b)   Any violation of the water use restrictions set forth in this article
shall be subject to prosecution and fines and penalties as set forth in Title
1, Chapter 2, Articles 1 and 2 of this code. Furthermore, any violation of the
water use restrictions set forth in this article is a public nuisance under
TOMC Section
1-6.01 et seq.
   (c)   Water Flow Restrictors. In addition to any fines or penalties, and
notwithstanding fire suppression system considerations, the City or water
purveyor may install a water flow restrictor device for repeated violations of
mandatory water use restrictions set forth in this article.
   (d)   Disconnecting Service. In addition to any fines and the installation
of a water flow restrictor, the City or water purveyor may disconnect a
customer's water service for continued willful violations of mandatory water
use restrictions set forth in this article.
   (e)   Cost of Flow Restrictor and Disconnecting Service. A person or entity
that violates this Chapter is responsible for payment of charges for installing
and/or removing any flow restricting device and for disconnecting and/or
reconnecting service per the City's or water purveyor's schedule of charges
then in effect. All charges must be paid before the flow restricting device is
removed or the water service is reconnected. Nonpayment will be subject to the
same remedies as nonpayment of basic water rates.
(§ 2, Ord. 1705-NS, eff. November 25, 2022)
Sec. 10-2.1104. Permanent and Level 1 water conservation requirements.
   Permanent measures: The following water conservation requirements are in
effect at all times and are permanent. Violations of this section shall be
considered waste and an unreasonable use of water.
   (a)   Limits on Watering Hours: Watering or irrigating landscape and
vegetated areas with potable water is prohibited between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m. on any day, except by use of a hand-held bucket or similar
container, or by use of a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing
water shut-off nozzle or device, or for short periods for the express purpose
of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system, or for turf refurbishment on a
public playing field.
   (b)   Limits on Watering Duration: Watering or irrigating landscape and
vegetated areas with potable water using a sprinkler system that includes spray
heads and/or bubblers or a watering device that is not continuously attended is
limited to no more than 10 minutes of watering per day per station or
irrigation zone. Drip irrigation systems (including subsurface) and water
efficient devices such as rotator stream nozzles are permitted to operate for a
longer period such that an equivalent volume of water is dispensed. In the
absence of manufacturer specifications, rotator stream nozzles are permitted to
run for 20 minutes and drip systems for up to 60 minutes provided that there is
no water runoff.
   (c)   No Excessive Water Runoff: Runoff, overspray, or excessive water flow
from a property from potable water use or from irrigation of any landscape or
vegetated areas onto an adjoining property, sidewalk, driveway, street, alley,
gutter or ditch is prohibited.
   (d)   Irrigation during and within the 48 hours following rainfall measuring
0.25 inches or more is prohibited. Rainfall data from the closest rain gauge
operated by the Ventura County Watershed Protection District shall be used for
this determination.
   (e)   No Washing Down Hard or Paved Surfaces: Washing down hard or paved
surfaces, including but not limited to sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking
areas, tennis courts, artificial turf, patios, or alleys, is prohibited except
when necessary for safety or sanitary purposes, and then only by use of a hand-
held bucket or similar container or a hand-held hose equipped with a positive
self-closing water shut-off device or a low-volume, high-pressure cleaning
machine equipped to recycle any water used or a low-volume high-pressure water
broom. The discharge of pollutants to the storm drain system is prohibited
pursuant to Section
7-8.201 of this code.
   (f)   Laundry Systems: New industrial laundry systems must recirculate the
water used in their operations.
   (g)   Commercial Car Wash Systems: All commercial car wash systems must have
installed and utilize operational recirculating water systems unless otherwise
exempt under state law and holding a current waiver of this requirement from
the City.
   (h)   Drinking Water: Eating or drinking establishments, including but not
limited to a restaurant, hotel, café, cafeteria, bar, or other public places
where food or drinks are sold, served, or offered for sale, shall only provide
drinking water to any person upon request.
   (i)   Commercial Lodging Establishments Must Provide Guests Option to
Decline Daily Linen Services: Hotels, motels, and other commercial lodging
establishments must provide customers the option of not having towels and linen
laundered daily. Commercial lodging establishments must prominently display
notice of this option in each bathroom using clear and easily understood
language.
   (j)   Single-Pass Cooling Systems: Installation of single-pass cooling
systems is prohibited in buildings where new water service is requested.
   (k)   Dish Wash Spray Valves: Food preparation establishments such as
restaurants must use water conserving dish wash spray valves.
   (l)   Non-functional turf: Irrigation of non-functional grass on CH
properties is prohibited. Designation of turf as functional on CH properties in
order to irrigate requires application and approval of a waiver by the water
purveyor. Areas designated as turf on CII landscape plans filed with the City
may be replaced with alternative climate-appropriate landscaping including
mulch, or other permeable ground cover.
   (m)   HOAs shall not enforce architectural or landscaping guidelines or
policies that prohibit the use of low water-using plants as a replacement of
existing turf, or that prohibit, or have the effect of prohibiting, compliance
with the City’s water-efficient landscaping requirements. HOAs shall not issue
a fine or assessment on a homeowner for reducing or eliminating the watering of
vegetation or lawns during a state or locally-declared drought, and shall not
fine or require a homeowner to reverse or remove water-efficient landscaping
measures upon the conclusion of a water shortage declaration.
   Level 1 measures: The following water conservation requirements are in
effect at all times in the absence of a declared Water Supply Shortage at Level
2 or higher.
   (a)   Limits on Watering Days: Watering or irrigating landscape and
vegetated areas with potable water is limited to three days per week. These
days may be designated by City Council through Resolution.
   (b)   Obligation to Fix Leaks, Breaks, or Malfunctions: Excessive use, loss,
or release of water through breaks, leaks, or other malfunctions in the water
user's plumbing, irrigation, or distribution system for any period after such
release of water should have reasonably been discovered and corrected and, in
no event more than seven (7) days of receiving notice from the City, is
prohibited.
   (c)   Recirculating Water Required for Water Fountains and Running-water
Features: Operating a water fountain or other running-water feature that does
not recirculate water is prohibited.
   (d)   Limits on Washing Vehicles: Using potable water to wash or clean a
vehicle, including but not limited to any automobile, truck, van, bus,
motorcycle, boat, or trailer, whether motorized or not, is prohibited, except
by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container or a hand-held hose equipped
with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device. This subsection
does not apply to any commercial car washing facility.
(§ 2, Ord. 1705-NS, eff. November 25, 2022)
Sec. 10-2.1105. Level 2 water supply shortage conservation requirements.
   (a)   A Level 2 Water Supply Shortage shall exist when the City Council
declares that due to drought or other water supply conditions, a water supply
shortage or threatened shortage exists which necessitates a consumer demand
reduction between 11 and 20 percent. Upon the declaration by the City Council
of a Level 2 Supply Shortage, the City will implement the mandatory
conservation measures identified in this section.
   (b)   In addition to the permanent conservation requirements identified in
Sec.
10-2.1104, the following water conservation requirements shall apply during a
declared Level 2 Water Supply Shortage:
   (1)   Limits on Watering Days: Watering or irrigating landscape and
vegetated areas with potable water is limited to three days per week from April
1 through October 31 and two days per week from November 1 through March 31,
which day(s) may be designated by City Council through Resolution, with the
following exceptions:
   (i)   Short periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting or
repairing an irrigation system;
   (ii)   Irrigation of playing fields for field refurbishment only when
necessary for public health and safety;
   (iii)   Use of water in a community garden providing garden plots to the
public, or to home fruit and vegetable gardens less than 300 square feet;
   (iv)   Irrigation of newly installed or significantly rehabilitated
landscape for the first 60 days after the first planting. Turf, flowers, and
annuals do not qualify as landscape for the purposes of this section;
   (v)   Use of reasonable amounts of water by commercial nurseries and
commercial growers to sustain plants, trees, shrubs and other vegetation
intended for commercial sale;
   (vi)   Irrigation of habitat restoration sites as required to meet permit
conditions of regulatory agencies;
   (2)   Obligation to Fix Leaks, Breaks, or Malfunctions: Excessive use, loss,
or release of water through breaks, leaks, or other malfunctions in the water
user's plumbing, irrigation, or distribution system for any period of time
after such release of water should have reasonably been discovered and
corrected and, in no event more than 72 hours of receiving notice from the
City, is prohibited.
   (3)   Recirculating Water Required for Water Fountains and Running-water
Features: Operating a water fountain or other running-water feature that does
not recirculate water is prohibited.
   (4)   Limits on Washing Vehicles: Using potable water to wash or clean a
vehicle, including but not limited to any automobile, truck, van, bus,
motorcycle, boat, or trailer, whether motorized or not, is prohibited, except
by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container or a hand-held hose equipped
with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device. This subsection
does not apply to any commercial car washing facility.
(§ 2, Ord. 1705-NS, eff. November 25, 2022)
Sec. 10-2.1106. Level 3 water supply shortage: water conservation measures.
   (a)   A Level 3 Water Supply Shortage shall exist when the City Council
determines that due to drought or other water supply conditions, a water supply
shortage or threatened shortage exists which necessitates a consumer demand
reduction between 21 and 30 percent. Upon the declaration by the City Council
of a Level 3 Water Supply Shortage condition, the City will implement mandatory
Level 3 conservation measures identified in this section.
   (b)   Level 3 Conservation Measures: In addition to the permanent
conservation requirements identified in Sec.
10-2.1104, the following water conservation requirements shall apply during a
declared Level 3 Water Supply Shortage:
   (1)   Limits on Watering Days: Watering or irrigating landscape and
vegetated areas with potable water is limited to two days per week from April 1
through October 31 and one day per week from November 1 through March 31, which
day(s) may be designated by City Council through Resolution, with the following
exceptions:
   (i)   Short periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting or
repairing an irrigation system;
   (ii)   Irrigation of playing fields for field refurbishment only when
necessary for public health and safety;
   (iii)   Use of water in a community garden providing garden plots to the
public, or to home fruit and vegetable gardens less than 300 square feet;
   (iv)   Irrigation of newly installed or significantly rehabilitated
landscape for the first 60 days after the first planting. Turf, flowers, and
annuals do not qualify as landscape for the purposes of this section;
   (v)   Use of reasonable amounts of water by commercial nurseries and
commercial growers to sustain plants, trees, shrubs and other vegetation
intended for commercial sale.
   (vi)   Irrigation of habitat restoration sites as required to meet permit
conditions of regulatory agencies;
   (vii)   Hand-watering of trees and shrubs using a hand-held bucket or
similar container, or hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing
water shut-off nozzle or device, as necessary and sufficient to keep them
alive;
   Extra irrigation day for specific uses: The following specific uses are
permitted one additional day of watering per week:
   (viii)   Irrigation as necessary to sustain existing ground cover or other
non-turf vegetation planted and essential to maintain slope stability on slopes
of at least six (6) feet in height and exceeding 20 percent grade or City
Engineer’s and water purveyor’s approval;
   (ix)   Irrigation of active playing fields, active recreation areas in
public parks, licensed daycare centers and schools, golf course greens and
fairways;
   (x)   Irrigation of fuel modification zones as necessary to sustain
vegetation required as part of original development conditions by the City;
   (xi)   Irrigation of landscaping installed to mitigate the effects of
stormwater pollution as required to meet permit conditions.
   (2)   Obligation to Fix Leaks, Breaks, or Malfunctions: Excessive use, loss,
or release of water through breaks, leaks, or other malfunctions in the water
user's plumbing, irrigation, or distribution system for any period of time
after such release of water should have reasonably been discovered and
corrected and, in no event more than 48 hours of receiving notice from the
City, is prohibited.
   (3)   No potable water use in Ornamental Lakes, Ponds, or Running-water
Features: Running-water features using potable water must be turned off.
Topping up, filling or re-filling of ornamental water features with potable
water is prohibited, except to the extent needed to sustain aquatic life,
provided that such animals are of significant value and have been actively
managed within the water feature prior to the declaration of a Water Supply
Shortage under this article. During the declared shortage, additional aquatic
animals may not be added to the water feature.
   (4)   Limits on Washing Vehicles: Using potable water to wash or clean a
vehicle, including but not limited to any automobile, truck, van, bus,
motorcycle, or trailer, whether motorized or not, is prohibited for home,
mobile, and community events. Only commercial car washes recycling their wash
water and those with a Commercial Car Wash waiver issued by the City within the
previous five years may operate. An exception is allowed for rinsing watercraft
after use in the ocean and for incidental cleaning necessary for repair or
detailing work.
   (5)   Swimming Pools and Spas: Outdoor swimming pools and spas shall be
covered when not in use to prevent water waste through evaporation. HOAs, gyms
and other businesses and institutions must cover their pools and spas when the
pool/spa is closed. Chemical or liquid pool “covers” are acceptable if
documented and applied regularly per manufacturer instructions. Draining and
refilling pools and spas is prohibited except upon water purveyor approval for
leak repair.
   (6)   Water Misters: Use of water misters is prohibited.
(§ 2, Ord. 1705-NS, eff. November 25, 2022)
Sec. 10-2.1107. Level 4 water supply shortage: water conservation measures.
   (a)   A Level 4 Water Supply Shortage shall exist when City Council
determines that due to drought or other water supply conditions, a water supply
shortage or threatened shortage exists which necessitates a consumer demand
reduction between 31 and 40 percent. Upon the declaration by City Council of a
Level 4 Water Supply Shortage condition, the City will implement mandatory
Level 4 conservation measures identified in this section.
   (b)   Level 4 Conservation Measures: In addition to the permanent
conservation requirements identified in Sec.
10-2.1104, the following water conservation requirements shall apply during a
declared Level 4 Water Supply Shortage:
   (1)   Limits on Watering Days: Watering or irrigating landscape and
vegetated areas with potable water is limited to one day per week, which day
may be designated by City Council through resolution, with the following
exceptions:
   (i)   Use of water in a community garden providing garden plots to the
public, or to home fruit and vegetable gardens less than 300 square feet;
   (ii)   Use of reasonable amounts of water by commercial nurseries and
commercial growers to sustain plants, trees, shrubs and other vegetation
intended for commercial sale;
   (iii)   Hand-watering of trees and shrubs using a hand-held bucket or
similar container, or hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing
water shut-off nozzle or device, as necessary and sufficient to keep them
alive.
   Extra irrigation day for specific uses: The following specific uses are
permitted one additional day of watering per week:
   (iv)   Irrigation as necessary to sustain existing ground cover or other
non-turf vegetation planted and essential to maintain slope stability on slopes
of at least six (6) feet in height and exceeding 20 percent grade or by City
Engineer’s and water purveyor’s approval;
   (v)   Irrigation of active playing fields, active recreation areas in public
parks, licensed daycare centers and schools, golf course greens and fairways;
   (vi)   Irrigation of fuel modification zones as necessary to sustain
vegetation required as part of original development conditions by the City;
   (vii)   Irrigation of landscaping installed to mitigate the effects of
stormwater pollution as required to meet permit conditions.
   (2)   Irrigation system: The use of spray sprinklers for irrigating
landscape and vegetated areas is prohibited. Only drip irrigation systems may
be employed with the following exceptions:
   (i)   Bubblers may be used to irrigate trees and shrubs provided that there
is no runoff;
   (ii)   Irrigation of active playing fields, active recreation areas in
public parks, licensed daycare centers and schools, golf course greens and
fairways;
   (iii)   Irrigation of existing ground cover or other non-turf vegetation in
steep or inaccessible areas where installation of a drip irrigation system is
impractical due to accessibility, steepness or density of existing vegetation;
   (iv)   Irrigation of existing non-turf, climate-appropriate ground cover
where drip irrigation is unsuitable due to the density of existing vegetative
cover provided that water efficient heads such as rotator stream nozzles are
used;
   (v)   Irrigation of trees within existing CII turf areas where an existing
sprinkler system is in place, spray heads serving turf are capped, and those
spray heads irrigating trees are replaced with water efficient heads such as
rotator stream nozzles;
   (vi)   Irrigation of CII non-turf landscaping where drip irrigation presents
an unreasonable maintenance challenge due to excessive vandalism, destruction
by wildlife, or breakage as a result of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
   (3)   Obligation to Fix Leaks, Breaks, or Malfunctions: Excessive use, loss,
or release of water through breaks, leaks, or other malfunctions in the water
user's plumbing, irrigation, or distribution system for any period of time
after such release of water should have reasonably been discovered and
corrected and, in no event more than 48 hours of receiving notice from the
City, is prohibited
   (4)   No potable water use in Ornamental Lakes, Ponds, or Running-water
Features: Running-water features using potable water must be turned off.
   Topping up, filling or re-filling of ornamental water features with potable
water is prohibited, except to the extent needed to sustain aquatic life,
provided that such animals are of significant value and have been actively
managed within the water feature prior to the declaration of a Water Supply
Shortage under this article. During the declared shortage, additional aquatic
animals may not be added to the water feature.
   (5)   Limits on Washing Vehicles: Using potable water to wash or clean a
vehicle, including but not limited to any automobile, truck, van, bus,
motorcycle, or trailer, whether motorized or not, is prohibited for home,
mobile, and community events. Only commercial car washes recycling their wash
water may operate. An exception is allowed for incidental cleaning necessary
for vehicle sale, repair or detailing work.
   (6)   Swimming Pools and Spas: Outdoor swimming pools and spas shall be
covered when not in use to prevent water waste through evaporation. HOAs and
CII entities must cover their pools and spas when the pool/spa is closed.
Chemical pool “covers” are acceptable if documented and applied regularly per
manufacturer instructions. Topping up with more than one and a half inches of
potable water per week is prohibited. Draining and refilling pools and spas is
prohibited except upon water purveyor approval for leak repair.
   (7)   Dust suppression: Dust suppression for fugitive dust that is subject
to Ventura County Air Pollution Control District Rule 55 shall not employ
potable water during the drought except via an approved waiver.
   (8)   Water Misters: Use of water misters is prohibited.
   (9)   Showering at gyms and athletic facilities: Showers shall be closed
with a physical barrier and sign informing members that showering is prohibited
unless the facility provides proof to the City that all showers are fitted with
showerheads that do not exceed a flow rate of 1.8 gpm at 80 psi. Acceptable
proof includes:
   (i)   Invoices or receipts from a licensed plumber or contractor documenting
the installation of devices that meet the standard;
   (ii)   Inspection by city staff (fees may apply);
   (iii)   Permit data showing the facility was constructed or remodeled to the
standards set forth in the 2019 Title 24, Part 11, California Green Building
Standards Code.
   (c)   A stay on code enforcement actions against brown or dead lawns will be
in effect for the duration of the Level 4 Water Supply Shortage, not exempting
the requirements for the removal of vegetation presenting a fire hazard and
weed removal.
   (d)   Re-landscaping of dead or brown lawns including those in HOA
properties, and landscaping required under development permit conditions but
delayed as a result of the drought, shall be granted a grace period of six
months after the Level 4 Water Supply Shortage is declared over to install
landscaping.
(§ 2, Ord. 1706-NS, eff. November 25, 2022)
Sec. 10-2.1108. Level 5 water supply shortage: water conservation measures.
   (a)   A Level 5 Water Supply Shortage shall exist when City Council
determines that due to drought or other water supply conditions, a water supply
shortage or threatened shortage exists which necessitates a consumer demand
reduction between 41 and 50 percent. Upon the declaration by the City Council
of a Level 5 Water Supply Shortage condition, the City will implement mandatory
Level 5 conservation measures identified in this section.
   (b)   Level 5 Conservation Measures: In addition to the permanent
conservation requirements identified in Sec.
10-2.1104, the following water conservation requirements apply during a
declared Level 5 Water Supply Shortage:
   (1)   Limits on Watering Days: Outside watering with potable water is
prohibited, with the following exceptions:
   (i)   Drip irrigation systems, bubblers and rotator stream nozzles may be
employed on one day per week on residential properties and up to two days per
week on CII properties, which day(s) may be designated by City Council through
Resolution, to water trees only as necessary and sufficient to keep them alive.
   (ii)   Hand-watering of trees using a hand-held bucket or similar container,
or handheld hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or
device, only as necessary and sufficient to keep them alive.
   (iii)   Irrigation of active playing fields, active recreation areas in
public parks, licensed daycare centers and schools, golf course greens and
fairways may occur on up to two days per week, which days may be designated by
City Council through Resolution, as necessary to preserve their ability to
function for public use.
   (iv)   Use of reasonable amounts of water by commercial nurseries and
commercial growers to sustain plants, trees, shrubs and other vegetation
intended for commercial sale.
   (v)   Irrigation using drip irrigation systems, bubblers and rotator stream
nozzles one day per week, which day may be designated by City Council through
Resolution, to sustain existing ground cover or other non-turf vegetation
planted and essential to maintain slope stability on slopes of at least six (6)
feet in height and exceeding 20 percent grade or by City Engineer’s and water
purveyor’s approval;
   (vi)   Irrigation of fuel modification zones using drip irrigation systems,
bubblers and rotator stream nozzles one day per week, which day may be
designated by City Council through Resolution, to sustain vegetation required
as part of original development conditions by the City;
   (2)   Turf/Lawn: Irrigation of turf, except for active public recreation
areas as listed in exceptions above, is prohibited. Waivers previously granted
for irrigation of functional turf on CII properties may be rescinded by the
Public Works Director.
   (3)   Irrigation system: The use of spray sprinklers is prohibited.
   (4)   Obligation to Fix Leaks, Breaks, or Malfunctions: Excessive use, loss,
or release of water through breaks, leaks, or other malfunctions in the water
user's plumbing, irrigation, or distribution system for any period of time
after such release of water should have reasonably been discovered and
corrected and, in no event more than 24 hours of receiving notice from the
City, is prohibited.
   (5)   No potable water use in Ornamental Lakes, Ponds, or Running-water
Features: Running-water features using potable water must be turned off.
Topping up, filling or re-filling of ornamental water features with potable
water is prohibited, except to the extent needed to sustain aquatic life,
provided that such animals are of significant value and have been actively
managed within the water feature prior to the declaration of a Water Supply
Shortage under this article. During the declared shortage, additional aquatic
animals may not be added to the water feature.
   (6)   Limits on Washing Vehicles: Using potable water to wash or clean a
vehicle, including but not limited to any automobile, truck, van, bus,
motorcycle, or trailer, whether motorized or not, is prohibited for home,
mobile, and community events. Only commercial car washes recycling their wash
water may operate. An exception is allowed for incidental cleaning necessary
for vehicle sale, repair or detailing work.
   (7)   Swimming Pools and Spas: Outdoor swimming pools and spas shall be
covered when not in use to prevent water waste through evaporation. HOAs and
CII entities must cover their pools and spas when the pool/spa is closed.
Chemical pool “covers” are acceptable if documented and applied regularly per
manufacturer instructions. Topping up with more than one and a half inches of
potable water per week is prohibited. Draining and refilling pools and spas is
prohibited except upon water purveyor approval for leak repair.
   (8)   Dust suppression: Dust suppression for fugitive dust that is subject
to Ventura County Air Pollution Control District Rule 55 shall not employ
potable water during the drought except via an approved waiver.
   (9)   Water Misters: Use of water misters is prohibited.
   (10)   Showering at gyms and athletic facilities: Showers shall be closed
with a physical barrier and sign informing members that showering is prohibited
unless the facility provides proof to the City that all showers are fitted with
showerheads that do not exceed a flow rate of 1.8 gpm at 80 psi. Acceptable
proof includes:
   (i)   Invoices or receipts from a licensed plumber or contractor documenting
the installation of devices that meet the standard;
   (ii)   Inspection by city staff (fees may apply);
   (iii)   Permit data showing the facility was constructed or remodeled to the
standards set forth in the 2019 Title 24, Part 11, California Green Building
Standards Code.
   (c)   A stay on code enforcement actions against brown or dead lawns will be
in effect for the duration of the Level 5 Water Supply Shortage, not exempting
the requirements for the removal of vegetation presenting a fire hazard and
weed removal.
   (d)   Re-landscaping of dead or brown lawns including those in HOA
properties, and landscaping required under development permit conditions but
delayed as a result of the drought, shall be granted a grace period of six
months after the Level 5 Water Supply Shortage is declared over to install
landscaping.
(§ 2, Ord. 1705-NS, eff. November 25, 2022)
Sec. 10-2.1109 Level 6 water supply shortage: water conservation measures.
   (a)   A Level 6 Water Supply Shortage condition is also referred to as an
"Emergency" condition. A Level 6 condition shall exist when the City Council
declares a critical water shortage emergency and notifies its residents and
businesses that a 50 percent or greater reduction in consumer demand is
necessary. Upon the declaration by the City Council of a Level 6 Water Supply
Shortage condition, the City will implement mandatory Level 6 conservation
measures identified in this section.
   (b)   Level 6 Conservation Measures: In addition to the permanent
conservation requirements identified in Sec.
10-2.1104, the following water conservation requirements shall apply during a
declared Level 6 Water Supply Shortage:
   (1)   Limits on Watering Days. Outside watering with potable water is
prohibited.
   (2)   Obligation to Fix Leaks, Breaks, or Malfunctions: Excessive use, loss,
or release of water through breaks, leaks, or other malfunctions in the water
user's plumbing, irrigation, or distribution system for any period of time
after such release of water should have reasonably been discovered and
corrected and, in no event more than 24 hours of receiving notice from the
City, is prohibited
   (3)   No potable water use in Ornamental Lakes, Ponds, or Running-water
Features: Running-water features using potable water must be turned off.
Topping up, filling or re-filling of ornamental water features with potable
water is prohibited.
   (4)   Limits on Washing Vehicles: All vehicle washing is prohibited.
   (5)   Swimming Pools and Spas: No pool permits will be issued, and filling
of pools, ponds, or water features is prohibited.
   (6)   Dust suppression: Dust suppression for fugitive dust that is subject
to Ventura County Air Pollution Control District Rule 55 shall not employ
potable water during the drought.
   (7)   Water Misters: Use of water misters is prohibited.
   (8)   Showering at gyms and athletic facilities: Showers at gyms and
athletic facilities shall be closed with a barricade and sign informing members
that showering is prohibited.
   (9)   No New Potable Water Service: Except for the resetting or turn-on of
meters to provide continuation of water service or the restoration of service
that has been interrupted for one year or less, no new potable water service
will be provided, no new temporary meters or permanent meters will be provided,
and no statements of immediate ability to serve or provide potable water
service (such as will-serve letters, certificates, or letters of availability)
will be issued, except under the following circumstances:
   The project is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare;
or
   The applicant provides substantial evidence of an enforceable commitment
that future water demands for the project will be offset (i.e., net zero water
use).
   (10)   Construction meters. The Public Works Director may recall previously
issued temporary construction meters.
   (c)   A stay on code enforcement actions against brown or dead lawns will be
in effect for the duration of the Level 6 Water Supply Shortage, not exempting
the requirements for the removal of vegetation presenting a fire hazard and
weed removal.
   (d)   Re-landscaping of dead or brown lawns including those in HOA
properties, and landscaping required under development permit conditions but
delayed as a result of the drought, shall be granted a grace period of six
months after the Level 6 Water Supply Shortage is declared over to install
landscaping.
(§ 2, Ord. 1705-NS, eff. November 25, 2022)
Sec. 10-2.1110. Procedures for determination: notification of water supply
shortage.
   Declaration and Notification of Water Supply Shortage: The existence of
Level 2, Level 3, Level 4, Level 5, or Level 6 Water Supply Shortage conditions
shall be declared by resolution of the City Council adopted at a regular or
special public meeting held in accordance with State law.
(§ 2, Ord. 1705-NS, eff. November 25, 2022)
Sec. 10-2.1111. Waiver.
   (a)   Undue and Disproportionate Hardship: If, due to unique circumstances,
a specific requirement of this chapter would result in undue hardship to a
person or business using water or to the property upon which water is used that
is disproportionate to the impacts to water users generally or to similar
property or classes of water users, then the person or business may apply for a
waiver to the requirements as provided in this section.
   (b)   Unique Circumstances: If, due to unique circumstances, specific
requirement(s) of this chapter would present an impractical barrier to the
customer’s operations, but that customer is still able to meet the water
conservation goals of the declared water supply shortage through an alternative
conservation plan, then the entity may apply for a waiver to the requirements
as provided in this section and submit an alternative plan to achieve the
required conservation.
   (c)   Disability: If, due to physical limitations, impairment or disability,
residents may apply for a waiver to substitute the hand-watering allowances
herein with automated watering.
   (d)   Written Finding: The waiver may be granted or conditionally granted
only upon a written finding of the existence of facts supporting the undue
hardship, unique circumstances or disability limitation as presented through
the following:
   (1)   Application: Application for a waiver must be on a form prescribed by
the City and accompanied by a processing fee in an amount set by City Council
resolution.
   (2)   Supporting Documentation: The application should include photographs,
maps, drawings, and all other relevant information, including a written
statement of the applicant.
   (3)   Required Findings for Waiver: An application for a waiver will be
denied unless the City finds, based on the information provided in the
application, supporting documents, or such additional information as may be
requested, and on water use information for the property as shown by water use
records, all of the following:
   (i)   That the waiver would not constitute a grant of special privilege over
other residents and businesses; and
   (ii)   That the authorizing of such waiver will not be of substantial
detriment to adjacent properties and will not materially affect the ability of
the City to effectuate the purpose of this chapter and will not be detrimental
to the public interest.
   (4)   Approval Authority: The Public Works Director must act upon any
completed application no later than 14 days after submittal and may approve,
conditionally approve, or deny the waiver. The applicant will be promptly
notified in writing of any action taken. Unless specified otherwise, at the
time a waiver is approved, the waiver will apply to the subject property during
the period of the mandatory water supply shortage condition. The waiver may be
revoked or modified upon written notice from the Public Works Director.
   (5)   Applicants may file an appeal with the City Manager's office within 14
days of receipt of the decision of the Public Works Director on the waiver
application. The appeal must include an additional processing fee in the amount
set for the initial waiver.
The additional fee will be refunded if the appeal is successful. The City
Manager or his/her designee must act upon the appeal within 14 days and this
decision is final.
(§ 2, Ord. 1705-NS, eff. November 25, 2022)
Sec. 10-2.1112. Additional water conservation measures.
   City Council, upon adoption of a resolution, may implement additional water
conservation measures in addition to those identified in Sections
10-2.1104,
10-2.1105,
10-2.1106,
10-2.1107,
10-2.1108, and
10-2.1109.
(§ 2, Ord. 1705-NS, eff. November 25, 2022)
APPENDIX
Disposition of Ordinances
Special Ordinances Not Codified but to Remain in Effect
Distribution of Thousand Oaks Ordinance Code Sections
DISPOSITION OF ORDINANCES
* Ordinances listed as “Special” are special in nature with limited application
and have not been included in the text of this Code. See Table 2 of this
Appendix.
Number Disposition
Number Disposition
       
1      2-1.101,
       2-1.102
2      Repealed
3      2-3.101--2-3.103, 2-3.105--2-3.107
4      Repealed
5      3-11.01--
       3-11.03
6      3-13.01--
       3-13.14
7      9-2.01, Special*
8      Repealed
9      Repealed
10     2-3.201--2-3.216
11     2-3.104, 2-3.301--2-3.305
12     Repealed
13     Repealed
14     Repealed
15     Special
16     Special
17     Special
18     Repealed
19     8-9.101--
       8-9.104
20     Repealed
21     Repealed
22     Repealed
23     Repealed
24     Repealed
25     3-5.101--
       3-5.103
26     3-14.01--
       3-14.32
27     Repealed
28     Special
29     Repealed
30     Repealed
31     7-5.01--7-5.06
32     Special
33     5-6.01--
       5-6.03
34     Repealed
35     Special
36     Repealed
37     3-10.01--3-10.09
38     7-1.101--
       7-1.106
39     Repealed
40     Special
41     Not adopted
42     Repealed
43     9-4.2703,
       9-4.2804
44     Repealed
45     Repealed
46     Repealed
47     Repealed
48     Not adopted
49     9-4.2419
       7-2.101,
50     7-2.102,
       7-2.202--
       7-2.1201
51     Not adopted
52     Repealed
53     Repealed
54     Repealed
       9-4.1201,
       9-4.1202,
       9-4.1301,
       9-4.1302,
55     9-4.1402,
       9-4.1403,
       9-4.1503,
       9-4.1504,
       9-4.1601, 9-4.16-2
56     Repealed
57     Not adopted
58     Not adopted
59     Repealed
60     Repealed
61     Special
62     Repealed
63     9-3.113--9-3.115
64     6-2.11--6-2.14
65     5-4.01--
       5-4.15
66     4-3.501
67     4-3.501
68     Repealed
69     6-1.201--
       6-1.209
70     Repealed
71     Repealed
72     9-4.1401,
       9-4.1502
73     Repealed
74     2-2.101--
       2-2.107
75     2-1.201,
       2-1.202
76     7-5.203
77     7-1.105
78     6-2.11--6-2.14
79     4-3.501
80     4-3.501
81     4-3.501
82     4-3.501
       4-3.409,
83     4-3.410,
       4-3.414
84     Not Adopted
85     9-4.1101--
       9-4.1109
       9-4.202,
       9-4.501,
       9-4.502,
       9-4.602,
       9-4.802,
       9-4.1001,
       9-4.1004,
       9-4.1201,
       9-4.1202,
86     9-4.1301,
       9-4.1302,
       9-4.1402,
       9-4.1403,
       9-4.1503,
       9-4.1504,
       9-4.1601,
       9-4.1602,
       9-4.2302,
       9-4.2813
87     4-3.406
       9-3.101,
88     9-3.102, 9-3.104--9-3.110, 9-3.112, 9-3.116--
       9-3.505
89     Repealed
90     9-2.2304
91     Repealed
92     7-5.204
93     9-4.1801--9-4.1819
       9-4.501,
94     9-4.503,
       9-4.2601
       9-4.401,
       9-4.501,
       9-4.601,
       9-4.701,
       9-4.801,
       9-4.902,
95     9-4.1001,
       9-4.1201,
       9-4.1301,
       9-4.1403,
       9-4.1504,
       9-4.1601, 9-4.2201--9-4.2210,
       9-4.2601
96     Repealed
97     Special
98     5-2.01--
       5-2.04
99     3-1.101--3-1.309
100    Repealed
100A   Repealed
101    Not Adopted
102    7-1.103,
       7-1.104
103    Repealed
104    1-5.01--
       1-5.08
105    Special
106    Special
107    Repealed
108    7-5.206
109    Special
110    Repealed
111    Repealed
112    Repealed
113    2-1.101,
       2-1.102
114    Special
115    Repealed
116    Special
117    9-4.303,
       9-4.904
118    Not Adopted
       9-4.1202,
       9-4.1302,
119    9-4.1402,
       9-4.1503,
       9-4.1602
120    Repealed
121    Repealed
122    Repealed
123    4-3.415
124    Not Adopted
125    Repealed
       9-4.301,
       9-4.1201--
       9-4.1301,
       9-4.1304,
       9-4.1401--
       9-4.1603,
126    9-4.2401,
       9-4.2404,
       9-4.2403,
       9-4.2405, 9-4.2408,
       9-4.2606,
       9-4.2703,
       9-4.2704
127    Repealed
128    4-3.501
129    Repealed
130    Repealed
131    Repealed
132    Repealed
133    Repealed
134    Repealed
135    Repealed
136    Special
137    Repealed
138    Repealed
139    3-1.126, 3-1.129
140    5-3.01--
       5-3.03
141    Repealed
142    Repealed
143    9-4.2304
144    4-3.501
145    9-4.2703,
       9-4.2801
146    5-11.02--
       5-11.03
147    Special
148    Repealed
149    9-3.103,
       9-3.210
150    Repealed
151    Repealed
152    Repealed
153    Repealed
154    Repealed
155    Repealed
156    9-3.210,
       9-3.211
       3-12.01--
157    3-12.08,
       3-12.14--
       3-12.16
       3-2.01--3-2.10,
       3-3.01--
       3-3.05,
       3-6.01--
158    3-6.17,
       3-8.01--
       3-8.07,
       3-15.01--
       3-15.03
159    Repealed
160    Repealed
161    Repealed
162    Special
163    5-10.01--
       5-10.14
164    9-1.01--
       9-1.03
165    Repealed
166    4-3.501
167    Not Adopted
168    Repealed
169    Repealed
170    9-3.205,
       9-3.301
       3-14.02,
171    3-14.03,
       3-14.06,
       3-14.28
172    Not Adopted
173    Repealed
174    Repealed
175    Special
176    Special
177    4-3.701--
       4-3.703
178    Repealed
179    Repealed
180    Repealed
181    Repealed
182    Repealed
183    1-5.08
184    Repealed
185    8-9.101
186    8-9.102
187    Repealed
188    Repealed
189    Repealed
190    Special
191    Repealed
192    3-4.01--
       3-4.07
193    Repealed
194    Repealed
195    Repealed
196    Repealed
197    Repealed
198    Repealed
199    4-3.501
200    2-1.101,
       2-1.102
201    Repealed
202    4-3.501
203    Repealed
204    2-4.01, 2-4.02
205    Special
206    Repealed
207    Repealed
208    9-4.2302,
       9-4.2304
209    Repealed
210    Repealed
       9-4.1201,
211    9-4.1301,
       9-4.1401
212    Not Adopted
213    7-5.101--
       7-5.112
214    4-3.501
215    Repealed
216    Repealed
217    5-8.02
218    3-1.109, Special
219    Repealed
220    Repealed
221    9-4.1904
222    9-4.1105, 9-4.2208
223    4-3.310
224    Repealed
225    Repealed
226    Repealed
227    Repealed
228    9-3.427
229    9-4.903
230    Special
231    9-4.234--9-4.2419
232    9-4.2417
233    9-4.2712--9-4.2714, 9-4.2819--9-4.2821
       8-5.01--
234    8-5.04,
       8-9.201--
       8-9.203
235    Repealed
236    Repealed
237    Zoning Map Sections I-12, I-13, J-12
238    Zoning Map Section H-9
239    2-5.01, 2-5.02
240    4-3.501
241    Not Adopted
242    Repealed
243    9-4.2302
244    4-3.703
245    Repealed
246    Zoning Map
247    Zoning Map Section C-8
248    2-1.102
249    Repealed
250    Repealed
251    Special
100-NS Zoning Map Section E-8
101-NS Not Adopted
102-NS Zoning Map Sections I-1, I-2
103-NS 4-3.501
104-NS Zoning Map Section J-10
       9-4.1107,
       9-4.1203,
105-NS 9-4.1303,
       9-4.1404,
       9-4.1505
106-NS 1-5.08
107-NS 9-4.1701--9-4.1708
108-NS Zoning Map Section I-14
109-NS Zoning Map Section D-7
110-NS Zoning Map Section H-4
111-NS Zoning Map Sections J-9, K-8, K-9
112-NS 4-3.703
113-NS 2-4.01
114-NS Repealed
115-NS Zoning Map Section G-8
116-NS 6-1.101,
       6-1.111, 6-1.215, 6-1.308
117-NS Zoning Map Section G-8
118-NS Zoning Map Sections I-5, I-6
119-NS Zoning Map Sections H-3, I-3, I-4
120-NS Zoning Map Sections H-3, H-4
121-NS Zoning Map Section I-9
122-NS 7-1.106,
       7-1.107
123-NS 4-3.501
124-NS Zoning Map Section I-9
125-NS Zoning Map Section H-8
126-NS 2-1.101--2-1.131
127-NS Zoning Map Sections I-9, I-10
128-NS 7-2.304,
       7-2.314
129-NS Special
130-NS Special
131-NS Zoning Map Section J-12
132-NS Zoning Map Section G-8
133-NS Zoning Map Sections E-8, E-9
134-NS Zoning Map Sections E-7, E-8
       9-4.303,
135-NS 9-4.1401,
       9-4.1402, 9-4.2207
136-NS Repealed
137-NS 5-14.01-5-14.04, 5-14.06, 5-14.07
138-NS 9-3.210,
       9-3.211
139-NS Zoning Map Section I-3
140-NS Zoning Map Sections D-8, D-9, Special
141-NS 9-4.2210
       9-4.1104,
       9-4.1204,
       9-4.1304,
142-NS 9-4.1405, 9-4.1506,
       9-4.1603, 9-4.1707,
       9-4.2703,
       9-4.2802
143-NS Zoning Map Section H-7
144-NS Zoning Map Section H-7
145-NS Zoning Map Sections E-8, E-9, F-8, F-9
146-NS Zoning Map Section F-9, Special
147-NS 7-5.202
148-NS 4-3.501
       9-4.202,
149-NS 9-4.2301--
       9-4.2305
       4-3.310,
150-NS 4-3.801--
       4-3.804
151-NS Zoning Map Section G-4
152-NS Repealed
153-NS Zoning Map Section E-8
154-NS 8-11.01,
       8-11.02
155-NS Special
156-NS 7-3.01--
       7-3.26
       9-4.601,
157-NS 9-4.701,
       9-4.703
158-NS Zoning Map Section H-6
159-NS Repealed
160-NS Zoning Map Sections G-4, G-5
161-NS Zoning Map Sections G-4, G-5
       7-5.203, 9-3.108,
       9-3.210--
       9-3.212,
       9-4.1104,
       9-4.1204,
       9-4.1304,
162-NS 9-4.1405, 9-4.1506,
       9-4.1603, 9-4.2105, 9-4.2206,
       9-4.2304,
       9-4.2703,
       9-4.2707,
       9-4.2804,
       9-4.2814
       9-4.905,
       9-4.1003,
       9-4.1103,
163-NS 9-4.1202,
       9-4.1302,
       9-4.1402,
       9-4.1602
164-NS Zoning Map Section C-7
165-NS Repealed
166-NS 9-4.202,
       9-4.2402
167-NS Zoning Map Section I-9
168-NS Repealed
169-NS Not Adopted
170-NS 4-3.501
171-NS Special
172-NS 9-4.1503,
       9-4.1602
       9-4.1200--
       9-4.1203,
       9-4.1300,
       9-4.1303,
173-NS 9-4.1400--
       9-4.1404,
       9-4.1500--
       9-4.1505,
       9-4.2401
174-NS Zoning Map Section H-6
175-NS Special
176-NS 3-1.01--
       3-1.36
177-NS 2-3.304
178-NS Zoning Map Sections C-6, C-7
179-NS Zoning Map Section H-8
180-NS Zoning Map Section D-7
181-NS 8-3.09
182-NS Zoning Map Section I-9
183-NS Repealed
184-NS Special
185-NS 5-15.01--
       5-15.14
186-NS 4-3.501
187-NS 4-3.501
188-NS 4-3.501
189-NS 9-4.903
190-NS 9-2.01--9-2.05
191-NS 4-4.01--
       4-4.10
192-NS Not Adopted
193-NS Repealed
       6-1.115--
194-NS 6-1.205,
       6-1.206
195-NS Not Adopted
196-NS 9-4.3006
       4-4.02,
197-NS 4-4.06,
       4-4.08
198-NS Special
199-NS 6-1.101
200-NS Zoning Map Sections C-10, C-11, D-10, D-11
201-NS Zoning Map Section G-8
202-NS Zoning Map Sections H-3, H-4, I-3, I-4
       9-4.601,
203-NS 9-4.902,
       9-4.1001
204-NS Zoning Map Section H-9
205-NS Zoning Map Sections C-9, C-10
206-NS Special
207-NS Zoning Map Sections C-9, C-10, D-9, D-10
208-NS Zoning Map Sections H-3, H-4
209-NS Zoning Map Section H-3
210-NS Zoning Map Sections F-8, F-9, Special
211-NS 4-3.501
212-NS Special
213-NS 5-10.01--
       5-10.17
214-NS Zoning Map Section H-5
215-NS 3-14.33--
       3-14.35
216-NS Zoning Map Sections C-9, D-9
217-NS 7-1.103
       6-1.101--
       6-1.104,
218-NS 6-1.109,
       6-1.115,
       6-1.120,
       6-1.121, 6-1.2
       7-5.203,
219-NS 9-4.2510--
       9-4.2518,
       9-4.2814
       9-4.401,
       9-4.402,
       9-4.501,
       9-4.502,
       9-4.601,
       9-4.602,
       9-4.701,
       9-4.702,
       9-4.801,
       9-4.802,
       9-4.902,
       9-4.905,
       9-4.1001,
220-NS 9-4.1003,
       9-4.1103,
       9-4.1201,
       9-4.1202,
       9-4.1301,
       9-4.1302, 9-4.14.01--
       9-4.1403,
       9-4.1501--
       9-4.1503,
       9-4.1604,
       9-4.1701,
       9-4.2002,
       9-4.2003, 9-4.2102, 9-4.2103,
       9-4.3200--
       9-4.3204
221-NS 9-3.409, 9-3.411, 9-3.426
222-NS Special
223-NS Repealed
224-NS 9-4.3100--
       9-4.3109
225-NS Zoning Map Sections G-4, G-5
226-NS 2-1.201--
       2-1.205
227-NS Not Adopted
228-NS Special
229-NS 4-3.501
       8-5.01--8-5.06,
230-NS 8-9.201--
       8-9.203
       Special,
231-NS 9-4.2518,
       9-4.2814
232-NS Special
233-NS Special
234-NS 4-3.501
235-NS Zoning Map Section C-10
       9-4.1303,
       9-4.2404,
236-NS 9-4.2405,
       9-4.2503,
       9-4.2504
237-NS Special
       9-3.601--9-3.611,
238-NS 9-4.2601--
       9-4.2609
239-NS 4-3.501
240-NS Repealed
       3-1.23,
       3-1.32,
       3-1.35, 3-2.01--3-2.10,
       3-3.02,
       3-3.03,
       3-6.02--
241-NS 3-6.06,
       3-6.14,
       3-6.18, 3-7.02--3-7.05,
       3-8.02--
       3-8.08,
       3-15.01--
       3-15.04
242-NS 9-4.3202,
       9-4.3203
243-NS Zoning Map Sections C-9, D-9, E-4, E-5, F-2, F-3, F-4, F-5, G-2, G-3, G-4, G-5
244-NS Zoning Map Sections G-4, G-5
245-NS 9-3.304, 9-3.407, 9-3.408
246-NS Repealed
247-NS Repealed
248-NS 9-4.2301--
       9-4.2311
249-NS Zoning Map Sections F-8, F-9
250-NS Zoning Map Section H-5
251-NS 4-3.501
252-NS Repealed
253-NS Zoning Map Section G-6
254-NS Zoning Map Sections E-8, E-9
255-NS Repealed
256-NS Zoning Map
257-NS Special
258-NS Zoning Map Sections J-10, J-11
259-NS Zoning Map Sections J-10, J-11
260-NS Zoning Map Section C-10
261-NS Repealed
262-NS Zoning Map Section C-7
263-NS Zoning Map Section C-8
264-NS 2-2.104
265-NS Repealed
266-NS 4-3.501
267-NS Zoning Map Sections G-5, H-5
268-NS Zoning Map Sections H-4, H-5
269-NS Zoning Map Section J-12
270-NS Zoning Map Section J-11
271-NS Zoning Map Section I-9
272-NS Zoning Map Sections H-6, H-7
273-NS Special
274-NS Zoning Map Sections G-5, G-6
275-NS Repealed
276-NS Zoning Map Sections G-4, G-5
277-NS Zoning Map Sections E-9, F-9
278-NS Zoning Map Sections I-9, I-10
279-NS Zoning Map Section J-10
280-NS Zoning Map Section F-9
281-NS Zoning Map Section H-4
282-NS Zoning Map Sections G-9, G-10, H-9, H-10
283-NS Zoning Map Sections G-9, G-10, H-9, H-10
284-NS Special
285-NS Special
286-NS Special
287-NS Repealed
288-NS 4-3.704
289-NS Zoning Map Sections C-9, C-10
290-NS Zoning Map Section J-10
291-NS Zoning Map Sections J-10, J-11
292-NS Zoning Map Section G-8
293-NS 4-3.501
294-NS Zoning Map Section I-9
295-NS 7-1.105,
       9-4.2404
296-NS Zoning Map Sections E-7, E-8, F-7, F-8
297-NS Repealed
298-NS Zoning Map Section J-10
299-NS Special
300-NS Zoning Map Section I-6
301-NS Zoning Map Section I-9
302-NS Special
303-NS Repealed
304-NS Zoning Map Section H-9
305-NS Zoning Map Section G-4
306-NS Zoning Map Section H-5
307-NS Zoning Map Section I-9
308-NS 4-3.501
309-NS Repealed
310-NS Zoning Map Section J-10
       9-4.401,
311-NS 9-4.501,
       9-4.902,
       9-4.905
       9-4.401,
       9-4.402,
       9-4.602,
       9-4.902,
       9-4.905,
       9-4.1001,
       9-4.1003,
312-NS 9-4.1103,
       9-4.1202,
       9-4.1302,
       9-4.1402,
       9-4.1502,
       9-4.1603,
       9-4.1702,
       9-4.2003, 9-4.2103,
       9-4.3202
313-NS 3-5.301, 3-5.302, 7-1.201, 7-1.204
314-NS 4-3.501
315-NS 6-1.113, 6-1.503
316-NS Not Adopted
317-NS Zoning Map Section H-5
318-NS Zoning Map Sections J-6, J-7, J-8, J-9, J-10, J-11, K-6, K-7, K-8, K-9, K-10,
       K-11, L-6, L-7, L-8, L-9, L-10, L-11
319-NS Zoning Map Section H-9
320-NS Zoning Map Section I-5
321-NS Zoning Map Section C-10
322-NS Zoning Map Section C-8
323-NS Zoning Map Section J-10
324-NS Zoning Map Sections H-6, I-6
325-NS Zoning Map Section C-11
326-NS Zoning Map Sections I-8, I-9
327-NS Zoning Map Sections J-11, J-12
328-NS Zoning Map Sections E-4, E-5, F-2, F-3, F-4, F-5, G-2, G-3, G-4, G-5
329-NS Zoning Map Section I-11
330-NS Zoning Map Sections G-9, G-10
331-NS 9-4.2501
332-NS Zoning Map Sections G-8, C-9
333-NS 4-3.501
334-NS Special
335-NS Zoning Map Section J-11
336-NS 4-3.501
337-NS 5-2.04--
       5-2.07
338-NS 3-16.01--
       3-16.06
339-NS Zoning Map Sections C-7, C-8
340-NS Zoning Map Sections I-5, I-6
341-NS 3-17.01--
       3-17.09
342-NS Zoning Map Section H-9
343-NS 3-16.02--
       3-16.04
344-NS Zoning Map Sections I-9, J-9
345-NS Repealed
346-NS Special
347-NS 4-5.01--
       4-5.20
348-NS Not Adopted
349-NS Zoning Map Sections H-2, H-3, I-1, I-2, I-3, I-4, J-1, J-3, J-4
       7-6.01,
350-NS 7-6.02,
       7-7.01,
       7-7.02
351-NS 1-6.01
352-NS 1-7.01--1-7.13
353-NS 9-4.2512, 9-4.2708
       9-4.902,
354-NS 9-4.905,
       9-4.906
355-NS 2-1.124
356-NS Special
357-NS Zoning Map Section G-4
       7-2.302,
358-NS 7-2.304,
       7-2.306
       9-4.2304--
359-NS 9-4.2306,
       9-4.2309
360-NS Zoning Map Sections I-4, I-5, I-6, J-4, J-5, J-6, K-4, K-5, K-6, L-4, L-5, L-6
361-NS 6-2.01--6-2.36
       9-5.101--9-5.107,
       9-5.201--9.5.223,
362-NS 9-5.301, 9-5.302, 9-5.401, 9-5.413, 9-5.501--9-5.508, 9-5.601--9-5.617, 9-
       5.701--9-5.708, 9-5.801--9-5.807, 9-5.901--9-5.903, 9-5.1001--9-5.1003, 9-
       5.1101--9-5.1103
363-NS Zoning Map Section G-9
364-NS Zoning Map Sections H-4, H-5
365-NS 4-3.501
366-NS 2-6.01--2-6.16
367-NS Special
368-NS 4-3.501
369-NS Repealed
370-NS Repealed
371-NS Zoning Map Sections I-8, J-8
372-NS 9-6.01--
       9-6.03
373-NS Zoning Map Section I-9
374-NS Map Section H-9
375-NS Zoning Map Section G-8
       9-3.601--9-3.611,
       9-4.903,
       9-4.1004,
376-NS 9-4.2004,
       9-4.2601--
       9-4.2611,
       9-4.3106
377-NS Not Adopted
378-NS Zoning Map Section I-8
379-NS 9-4.2303
380-NS Zoning Map Sections H-3, H-4
381-NS Zoning Map Sections H-9, I-9, I-10
382-NS Zoning Map Sections F-8, F-9
383-NS 9-4.3102--
       9-4.3111
384-NS Zoning Map Sections G-7, G-8
       9-4.1802--
385-NS 9-4.1804,
       9-4.1806
386-NS 5-16.01--5-16.08
387-NS 2-1.206
388-NS Zoning Map Section G-4
389-NS Zoning Map Section H-4
390-NS 9-4.3202
391-NS 4-6.01--4-6.07
392-NS Zoning Map Sections C-7, D-7
393-NS Zoning Map Sections F-8, F-9
394-NS Zoning Map Sections B-10, C-10
395-NS Zoning Map Sections F-5, F-6, G-5, G-6
396-NS Zoning Map Sections G-7
397-NS Repealed
398-NS Zoning Map Sections I-12, J-12
399-NS Zoning Map Sections H-9, H-10, I-10
400-NS Zoning Map Sections C-11, D-10, D-11
401-NS Repealed
402-NS 3-7.03
403-NS 9-3.606,
       9-4.2606
404-NS 9-4.2811
405-NS 9-3.607,
       9-4.2607
406-NS 9-4.2918,
       9-4.2920
407-NS Special
408-NS Zoning Map Sections J-11, J-12, K-11, K-12
409-NS Zoning Map Sections F-8, F-9, G-8, G-9
410-NS Zoning Map Sections E-8, E-9
       3-13.11,
411-NS 3-13.12.5,
       3-13.12.6
412-NS Zoning Map Sections C-8, C-9
413-NS Zoning Map Sections J-11, J-12
414-NS Zoning Map Sections I-9, I-10
415-NS 4-3.501
416-NS Zoning Map Section H-9
417-NS Special
418-NS Zoning Map Sections G-6, G-7
419-NS 4-3.301, Special
420-NS Zoning Map Section I-9
421-NS Zoning Map Sections C-10, C-11, D-10, D-11
422-NS Zoning Map Sections G-9, H-9, H-10
       9-4.2303,
       9-4.2305,
423-NS 9-4.2308,
       9-4.2309,
       9-4.2803
424-NS 4-3.301
425-NS Zoning Map Section J-10
426-NS Zoning Map Section D-8
427-NS Zoning Map Section G-6
428-NS 5-6.01--
       5-6.03, Special
429-NS 6-1.205
430-NS Zoning Map Section H-8
431-NS Zoning Map Section H-7
432-NS Zoning Map Sections G-9, G-10, H-10
433-NS Special
434-NS Zoning Map Section I-9
435-NS 2-2.104
       9-2.101--
       9-2.105,
       9-2.201,
       9-2.202,
436-NS 9-2.301--
       9-2.304,
       9-2.401--
       9-2.404,
       9-4.2902
437-NS Zoning Map Section H-8
438-NS Zoning Map Section H-8
439-NS Zoning Map Section H-9
440-NS Zoning Map Sections I-8, I-9
441-NS Zoning Map Section I-9
442-NS Zoning Map Sections I-6, I-7
443-NS Zoning Map Section H-7
444-NS Zoning Map Section G-5
445-NS Zoning Map Sections H-4, H-5
446-NS Zoning Map Section I-7
447-NS Zoning Map Sections H-5, I-5
448-NS Zoning Map Sections G-5, H-5
449-NS Zoning Map Section H-6
450-NS Zoning Map Section H-4
451-NS Zoning Map Section I-12
452-NS Zoning Map Section F-5
453-NS Zoning Map Section G-6
454-NS Zoning Map Section C-9
455-NS Zoning Map Section E-8
456-NS Zoning Map Section C-8
457-NS Zoning Map Sections H-5, H-6
458-NS Zoning Map Section I-10
459-NS 9-4.901--
       9-4.908
460-NS Zoning Map Sections C-10, D-10, D-11
461-NS Zoning Map Sections F-4, F-5, G-4, G-5
       9-4.2306,
462-NS 9-4.2308,
       9-4.2309,
       9-4.2312
       9-5.101--9-5.107,
463-NS 9-5.201--9-5.226,
       9-5.301, 9-5.302, 9-5.401--9-5.414, 9-5.501--9-5.509, 9-5.601--9-5.617, 9-
       5.701--9-5.708, 9-5.801--9-5.807, 9-5.901--9-5.903, 9-5.1001--9-5.1003
464-NS Zoning Map Section C-10
465-NS Zoning Map Section D-8
466-NS Repealed
467-NS Zoning Map Section J-11
468-NS Zoning Map Section J-10
469-NS Zoning Map Section C-10
470-NS Zoning Map Sections C-9, C-10, D-10
471-NS Zoning Map Section D-10
472-NS Zoning Map Section E-5
473-NS Zoning Map Section E-7
474-NS Zoning Map Section E-8
475-NS Zoning Map Section G-6
476-NS Zoning Map Sections G-6, G-7, H-6
477-NS Zoning Map Section G-7
478-NS Zoning Map Sections H-4, H-5
479-NS Zoning Map Sections I-6, J-5, J-6
480-NS Zoning Map Section I-7
481-NS Zoning Map Section I-6
482-NS Zoning Map Section J-10
483-NS 4-3.501
484-NS 4-3.116,
       4-3.117
485-NS 4-3.311--
       4-3.316
486-NS Zoning Map Sections G-9, G-10, H-9, H-10
487-NS Zoning Map Sections G-3, G-4
488-NS 2-1.101--2-1.105, 2-1.108--2-1.110, 2-1.112, 2-1.118, 2-1.120, 2-1.122--2-
       1.124, 2-1.129--2-1.133
       4-3.205, 4-3.208, 4-3.209,
       4-3.402,
       4-3.403,
       4-3.406,
       4-3.408,
       4-5.02,
489-NS 4-5.03,
       4-5.05--
       4-5.11,
       4-5.13--
       4-5.17,
       6-1.202,
       6-1.203
490-NS 3-10.06--3-10.08
491-NS 1-2.07
492-NS Repealed
493-NS Zoning Map Section I-9
494-NS Zoning Map Section G-6
       9-4.307,
       9-4.1203,
       9-4.1303,
       9-4.1404,
       9-4.1504,
495-NS 9-4.2501,
       9-4.2504,
       9-4.2505,
       9-4.2508,
       9-4.3300--
       9-4.3305
       3-1.01,
       6-1.101--
       6-1.104,
       6-1.109,
496-NS 6-1.113,
       6-1.120, 6-1.122, 6-1.123,
       6-1.201,
       6-1.202,
       6-1.208, 6-1.212, 6-1.215, 6-1.219
497-NS Zoning Map Section H-3
498-NS Zoning Map Sections G-2, G-3
499-NS Zoning Map Sections I-6, I-7, J-6, J-7
500-NS Repealed
501-NS 4-3.501
502-NS Zoning Map Sections H-3, I-3, I-4, I-5, I-6, J-6
503-NS Zoning Map Section H-8
504-NS Zoning Map Section J-11
505-NS Zoning Map Section J-10
       9-4.106,
506-NS 9-4.3200,
       9-4.3201
507-NS 7-5.201,
       7-5.202
508-NS Zoning Map Sections I-6, I-7
509-NS Zoning Map Section J-6
510-NS 9-4.2910
511-NS Zoning map Section H-6
512-NS Repealed
513-NS Special
514-NS Zoning Map Section H-3
515-NS 4-3.501
516-NS Repealed
517-NS Zoning Map Sections E-9, E-10
518-NS Zoning Map Section H-8
519-NS 6-1.208
       4-6.08,
520-NS 8-5.01--8-5.06,
       8-9.201--
       8-9.204
521-NS 2-3.214
522-NS 2-3.501--2-3.510
       9-5.101--9-5.107,
523-NS 9-5.201--9-5.227,
       9-5.301, 9-5.302, 9-5.401, 9-5.413, 9-5.501--9-5.509, 9-5.601--9-5.619, 9-
       6.701--9-5.709, 9-5.801--9-5.808, 9-5.901--9-5.903, 9-5.1001--9-5.1003
524-NS 9-4.2404
525-NS 9-4.2807
526-NS 2-2.205
527-NS 9-4.1605,
       9-4.1704
528-NS Zoning Map Section H-4
529-NS 9-7.01
530-NS Repealed
531-NS Zoning Map Section H-8
532-NS Zoning Map Section H-9
533-NS 4-3.501
534-NS 7-3.01--
       7-3.26
535-NS 9-4.2519
536-NS 4-3.501
537-NS 4-3.501
       4-3.402,
       4-3.403,
       4-3.405,
538-NS 4-3.407,
       4-3.409--
       4-3.411,
       4-3.413
539-NS 4-3.201--
       4-3.207, 4-3.601, 4-3.602
540-NS Zoning Map Sections H-2, H-3</CECETA>
542-NS Special
543-NS Repealed
       4-3.501,
       4-3.502,
       4-3.506,
       4-3.508,
       4-3.510,
       4-3.512,
       4-3.514,
       4-3.518,
       4-3.520,
       4-3.522,
       4-3.524,
       4-3.526,
       4-3.530,
       4-3.532,
       4-3.534,
544-NS 4-3.536,
       4-3.540,
       4-3.542,
       4-3.544,
       4-3.546,
       4-3.548,
       4-3.550,
       4-3.552,
       4-3.554,
       4-3.556,
       4-3.558,
       4-3.560,
       4-3.562,
       4-3.564,
       4-3.566,
       4-3.568
545-NS Zoning Map Sections H-3, I-1, I-2, I-3, I-4
546-NS Zoning Map Section G-5
547-NS Zoning Map Section G-4
       4-1.01--4-1.14,
548-NS 4-3.1201--
       4-3.1222
       7-2.901--
549-NS 7-2.912, 9-3.426,
       9-4.2517
       4-3.111,
       4-3.117--
       4-3.123,
       4-3.302,
550-NS 4-3.305,
       4-3.311--
       4-3.316,
       4-3.1001--
       4-3.1008, 4-3.1101--4-3.1104
551-NS Repealed
552-NS Zoning Map Sections I-9, I-10
553-NS Zoning Map Sections I-6, J-6
554-NS Zoning Map Section C-7
555-NS Zoning Map Sections H-7, I-7
556-NS Repealed
       9-4.1202,
       9-4.1302,
557-NS 9-4.1402,
       9-4.1403,
       9-4.1503
558-NS 9-3.515
559-NS Zoning Map Sections J-9, J-10
560-NS Zoning Map Section H-8
561-NS Zoning Map Section H-4
562-NS Zoning Map Section J-11
       9-4.202,
563-NS 9-4.1201,
       9-4.1202,
       9-4.1403
564-NS Zoning Map Section E-8
565-NS Repealed
566-NS Zoning Map Section H-9
567-NS 9-4.2807
568-NS Zoning Map Sections G-6, G-7
569-NS 8-13.01,
       8-13.08
570-NS Zoning Map Section E-8
571-NS Zoning Map Sections K-10, K-11
572-NS Zoning Map Section H-4
573-NS Repealed
574-NS Zoning Map Section E-9
575-NS Zoning Map Section H-9
576-NS Repealed
577-NS Zoning Map Section C-9
578-NS Zoning Map Section G-9
579-NS Repealed
580-NS Zoning Map Section I-6
       5-14.03,
       7-3.05,
       7-5.203,
       9-2.303,
       9-2.404, 9-3.108,
       9-3.208,
       9-3.211,
581-NS 9-3.212,
       9-4.703,
       9-4.2306,
       9-4.2404,
       9-4.2803,
       9-4.2815,
       9-4.2904,
       9-4.2914,
       9-4.3110
582-NS 4-3.527
583-NS Zoning Map Sections D-6, D-7
584-NS 6-2.01--6-2.34
585-NS 9-4.2305,
       9-4.2309
586-NS Zoning Map Section I-9
587-NS Repealed
588-NS Repealed
589-NS Zoning Map Section I-9
590-NS Zoning Map Section D-7
591-NS 4-3.518
592-NS 4-3.416,
       4-3.417
593-NS Zoning Map Section F-8
594-NS 9-4.1603
595-NS Repealed
596-NS Repealed
597-NS Repealed
598-NS Zoning Map Section E-9
599-NS Zoning Map Section I-4
600-NS Zoning Map Sections H-8, H-9
601-NS Zoning Map Sections G-6, G-7
602-NS Zoning Map Section H-3
603-NS 7-5.206,
       9-4.2914
604-NS 9-4.601
605-NS Zoning Map Sections I-12, J-12
606-NS Zoning Map Section G-8
607-NS 9-4.2811,
       9-4.2815
608-NS Zoning Map Section E-9
609-NS Zoning Map Section E-8
610-NS Zoning Map Sections E-8
611-NS 4-3.508,
       4-3.512
612-NS Repealed
613-NS Repealed
614-NS Repealed
615-NS Zoning Map Section E-8
616-NS Zoning Map Section D-8
617-NS Zoning Map Section H-9
618-NS Repealed
619-NS 2-3.507, 2-3.511,
       3-8.07
620-NS Zoning Map Section E-9
621-NS Zoning Map Section H-4
622-NS Zoning Map Section H-4
623-NS Zoning Map Section I-2
624-NS Zoning Map Sections C-10, C-11
625-NS Zoning Map Section G-5
626-NS 9-4.905,
       9-4.2815
627-NS 9-4.1603
628-NS Zoning Map Section I-9
629-NS 9-4.904
630-NS Zoning Map Section I-6
631-NS 9-4.3006
       9-4.308,
632-NS 9-4.3400--
       9-4.3404
       9-5.101,
633-NS 9-5.102,
       9-5.201--
       9-5.203
634-NS Zoning Map Section I-5
635-NS Repealed
       9-4.1303,
636-NS 9-4.2404,
       9-4.2503
637-NS Zoning Map Section G-9
638-NS Special
639-NS Zoning Map Sections I-1, J-1
640-NS Zoning Map Section G-8
641-NS Repealed
642-NS Zoning Map Sections J-12, K-12
643-NS 5-2.07
644-NS Zoning Map Sections I-8, I-9 J-8, J-9
645-NS Zoning Map Sections I-8, I-9
646-NS Special
647-NS Special
648-NS Zoning Map Section E-8
649-NS Zoning Map Section F-8
650-NS Repealed
651-NS Repealed
652-NS 9-4.1603
653-NS Zoning Map Sections D-8, D-9, E-9
654-NS Zoning Map Sections I-3, I-4, J-3
655-NS Zoning Map Section I-9
656-NS 4-3.521
657-NS Zoning Map Sections H-9, I-8, I-9
658-NS Zoning Map Section H-8
659-NS 4-3.563
660-NS Zoning Map Section J-10
       9-4.1201,
661-NS 9-4.1202,
       9-4.1301,
       9-4.1402
662-NS 9-4.1102,
       9-4.1103
663-NS Zoning Map Section H-8
664-NS Repealed
665-NS Zoning Map Sections I-6, I-7
666-NS Special
667-NS Zoning Map Sections E-9, E-10
668-NS Zoning Map Section E-9
669-NS Repealed
670-NS Repealed
671-NS 5-8.05
672-NS Zoning Map Section H-8
673-NS Zoning Map Section I-10
674-NS 4-3.512
675-NS Zoning Map Sections G-8, G-9
676-NS Zoning Map Section H-3
677-NS Zoning Map Section I-8
678-NS 3-14.03
679-NS 3-18.01--
       3-18.06
680-NS Repealed
681-NS Repealed
682-NS Repealed
       9-4.2308,
683-NS 9-4.2309,
       9-4.2402
684-NS 9-8.01--
       9-8.09
685-NS Repealed
686-NS Zoning Map Sections D-8, D-9
687-NS Zoning Map Section E-9
688-NS Zoning Map Sections G-2, G-3, H-2, H-3
689-NS Zoning Map Section I-9
690-NS Zoning Map Sections H-3, H-4
691-NS 4-6.01--
       4-6.06
692-NS 7-3.07
693-NS 4-3.506,
       4-3.522
694-NS 5-6.01,
       5-6.06
695-NS Zoning Map Section J-10
696-NS 4-7.01--
       4-7.12
697-NS Zoning Map Sections I-12, I-13
698-NS Zoning Map Section E-9
699-NS Repealed
700-NS Zoning Map Sections G-2, G-3, H-2, H-3, H-4, J-10
701-NS 4-3.1004
702-NS Zoning Map Sections H-1, I-1
703-NS Repealed
704-NS Zoning Map Section I-6
705-NS 1-4.05,
       9-9.01
706-NS Repealed
707-NS Repealed
708-NS Special
709-NS 4-3.801--
       4-3.806
710-NS 4-3.560
711-NS 4-3.124,
       4-3.408
712-NS Zoning Map Section I-5
713-NS 4-4.1802
714-NS 4-3.534,
       4-3.546
715-NS Repealed
716-NS Zoning Map Section J-10
717-NS Zoning Map Section F-8
718-NS Zoning Map Section H-6
719-NS Repealed
720-NS Zoning map Sections I-6, J-6
721-NS Special
       4-3.106,
722-NS 4-3.125,
       4-3.305,
       4-3.408
723-NS 4-3.524
724-NS Zoning Map Section F-9
725-NS 3-10.07, 3-10.03,
       7-1.103
726-NS 4-3.530,
       4-3.547
727-NS 7-2.1301--
       7-2.1308
728-NS Zoning Map Section I-12
729-NS Zoning Map Sections H-8 and H-9
730-NS Zoning Map Sections F-9, G-9, G-10
731-NS Repealed
732-NS Special
733-NS Zoning Map Sections F-9, G-9
734-NS 5-18.01--5-18.04
735-NS Special
736-NS Zoning Map Sections H-8, H-9
737-NS 4-3.557
738-NS 4-3.514
739-NS 9-4.202
740-NS Zoning Map Section F-10
       9-4.2304,
       9-4.2305,
741-NS 9-4.2307,
       9-4.2309,
       9-4.2312
742-NS Zoning Map Section J-11
       3-6.01,
743-NS 3-6.02,
       3-6.05,
       3-6.08
       9-3.101--
       9-3.103,
       9-3.201--
       9-3.216,
       9-3.301--
       9-3.304,
       9-3.401,
       9-3.501--
       9-3.510,
       9-3.601--
       9-3.610,
       9-3.701--
       9-3.702,
       9-3.801,
       9-3.901--
       9-3.946,
744-NS 9-3.1001--
       9-3.1027,
       9-3.1101--
       9-3.1103,
       9-3.1201--
       9-3.1211,
       9-3.1301--
       9-3.1304,
       9-3.1401,
       9-3.1402,
       9-3.1501--
       9-3.1505,
       9-3.1601--
       9-3.1612,
       9-3.1701--
       9-3.1705,
       9-3.1801--
       9-3.1805
745-NS Repealed
746-NS 4-3.301
747-NS Special
748-NS Special
749-NS Repealed
       9-4.1603,
750-NS 9-4.1604,
       9-4.1701,
       9-4.1702
751-NS Zoning Map Sections D-8, D-9
752-NS Special
753-NS Zoning Map Sections I-1 and J-1
754-NS 9-4.1302
755-NS Special
756-NS Repealed
       7-3.07,
       7-3.08,
757-NS 9-3.703,
       9-4.909,
       9-4.2005,
       9-4.3112
758-NS Zoning Map Section I-11
759-NS Zoning Map Section J-7
760-NS Special
761-NS Special
762-NS 2-3.214
763-NS Zoning Map Sections E-9, E-10
764-NS Zoning Map Section E-8, E-9
765-NS 6-2.02
766-NS Zoning Map Sections H-8, I-9
767-NS Zoning Map Section H-8
768-NS Special
769-NS Special
       1-2.01,
       1-5.01,
       3-1.25,
       3-1.27,
       3-14.32,
       3-17.09,
       4-3.806, 4-3.904,
       4-4.09,
       4-5.19,
       4-6.05,
       4-6.06,
       5-4.15,
770-NS 5-8.01,
       5-8.03,
       5-9.07,
       5-10.16,
       5-10.17,
       6-1.104,
       6-1.116,
       6-1.209, 6-1.218, 6-1.307, 6-1.506, 6-3.08, 7-2.120,
       7-3.26,
       7-4.06,
       8-3.08,
       8-13.08,
       9-4.3005
771-NS Special
       9-4.202,
772-NS 9-4.1302, 9-4-.1402,
       9-4.1502
773-NS 9-4.1402
774-NS 5-11.01,
       5-11.02
775-NS Zoning Map Sections H-6, H-7
       5-14.03,
       7-3.05,
       7-5.203,
       9-2.303,
       9-2.404,
       9-4.703,
       9-4.2306,
776-NS 9-4.2404,
       9-4.2803,
       9-4.2807,
       9-4.2815,
       9-4.2904,
       9-4.2914,
       9-4.3110,
       9-6.03
777-NS Zoning Map Sections J-10, K-10
       7-2.304,
       7-2.401,
778-NS 7-3.15,
       7-6.01,
       7-7.01,
       9-4.2404
       9-4.903,
       9-4.1003,
779-NS 9-4.2502,
       9-4.2815,
       9-4.3104
780-NS 6-2.02
       4-3.524,
781-NS 4-3.544,
       4-3.558
782-NS Special
783-NS Zoning Map Section I-9
784-NS Zoning Map Section E-9
785-NS Zoning Map Section I-9
786-NS Zoning Map Sections J-9, J-10
787-NS Special
788-NS Special
789-NS Zoning Map Section J-10
790-NS Repealed
791-NS Repealed
792-NS Special
793-NS Repealed
794-NS Zoning Map Section G-5
795-NS Zoning Map Sections E-8, E-9
796-NS Zoning Map Sections H-13, I-13
797-NS Special
798-NS Zoning Map Section G-8
799-NS Not Adopted
800-NS 9-4.2309
801-NS Zoning Map Section I-10
802-NS Special
803-NS Special
804-NS 9-3.801
805-NS Special
806-NS Zoning Map Sections D-8, D-9
807-NS 2-2.202--2-2.205, 2-2.207--2-2.213
808-NS Zoning Map Sections I-12, I-13
809-NS 4-3.561
810-NS 9-4.2304
811-NS Repealed
812-NS Zoning Map Sections E-9, F-9
813-NS Zoning Map Section I-10
814-NS Special
       9-4.402,
       9-4.502,
       9-4.602,
815-NS 9-4.702,
       9-4.802,
       9-4.903,
       9-4.1003,
       9-4.3104
816-NS Zoning Map Section C-7
817-NS Special
818-NS Special
819-NS Repealed
820-NS 4-3.534
821-NS Special
822-NS Zoning Map Sections G-4, H-4
823-NS Special
824-NS Zoning Map Section H-6
825-NS 3-19.01--
       3-19.04
826-NS Repealed
827-NS Repealed
828-NS Special
829-NS Zoning Map Section G-8
830-NS Special
831-NS Special
832-NS 4-3.525
833-NS 9-4.1103,
       9-4.1301
       9-4.401,
       9-4.405,
       9-4.501,
       9-4.504,
       9-4.601,
       9-4.604,
834-NS 9-4.701,
       9-4.704,
       9-4.801,
       9-4.803,
       9-4.902,
       9-4.910,
       9-4.1005,
       9-4.1104
835-NS Special
       4-3.520,
       4-3.524,
       4-3.525,
       4-3.526,
836-NS 4-3.532,
       4-3.533,
       4-3.541,
       4-3.542,
       4-3.555
837-NS Zoning Map Section I-9
838-NS Special
839-NS Repealed
840-NS Zoning Map Section I-10
841-NS Zoning Map Section C-7
842-NS 9-4.2519
843-NS Zoning Map Section I-4
844-NS 4-3.533
845-NS Zoning Map Section I-9
846-NS Special
847-NS 4-3.533
848-NS 7-3.05,
       9-4.2807
849-NS Zoning Map Sections C-4, C-5, D-4, D-5, D-6, E-4, E-5, E-6, E-7, F-6, F-7
850-NS 1-1.01
851-NS 3-13.12.5
       8-2.01,
       8-2.02,
852-NS 8-2.03,
       8-2.04,
       8-2.05
853-NS 9-4.2309
854-NS 9-4.2509
855-NS Not Adopted
       4-3.401,
856-NS 4-3.407,
       4-3.414,
       4-3.417
       9-4.2402,
857-NS 9-4.2404,
       9-4.2405,
       9-4.2406
       9-4.402,
       9-4.502,
       9-4.602,
858-NS 9-4.702,
       9-4.802,
       9-4.903,
       9-4.1003,
       9-4.2521
859-NS Zoning Map Sections G-7, G-8
860-NS Zoning Map Sections E-4, E-6, F-6, F-7
861-NS 7-3.08
       8-5.01--8-5.06,
862-NS 8-9.201--
       8-9.204
863-NS Repealed
864-NS Repealed
865-NS Zoning Map Section I-9
866-NS 4-3.417
       7-3.08,
       9-3.703,
867-NS 9-4.909,
       9-4.2005,
       9-4.3112
       1-8.01--
       1-8.129,
       1-8.201--
       1-8.205,
868-NS 1-9.101--
       1-9.107,
       1-9.201--
       1-9.203,
       1-10.01--
       1-10.15
869-NS 4-3.559
870-NS 1-8.107,
       1-8.111
871-NS 9-4.1202
872-NS Zoning Map Section F-9
873-NS Zoning Map Section I-9
874-NS Zoning Map Section J-9
875-NS Special
876-NS Zoning Map Section I-9
877-NS Zoning Map Sections D-8, D-9
878-NS Repealed
879-NS 4-3.546.1
880-NS 4-3.516
881-NS Zoning Map Section J-9
882-NS Zoning Map Section I-10
883-NS Zoning Map Section E-8
884-NS Zoning Map Section F-6
885-NS Special
886-NS 3-1.35
       9-4.1205,
       9-4.1305,
887-NS 9-4.1406,
       9-4.2702,
       9-4.2702.5
888-NS Zoning Map
       2-1.101--
889-NS 2-1.507,
       2-2.101--
       2-2.110
890-NS Zoning Map Section H-9
891-NS 4-3.517
892-NS Special
       6-1.114,
893-NS 6-1.117,
       6-1.124--
       6-1.133
894-NS 9-4.304
895-NS Special
896-NS 1-8.203,
       1-8.204
897-NS 4-3.524
898-NS Zoning Map Section F-8
       7-1.105,
       9-3.202,
       9-3.801,
       9-4.2310,
899-NS 9-4.2811,
       9-4.2815,
       9-4.3105,
       9-4.3106,
       9-4.3109--
       9-4.3111
900-NS 9-4.2404,
       9-4.2405
901-NS Zoning Map Section I-4
902-NS Zoning Map Section J-10
903-NS Zoning Map Section H-4
904-NS Zoning Map Section I-9
905-NS Zoning Map Sections H-8, H-9
906-NS Zoning Map Section D-9
       1-2.01,
       1-2.03,
       1-3.13,
       1-4.05,
       1-5.03,
       1-5.05,
       1-5.06,
       1-5.08,
       1-5.09,
907-NS 1-6.01,
       1-6.02,
       2-1.401,
       5-8.04, 6-2.05, 6-2.29,
       9-4.2302,
       9-4.2309,
       9-4.2312,
       9-4.2811,
       9-4.3005,
       9-4.3007,
       9-9.01
908-NS 4-3.543
909-NS Zoning Map Section I-10
910-NS Zoning Map Sections E-8, E-9, F-8, F-9
       1-10.05,
911-NS 1-10.11,
       1-10.12
912-NS Zoning Map Sections H-13, I-13, I-14
913-NS Zoning Map Sections F-8, G-8
914-NS Zoning Map Section J-10
915-NS Zoning Map Section I-9
916-NS Zoning Map Sections D-8, D-9
917-NS 9-4.2815
       5-13.01,
       5-13.02,
       5-13.03,
918-NS 5-13.04,
       5-13.05,
       5-13.06,
       5-13.07,
       5-13.08
919-NS Repealed
920-NS 4-3.564
       1-4.03,
921-NS 9-4.2807,
       9-4.2916
922-NS Zoning Map Section F-8
923-NS Repealed
924-NS 4-3.418
925-NS Zoning Map Sections I-9, J-9
926-NS Special
927-NS Repealed
928-NS Zoning Map Section I-9
929-NS 1-10.06
930-NS Special
931-NS Repealed
932-NS 8-12.01, 8-12.02, 8-12.03, 8-12.04, 8-12.05, 8-12.06, 8-12.07, 8-12.08, 8-
       12.09, 8-12.10, 8-12.11 (Repealed)
933-NS Special
934-NS Special
       9-3.217,
       9-3.218,
       9-3.704,
       9-3.801,
935-NS 9-3.802,
       9-3.803,
       9-3.804,
       9-3.805,
       9-3.806
936-NS Zoning Map Section H-3
       9-4.4201 -
       9-4.4204,
937-NS 9-4.4206,
       9-4.4208,
       9-4.4209
938-NS 4-3.549
939-NS 6-2.02(r), 6-2.09
940-NS Zoning Map Section I-10
941-NS Zoning Map Sections I-1, J-1
942-NS 4-3.526.6,
       4-3.532.9
943-NS Zoning Map Section I-13
944-NS Zoning Map Sections H-11, H-12, I-11, I-12
945-NS Zoning Map Section H-5, H-6
946-NS Repealed
947-NS Repealed
948-NS Special
949-NS Zoning Map Sections D-8, D-9
950-NS Zoning Map Section J-8
951-NS Zoning Map Sections G-9, H-9
952-NS Zoning Map Sections D-10, D-11
       9-11.01,
       9-11.02,
       9-11.03,
       9-11.04,
       9-11.05,
       9-11.06,
953-NS 9-11.07,
       9-11.08,
       9-11.09,
       9-11.10,
       9-11.11,
       9-11.12,
       9-11.13,
       9-11.14
954-NS 1-8.106,
       1-8.108
955-NS Zoning Map Section H-9
956-NS Special
957-NS Not codified
958-NS 1-8.107
959-NS 9-4.2917
960-NS 6-1.220
961-NS Zoning Map Section H-9
962-NS 1-5.08
963-NS Not codified
964-NS 4-3.410
       8-5.01--8-5.06,
965-NS 8-9.201--
       8-9.206
966-NS Repealed
967-NS Repealed
968-NS Special
969-NS Not codified
970-NS 4-3.532.5
971-NS Repealed
972-NS Zoning Map Section I-10
973-NS Zoning Map Section D-7
974-NS 9-3.1210--
       9-3.1217, 9-4.2708
975-NS Not codified
976-NS Zoning Map Section I-9
977-NS Zoning Map Sections D-10 and E-10
978-NS Not codified
979-NS Number not used
       9-4.273, 9-4.274,
       9-4.1201,
       9-4.1301,
       9-4.1403,
       9-4.1503,
980-NS 9-4.1604,
       9-4.1603,
       9-4.1701,
       9-4.1702,
       9-4.3201,
       9-4.2815
981-NS 9-4.2811
982-NS Special
983-NS Zoning Map Section I-9
984-NS 3-14.03
985-NS Zoning Map Section E-9
986-NS Zoning Map Sections C-4, C-5, C-6, D-4, D-5, D-6, D-7, E-4, E-5, E-6, E-7, F-6,
       F-7
987-NS Zoning Map Section J-10
988-NS 4-3.417,
       9-4.2404
       9-4.501,
       9-4.701,
       9-4.902,
989-NS 9-4.2701,
       9-4.2705,
       9-4.2707,
       9-4.3102
990-NS Zoning Map Section G-3
991-NS 3-14.35
992-NS Zoning Map Section J-11
993-NS Zoning Map Section I-9
       4-7.01,
       4-7.02,
       4-7.03,
       4-7.04,
       4-7.05,
994-NS 4-7.06,
       4-7.07,
       4-7.08,
       4-7.09,
       4-7.10,
       4-7.11,
       4-7.12
995-NS Zoning Map Sections A-7, A-8, A-9, A-10, A-11, B-7, B-8, B-9, B-10, B-11
996-NS Zoning Map Section H-8
       9-4.904,
997-NS 9-4.2501, 9-4.2409,
       9-4.2509.5,
       9-4.2815
998-NS 6-5.106
999-NS Zoning Map Sections H-9, H-10, I-9, I-10
1000-  Zoning Map Sections I-10, J-10
NS
1001-  Special
NS
1002-  Special
NS
1003-  Zoning Map Section C-10
NS
1004-  Zoning Map Sections I-10, J-10
NS
1005-  Zoning Map Sections D-8, D-9
NS
1006-  Zoning Map Section K-11
NS
1007-  Not codified
NS
1008-  4-3.533
NS
1009-  Zoning Map Section D-7
NS
1010-  Zoning Map Section I-10
NS
1011-  Zoning Map Section H-4
NS
1012-  Zoning Map Section I-9
NS
1013-  Zoning Map Sections C-6, C-7
NS
1014-  Zoning Map Sections H-8, H-9
NS
       1-9.202,
1015-  1-9.203,
NS     1-9.204,
       1-9.205,
       1-9.206
1016-  Repealed
NS
1017-  4-3.417,
NS     5-13.06
1018-  Zoning Map Section I-8
NS
1019-  Repealed
NS
1020-  8-13.03
NS
1021-  Special
NS
1022-  4-3.419
NS
1023-  Special
NS
1024-  Special
NS
       9-4.1102,
1025-  9-4.1201,
NS     9-4.1301,
       9-4.1403,
       9-4.1503
1026-  Zoning Map Section H-9
NS
1027-  1-11.101,
NS     1-11.102,
       1-11.103
1028-  Special
NS
1029-  4-1.0--
NS     4-1.05
1030-  9-4.2509.2
NS
1031-  Special
NS
1032-  4-3.526
NS
1033-  5-20.01--
NS     5-20.08
1034-  Zoning Map Sections 1-10, J-10
NS
1035-  Zoning Map Section J-10
NS
1036-  Zoning Map Sections C-9, C-10
NS
1037-  8-15.01--
NS     8-15.07
1038-  Zoning Map Section J-10
NS
1039-  Zoning Map Section E-8
NS
1040-  Special
NS
1041-  6-1.101, 9-4.245.1, 9-4.251
NS
1042-  Special
NS
1043-  Zoning Map Section I-9
NS
1044-  Zoning Map Section H-8
NS
1045-  Zoning Map Section F-8
NS
1046-  4-3.417
NS
1047-  9-3.506,
NS     9-3.507,
       9-3.801
1048-  Zoning Map Section I-9
NS
1049-  Zoning Map Section J-10
NS
1050-  4-3.1300
NS
1051-  1-6.03
NS
1052-  6-1.205
NS
1053-  Zoning Map Sections L-8, L-9
NS
1054-  9.1603(x)
NS
1055-  Repealed
NS
1056-  Repealed
NS
1057-  Special
NS
1058-  8-5.01--8-5.06,
NS     8-9.201--
       8-9.206
1059-  Repealed
NS
1060-  Zoning Map Section E-8, E-9
NS
1061-  Zoning Map Section I-9
NS
1062-  Zoning Map Sections J-9, J-10
NS
1063-  Zoning Map Section J-9
NS
1064-  1-8.203,
NS     1-8.204
1065-  Zoning Map Section I-2
NS
1066-  Zoning Map Section D-9
NS
       4-3.5165,
       4-3.532,
1067-  4-3.532.5,
NS     4-3.547.5,
       4-3.557.5,
       4-3.557.8,
       4-3.560
1068-  4-3.414
NS
1069-  Repealed
NS
1070-  Special
NS
1071-  Zoning Map Section I-3
NS
1072-  Zoning Map Sections C-7, D-7
NS
1073-  Special
NS
1074-  Special
NS
1075-  Zoning Map Section I-9
NS
1076-  Zoning Map Section I-9
NS
1077-  Zoning Map Section F-8
NS
1078-  Zoning Map section G-3
NS
1079-  Repealed
NS
1080-  Special
NS
1081-  Special
NS
1082-  9-4.1603
NS
1083-  Zoning Map Section D-7
NS
1084-  Zoning Map Section I-9
NS
1085-  1-601,
NS     5-21.01--
       5-21.05
1086-  3-9.01--
NS     3-9.08
1087-  Repealed
NS
1088-  Zoning Map Section H-4
NS
1089-  Zoning Map Section G-8
NS
1090-  Zoning Map Section I-9
NS
1091-  Repealed
NS
1092-  Zoning Map Sections I-8, I-9
NS
1093-  3-20.01,
NS     3-20.02
1094-  Zoning Map Sections K-7, K-8, L-7, L-8
NS
1095-  Repealed
NS
1096-  Not Codified
NS
       4-3.524,
       4-3.532.3,
       4-3.540,
1097-  4-3.546.2,
NS     4-3.546.3,
       4-3.548.5,
       4-3.560,
       4-3.563
1098-  7-3.07,
NS     7-3.19,
       7-3.20
1099-  9-4.3500--
NS     9-4.3504
1100-  Repealed
NS
1101-  5-13.06(b)
NS
1102-  9-4.1003
NS
1103-  Special
NS
1104-  Zoning Map Sections H-8, I-8
NS
1105-  Repealed
NS
1106-  4-3.419
NS
1107-  9-4.2914(b)
NS
       9-4.202,
1108-  9-4.301,
NS     9-4.2701(e),
       9-4.3600--
       9-4.3602
1109-  Zoning Map Section I-9
NS
1110-  5-22.01--
NS     5-22.10
1111-  5-21.03,
NS     6-1.114(c)
1112-  Not codified
NS
       9-4.1201(ba),
1113-  9-4.1301(bt),
NS     9-4.1403(bn),
       9-4.1503(bm)
1114-  Repealed
NS
1115-  5-8.06
NS
1116-  5-2.04--
NS     5-2.07
1117-  1-12.101--
NS     1-12.103
1118-  Zoning Map Section I-10
NS
       4-3.546,
1119-  4-3.546.2 [
NS     4-3.515.5],
       4-3.548.1
1120-  4-3.512,
NS     4-3.557.5,
       4-3.560
1121-  Zoning Map Sections
NS
       9-3.704(a) and (b),
1122-  9-3.804,
NS     9-4.2811(a),
       9-4.2815(b)(3)
1123-  Zoning Map Section G-8
NS
1124-  6-3.06
NS
1125-  Zoning Map Section G-4
NS
1126-  Zoning Map Sections
NS
1127-  Zoning Map Section C-6
NS
1128-  9-4.301,
NS     9-4.3600--9-4.3606 [9-4.3700--9-4.3706]
1129-  Repealed
NS
1130-  9-4.2303,
NS     9-4.2309(b), (f), (p)
1131-  6-2.09
NS
1132-  Title 9, Appendix A
NS
1133-  9-3.1019,
NS     9-4.2522
1134-  4-3.546.2,
NS     4-3.555,
       4-3.557
1135-  Not Codified
NS
1136-  9-4.2815(a), (b),
NS     9-4.2509.1
1137-  4-3.556.6
NS
1138-  Special
NS
       4-3.420--
1139-  4-3.422,
NS     9-4.202,
       9-4.3600
1140-  1-2.08
NS
1141-  Special
NS
1142-  Zoning Map Section H-8
NS
1143-  Special
NS
1144-  Repealed
NS
1145-  4-3.411(f)
NS
1146-  1-7.02--1-7.13
NS
1147-  Special
NS
1148-  Special
NS
1149-  Special
NS
1150-  5-8.05
NS
1151-  Special
NS
1152-  Special
NS
1153-  1-8.107
NS
1154-  6-1.100
NS
1155-  5-20.07(c)(1)
NS
       9-4.2705,
1156-  9-4.2401,
NS     9-4.2404(a), (d),
       9-4.2405(c)
1157-  8-5.01--8-5.06,
NS     8-9.201--
       8-9.206
1158-  Repealed
NS
1159-  Zoning Map Section E-8
NS
1160-  9-4.2807(b), (d), (e), (g)
NS
1161-  Special
NS
1162-  4-3.532.5(a)
NS
1163-  1-8.203,
NS     1-8.204
1164-  Zoning Map Section I-9
NS
1165-  1-4.05
NS
1166-  9-4.2704(b)
NS
1167-  Special
NS
       9-4.202,
1168-  9-4.301,
NS     9-4.3900--
       9-4.3903
1169-  Zoning Map Sections I-10 and J-10
NS
1170-  Zoning Map Section D-8
NS
1171-  Zoning Map Section D-4
NS
1172-  Special
NS
1173-  8-15.01--
NS     8-15.07
1174-  Zoning Map Section E-7
NS
1175-  9-4.2402
NS
1176-  Not codified
NS
       9-4.202,
       9-4.1800--
1177-  9-4.1810,
NS     9-4.2309(e),
       9-4.2702.5(c)(4),
       9-4.2702.5(d)(3)
        
       7-5.203,
       9-2.104,
       9-2.201,
       9-2.402,
       9-2.403,
       9-3.202,
       9-3.203,
       9-3.702,
       9-3.1206,
       9-4.402,
       9-4.502,
       9-4.602,
       9-4.702,
       9-4.802,
       9-4.903,
       9-4.1003,
       9-4.1102,
       9-4.1103,
       9-4.1104,
       9-4.1201,
       9-4.1204,
       9-4.1301,
       9-4.1304,
1178-  9-4.1304,
NS     9-4.1403,
       9-4.1405,
       9-4.1503, 9-4.2203,
       9-4.2521,
       9-4.2801--
       9-4.2806,
       9-4.2807,
       9-4.2808--
       9-4.2816,
       9-4.2908,
       9-4.2910,
       9-4.2912,
       9-4.2916,
       9-4.3201,
       9-4.3204,
       9-4.3601, 9-4.3701, 9-4.3704,
       9-4.3800,
       9-4.4206,
       9-5.301,
       9-11.07,
       9-12.101--
       9-12.103,
       9-12.201--
       9-12.210,
       9-12.301--
       9-12.302
1179-  Zoning Map Sections H-8, H-9, I-8 and I-9
NS
1180-  Zoning Map Sections G-8
NS
1181-  Special
NS
1182-  Repealed
NS
1183-  1-2.01,
NS     4-3.423
1184-  Special
NS
1185-  5-20.06
NS
1186-  6-5.102--
NS     6-5.104
       5-5.01--5-5.12,
       9-4.202,
       9-4.1201(ak),
       9-4.1202(j)--(m),
       9-4.1301(ag),
       9-4.1301(ba),
1187-  9-4.1302(s)--(v),
NS     9-4.1402 (o)--(r),
       9-4.1403(r),
       9-4.1502(l)--(o),
       9-4.1503(r) and (ax),
       9-4.1603(z) and (aa),
       9-4.1702 (ab) and (ac),
       9-4.2802.5
       3-8.02,
1188-  3-8.03,
NS     3-8.05,
       3-8.06,
       4-3.415(b)
       9-4.202,
       9-4.402(a),
       9-4.502(a),
       9-4.602(a),
1189-  9-4.702(a),
NS     9-4.802(a),
       9-4.903,
       9-4.1003(a),
       9-4.2804,
       9-4.3104
1190-  Repealed
NS
1191-  Special
NS
1192-  Repealed
NS
1193-  Special
NS
       9-12.202(f),
       9-13.101--
1194-  9-13.103,
NS     9-13.201--
       9-13.203,
       9-13.301--
       9-13.302
1195-  9-4.202,
NS     9-4.501(p),
       9-4.2805(b)(7)
1196-  5-19.01,
NS     5-19.05,
       5-19.10
1197-  3-10.102(c) and (e)
NS
1198-  Zoning Map Section I-10
NS
1199-  9-4.4001--
NS     9-4.4006
1200-  1-6.01(c) and (e),
NS     6-2.101--
       6-2.610
1201-  Special
NS
1202-  Zoning Map Section E-9
NS
1203-  9-4.2403(b),
NS     9-12.202(d)
1204-  Special
NS
1205-  Special
NS
1206-  Zoning Map Section G-8
NS
1207-  Special
NS
1208-  Zoning Map Section E-9
NS
1209-  Zoning Map Section I-9
NS
       9-4.1802--
       9-4.1811,
       9-4.2804--
1210-  9-4.2808,
NS     9-12.101,
       9-12.201--
       9-12.204,
       9-12.207
1211-  9-4.2402,
NS     9-4.2523,
       9-4.2309(z)
1212-  Zoning Map Section G-7
NS
1213-  Zoning Map Section G-7
NS
1214-  9-3.206
NS
1215-  Special
NS
1216-  Special
NS
       7-2.902(j), (n), (o),
       7-2.906,
       7-3.06(o),
       7-3.24(d),
1217-  9-3.1006,
NS     9-4.904(c)(6)(iii),
       9-4.904(g)(9),
       9-4.1004(e)(5),
       9-4.2404(e)(6), (7), (8),
       9-4.4301 -
       9-4.4310
1218-  9-4.2303,
NS     9-4.2308(b)(1)(v)
1219-  9-4.107,
NS     9-4.3202,
       9-4.3204
1220-  9-4.2404(b)(4),
NS     9-4.2503(d)
1221-  Zoning Map Sections H-9, H-10, I-9, I-10, I-12
NS
1222-  Zoning Map Section C-9
NS
1223-  Repealed
NS
1224-  Special
NS
1225-  Special
NS
1226-  1-10.05,
NS     1-10.12
1227-  9-4.202,
NS     9-4.2804
1228-  Zoning Map Section G-7
NS
       4-3.1004,
1229-  4-3.1006,
NS     4-3.1007,
       4-3.1008
       7-1.103,
       9-4.2404,
       9-4.2701(c) and (d),
       9-4.2702,
1230-  9-4.2702.5,
NS     9-4.2703,
       9-4.2704,
       9-4.2705,
       9-4.2706,
       9-4.2707
       1-8.101,
       1-8.103,
       1-8.106,
1231-  1-8.112(c),
NS     1-8.113 (b) and (d),
       1-8.114(a),
       1-8.122,
       1-8.125(e) and (f),
       1-8.128
1232-  Zoning Map Section G-4
NS
1233-  Special
NS
1234-  Repealed
NS
1235-  Zoning Map Section G-7
NS
1236-  Special
NS
1237-  Repealed
NS
1238-  6-2.601
NS
1239-  Zoning Map Sections I-12 and I-13
NS
1240-  Zoning Map Sections G-10, G-11, H-10, H-11
NS
1241-  4-3.111.5,
NS     4-3.414
1242-  Special
NS
1243-  9-4.107,
NS     9-4.3202,
       9-4.3204
1244-  5-8.07
NS
1245-  Not codified
NS
1246-  Zoning Map Sections G-10, H-9, H-10
NS
1247-  Zoning Map Sections C-5, C-6, D-5, D-6, D-7
NS
1248-  9-4.202,
NS     9-4.2523
1249-  9-4.202,
NS     9-4.1803,
       9-4.2509
       1-5.09,
       1-9.102,
       1-9.107,
       3-6.14,
       3-12.05,
       3-12.10--
       3-12.13,
       4-3.1222,
1250-  5-6.02,
NS     5-9.06,
       7-5.102,
       8-9.102,
       9-2.105,
       9-2.401,
       9-3.215,
       9-3.1009,
       9-3.1207,
       9-6.03,
       9-7.01
1251-  8-5.01--8-5.06,
NS     8-9.201--
       8-9.206
1252-  Repealed
NS
1253-  Repealed
NS
1254-  5-25.01--
NS     5-25.12
1255-  Zoning Map Section J-10
NS
1256-  5-8.02
NS
1257-  9-4.911
NS
1258-  4-3.901
NS
1259-  Zoning Map Section G-8
NS
1260-  9-4.2313
NS
1261-  Zoning Map Section I-6
NS
1262-  Zoning Map Sections D-6 and D-7
NS
1263-  Zoning Map Section G-8
NS
1264-  Special
NS
1265-  Special
NS
1266-  7-2.1301(a), (b), (c),
NS     7-2.1304(d)
1267-  Special
NS
1268-  1-8.203,
NS     1-8.204
1269-  Repealed
NS
1270-  Special
NS
1271-  Zoning Map Section C-9
NS
1272-  Special
NS
       9-4.402(c),
       9-4.502(c),
       9-4.602(c),
       9-4.702(c),
       9-4.802(c),
       9-4.903(m),
       9-4.1003(c),
1273-  9-4.1103(h),
NS     9-4.1202(n),
       9-4.1302(w),
       9-4.1402(s),
       9-4.1502(p),
       9-4.1603(ab),
       9-4.1702(ae),
       9-4.3104(c),
       9-4.3502(c), (d)
1274-  1-1.08
NS
1275-  Special
NS
1276-  1-9.202,
NS     1-9.203,
       1-9.204
1277-  Special
NS
1278-  Special
NS
1279-  9-12.202(f)(5), (g),
NS     9-12.210
1280-  9-2.203
NS
       4-3.508,
       4-3.516.5,
       4-3.517,
       4-3.520,
       4-3.524,
       4-3.540,
1281-  4-3.542,
NS     4-3.544,
       4-3.546,
       4-3.547,
       4-3.547.3,
       4-3.552,
       4-3.555,
       4-3.558, 4-563
1282-  Special
NS
1283-  Special
NS
1284-  Special
NS
1285-  Repealed
NS
1286-  Special
NS
1287-  Special
NS
1288-  4-3.417(b)
NS
1289-  8-12.01--8-12.11 (Repealed)
NS
1290-  9-4.2402(c)(26), (28),
NS     9-4.2403(d)
1291-  Zoning Map Section D-8
NS
       9-4.202,
       9-4.1102(f)
       9-4.1201(bb),
       9-4.1301(bv),
1292-  9-4.1403(bo),
NS     9-4.1503(bn), 9-4.3701(ay),
       9-4.3901(d),
       9-4.1604(au),
       9-4.1701(av),
       9-4.2804(a)(4)(x)
1293-  Special
NS
       8-15.01,
1294-  8-15.02,
NS     8-15.04,
       8-15.05
1295-  Special
NS
       4-3.514.5,
       4-3.521.5,
1296-  4-3.537,
NS     4-3.541,
       4-3.547.5,
       4-3.548.3
1297-  Special
NS
1298-  Zoning Map Sections G-3, H-3, I-3, J-3, J-4
NS
1299-  5-8.08
NS
1300-  5-8.09
NS
1301-  5-8.10
NS
1302-  Special
NS
1303-  Special
NS
       9-4.1201(ax),
1304-  9-4.1301(bp),
NS     9-4.1401(f),
       9-4.1501(f), 9-4.3701(ax),
       9-4.3901(d), (e)
1305-  Zoning Map Section E-2
NS
       9-4.402(a)(15),
       9-4.502(a)(14),
       9-4.602(a)(9),
1306-  9-4.702(a)(11), 9-4.802(a)(11),
NS     9-4.903(m),
       9-4.1003(a)(12),
       9-4.3104(a)(6),
       9-4.3202(j),
       9-4.3602(f)
1307-  4-3.401
NS
1308-  Special
NS
       4-8.01,
1309-  4-8.02,
NS     4-8.03,
       4-8.05,
       4-8.06
1310-  1-6.01(e)(15)
NS
1311-  4-3.1004
NS
1312-  7-2.1301--
NS     7-2.1312
1313-  Special
NS
1314-  9-4.904(h),
NS     9-4.1004(h)
       6-2.103,
1315-  6-2.213,
NS     6-2.308,
       6-2.501,
       6-2.502
1316-  9-4.1503(bo)
NS
1317-  Zoning Map Sections G-1, G-2, G-3, G-6, H-1
NS
1318-  4-3.410(c)
NS
1319-  5-7.01--
NS     5-7.04
1320-  Zoning Map Sections C-6, D-6,
NS
      D-7, E-5, E-6, F-2, G-1, G-2,
      G-3, G-5, G-6, G-7, I-5
1321-  9-4.2303,
NS     9-4.2308(b)(1)(i),
      (iv),
       9-4.2308(b)(2)(i), (iii),
      9-4.2308(b)(3)(i), (iii),
      9-4.2308(b)(4), (5)(ii), (iv),
      9-4.2309(aa), (ab)
1322-  Zoning Map Section G-6
NS
1323-  9-4.1201(bc),
NS     9-4.1301(bw),
      9-4.1403(bp),
       9-4.1503(bp),
      9-4.2402(c)(30)
1324-  Zoning Map Sections F-5, F-6
NS
1325-  Repealed
NS
1326-  Special
NS
1327-  Special
NS
1328-  9-2.501--
NS     9-2.506
1329-  1-10.05
NS
1330-  9-4.2310,
NS     9-4.2804
1331-  9-3.502,
NS     9-3.702(a),
      9-4.2802(d),
       9-4.2803(a),
      9-4.2806(c) and (e)
1332-  Zoning Map Section E-3
NS
1333-  Special
NS
1334-  Special
NS
1335-  Special
NS
1336-  8-9.201--
NS     8-9.206
1337-  Repealed
NS
1338-  Repealed
NS
1339-  9-2.204
NS
1340-  Special
NS
1341-  Special
NS
1342-  1-8.203
NS
1343-  7-8.101--
NS     7-8.507
1344-  Special
NS
1345-  Special
NS
1346-  Special
NS
1347-  Zoning Map Section F-6
NS
1348-  Zoning Map Section C-6
NS
1349-  Special
NS
1350-  Zoning Map Sections C-6,
NS
      D-6, F-1, F-2, F-3, G-1, G-2,
      G-3, G-4, G-5
       1-5.08,
1351-  3-15.02,
NS     4-6.01--
       4-6.06
1352-  Zoning Map Sections E-6, E-7, F-7
NS
      Sections of Code)
1353-  Zoning Map Sections C-3, C-4,
NS
      C-5, D-3, D-4, D-5
1354-  Zoning Map Section F-6
NS
1355-  3-10.102(e),
NS     3-10.203,
       3-10.205,
       3-10.206,
      3-10.207,
       3-10.401
1356-  Repealed
NS
1357-  Special
NS
1358-  9-4.3701, 9-4.3702
NS
1359-  Zoning Map Section G-6
NS
1360-  4.4.101--4.4.109
NS
1361-  3-10.205(c),
NS     3-10.205(c)(9),
      3-10.205(d),
       3-10.302(b),
       3-10.302(c),
      3-10.303,
       3-10.305(i)
1362-  Zoning Map Section H-8
NS
1363-  Repealed
NS
1364-  4-3.515.5,
NS     4-3.515.8,
       4-3.532.4,
      4-3.533.5,
       4-3.547.1,
       4-3.547.8,
      4-3.552,
       4-3.552.5,
      4-3.557,
       4-3.560
1365-  Special
NS
1366-  Special
NS
1367-  Repealed
NS
1368-  9-4.1004(e)(4),
NS     9-4.2402(a)(1),
      9-4.2402(a)(2)
1369-  Zoning Map Section G-6
NS
1370-  Zoning Map Section B-5
NS
1371-  5-16.01--
NS     5-16.05
1372-  7-2.901(j),
NS     7-2.902(j),
       7-2.906,
      7-3.24(d)
1373-  9-12.203--
NS     9-12.207,
       9-12.209
       2-1.304,
       3-1.01,
       3-3.02--
       3-3.05,
       3-12.05,
       3-12.09--
       3-12.16,
       4-3.111.5,
       4-3.1221,
       4-5.04--
       4-5.06,
       4-5.14,
1374-  5-8.02,
NS     6-1.101--
       6-1.104,
       6-1.104,
       6-1.107,
       6-1.109--
       6-1.111,
       6-1.113--
       6-1.121,
       6-1.124--
       6-1.133,
       6-1.201--
       6-1.209,
       7-1.105,
       9-4.4001
1375-  4-3.701--
NS     4-3.703
1376-  Zoning Map Section F-2
NS
1377-  Special
NS
1378-  Special
NS
       9-4.401,
       9-4.501,
       9-4.601,
       9-4.701,
       9-4.801,
       9-4.902,
       9-4.1001,
       9-4.1201,
       9-4.1301,
1379-  9-4.1401,
NS     9-4.1403,
       9-4.1501,
       9-4.1503,
       9-4.1602,
       9-4.1701,
       9-4.3201, 9-4.3701,
       9-4.3901,
       9-4.4100--
       9-4.4102,
       9-12.202
1380-  9-4.1603
NS
1381-  Zoning Map Section G-6
NS
1382-  1-8.203
NS
1383-  Not codified
NS
1384-  Not codified
NS
1385-  9-12.202(f),
NS     9-12.208
1386-  9-3.704(b),
NS     9-4.2812(e)
1387-  9-4-701(g), 9-4-703
NS
1388-  Not Codified
NS
1389-  Special
NS
1390-  4-3.506(a),
NS     4-3.506.2(a),
      4-3.506.5,
       4-3.514(a), (b),
      4-3.514.5(a), (b),
       4-3.515(a), (b),
      4-3.516(a),
       4-3.517(a),
      4-3.518(a) (b),
       4-3.521.3(a),
      4-3.524(a)--(f)
       4-3.526(a)--(d),
      4-3.527(a),
       4-3.530(a), (b)
      4-3.532.3(a),
       4-3.532.9(a),
      4-3.533(a), (b),
       4-3.534(a)--(c),
       4-3.536(a),
      4-3.537(a),
       4-3.541(a),
      4-3.547.5(a), (b),
       4-3.548.3(a),
      4-3.550(a),
       4-3.553(a),
      4-3.555(a)
       4-3.557.5(a), (b),
      4-3.557.8(a),
       4-3.560(a), (b)
1391-  Zoning Map Section F-6
NS
1392-  3-1.10(b),
NS     3-15.03(b),
       6-1.101(a),
       6-2.212,
       9-4.202,
       9-4.401(e)
       9-4.403,
      9-4.501(g)(3),
       9-4.502(a)(7),
       9-4.503,
       9-4.603,
       9-4.701(g)(4),
       9-4.702(a)(1)
       9-4.703(b),
       9-4.802(a)(2),
       9-4.902(k),
       9-4.903(d),
       9-4.1001(c),
       9-4.1103(a),
       9-4.1201(j),
       9-4.1301(p),
      9-4.1403(o),
       9-4.1503(o),
       9-4.1603(r),
       9-4.2305(b)(6),
       9-4.2309(x),
       9-4.2402(b)(4)
       9-4.2501(a)(5),
       9-4.2515,
       9-4.3102(e), 9-4.3701(o), Title 9 Appendix A Section 4B(3)
1393-  9-4.1202(i)
NS
1394-  9-4.4202,
NS     9-4.4206,
       9-4.4305
1395-  Repealed
NS
1396-  Repealed
NS
1397-  Repealed
NS
1398-  Not codified
NS
1399-  Not codified
NS
1400-  Zoning Map Section G-6
NS
1401-  9-4.401(j),
NS     9-4.501(d),
       9-4.601(c),
       9-4.701(c),
       9-4.801(d),
       9-4.902(e),
      9-4.1001(g),
       9-4.1406,
       9-4.1701,
       9-4.2520,
       9-4.3901
1402-  9-4.2404,
NS     9-4.2405
1403-  Repealed
NS
1404-  4-3.513,
NS     4-3.515.3,
       4-3.515.9,
       4-3.516.2,
      4-3.547.4,
       4-3.557.2,
       4-3.557.6,
       4-3.557.7
1405-  Not codified
NS
1406-  Not codified
NS
1407-  5-2.04,
NS     5-2.05,
       5-2.06
1408-  9-3.1027
NS
1409-  9-4.2518
NS
1410-  Repealed
NS
1411-  1-6.01
NS
1412-  9-4.202,
NS
       9-4.401,
      9-4.402,
       9-4.501,
       9-4.502,
      9-4.601,
       9-4.602,
      9-4.701,
       9-4.702,
       9-4.801,
      9-4.802,
       9-4.902,
       9-4.903,
      9-4.1001,
       9-4.1003,
       9-4.1802,
      9-4.1803,
       9-4.2402,
       9-4.2521,
      9-4.2804,
       9-4.3102
1413-  9-4.3800
NS
1414-  9-3.206,
NS     9-4.202,
       9-4.904,
      9-4.1808,
       9-4.2804,
      9-12.203
1415-  1-8.203
NS
1416-  9-4.1402,
NS     9-4.1403
1419-  9-4.107,
NS     9-4.3204
1420-  1-9.201,
NS     1-9.202,
       1-9.203,
       1-9.204,
      1-9.205,
       1-9.206
1421-  1-8.101,
NS     1-8.104,
       1-8.106,
      1-8.128,
       1-8.202
1422-  Not codified
NS
1423-  9-4.202,
NS     9-4.2509,
       9-4.2805
1424-  Not codified
NS
1425-  Repealed
NS
1426-  Not codified
NS
1427-  Not codified
NS
1428-  Not codified
NS
       4-3.516,
1429-  4-3.546.3,
NS     4-3.548,
       4-3.554,
       4-3.559.5
1430-  1-2.201--
NS     1-2.213
1431-  9-4.1603,
NS     9-4.2804
1432-  Not codified
NS
1433-  Not codified
NS
       3-6.05,
1434-  3-15.04,
NS     4-3.407,
       4-3.417,
       5-21.05
1435-  Not codified
NS
1436-  Not codified
NS
       3-6.14,
       3-10.102,
       3-12.06,
       3-12.08,
       3-12.11,
       3-12.13,
       3-16.05,
       4-3.412,
       4-6.02,
       4-8.02,
       5-2.04--
1437-  5-2.06,
NS     5-6.02,
       5-13.04,
       5-22.04,
       6-2.220,
       6-2.302,
       7-4.01,
       9-3.1207,
       9-3.1210,
       9-3.1602,
       9-3.1604,
       9-4.202,
       9-4.2507,
       9-4.2707
1438-  Repealed
NS
1439-  Repealed
NS
1440-  8-15.02,
NS     8-15.03
1441-  Not codified
NS
1442-  Not codified
NS
1443-  Not codified
NS
1444-  Not codified
NS
1445-  Not codified
NS
       5-24.05,
       9-3.702,
       9-4.202,
1446-  9-4.1809,
NS     9-4.2807,
       9-4.2808,
       9-4.3502,
       9-4.4206,
       9-4.4305
1447-  Not codified
NS
1448-  Not codified
NS
1449-  9-4.202,
NS     9-4.904,
       9-4.2503
       3-10.205 -
       3-10.207, 3-10.212,
1450-  3-10.302,
NS     3-10.303,
       3-10.305,
       3-10.401
1451-  4-3.407
NS
1452-  4-3.417
NS
1453-  Repealed
NS
1454-  Not codified
NS
1455-  Repealed
NS
1456-  Not codified
NS
1457-  1-8.203
NS
1458-  Not codified
NS
       9-4.202,
       9-4.1901,
       9-4.1902,
1459-  9-4.1903,
NS     9-4.1904,
       9-4.1905,
       9-4.1906,
       9-4.1907
1460-  Not codified
NS
1461-  Not codified
NS
1462-  5-26.01 -
NS     5-26.08
1463-  Repealed
NS
1464-  Not codified
NS
1465-  9-4.2516
NS
1466-  9-4.2516
NS
1467-  Repealed
NS
1468-  9-4.4101
NS
1469-  9-4.1808
NS
1470-  Repealed
NS
1471-  Repealed
NS
1472-  Not codified
NS
       6-2.101,
1473-  6-2.302,
NS     6-2.501,
       6-2.502
1474-  Not codified
NS
1475-  7-3.06 -
NS     7-3.08
1476-  5-11.03
NS
       9-4.202,
1477-  9-4.2303,
NS     9-4.2309,
       9-4.2310
       3-1.18,
       3-1.20,
1478-  3-1.21,
NS     4-3.1209,
       5-13.06,
       5-26.05
1479-  Not codified
NS
1480-  Not codified
NS
       9-4.904,
1481-  9-4.1801,
NS     9-4.1802,
       9-4.1803,
       9-4.1808
1482-  Not codified
NS
1483-  Not codified
NS
1484-  1-11.102 -
NS     1-11.104
       9-4.202,
1485-  9-4.1201,
NS     9-4.1301,
       9-4.1403,
       9-4.1503, 9-2402, 9-4.3701
1486-  9-4.202,
NS     9-4.1802,
       9-4.2524
1487-  Not codified
NS
1488-  Not codified
NS
1489-  Not codified
NS
1490-  Not codified
NS
       1-4.01 -
1491-  1-4.04,
NS     1-4.201 -
       1-4.203
1492-  Not codified
NS
1493-  9-4.904,
NS     9-4.1004
1494-  Repealed
NS
1495-  5-8.08
NS
1496-  Repealed
NS
1497-  Not codified
NS
1498-  Not codified
NS
1499-  9-4.2502
NS
1500-  1-8.203
NS
1501-  Not codified
NS
1502-  6-5.101 -
NS     6-5.109
       9-4.301,
1503-  9-4.304,
NS     9-4.1905,
       9-4.1906
1504-  Not codified
NS
1505-  6-5.102,
NS     6-5.103,
       6-5.110
       9-10.101,
       9-10.102,
       9-10.201 -
       9-10.204,
       9-10.301 -
1506-  9-10.308,
NS     9-10.401 -
       9-10.409,
       9-10.501 -
       9-10.503,
       9-10.504,
       9-10.601 -
       9-10.604
1507-  9-4.2509
NS
1508-  Repealed
NS
1509-  Not codified
NS
1510-  Repealed
NS
1511-  Not codified
NS
1512-  Not codified
NS
1513-  Not codified
NS
1514-  4-3.534
NS
       10-1.101 -
       10-1.112,
       10-1.201 -
       10-1.233,
       10-1.301 -
       10-1.304,
       10-1.401 -
1515-  10-1.413,
NS     10-1.501,
       10-1.505,
       10-1.507 ,
       10-1.701 -
       10-1.706,
       10-1.801 -
       10-1.803,
       10-1.901 -
       10-1.913
       10-2.101 - 10.2.108,
       10-2.201 -
       10-2.243,
       10-2.301-
       10-2.306,
       10-2.401-
       10-2.414,
       10-2.501 -
       10-2.514,
1516-  10-2.601 -
NS     10-2.614,
       10-2.601 -
       10-2.614,
       10-2.701 -
       10-2.716,
       10-2.801 -
       10-2.803,
       10-2.901 -
       10-2.913,
       10-2.1101 -
       10-2.1110
1517-  Not codified
NS
1518-  Not codified
NS
1519-  Not codified
NS
1520-  Not codified
NS
1521-  9-3.1027
NS
1522-  4-3.701 -
NS     4-3.703
1523-  4-3.424
NS
1524-  4-3.423
NS
1525-  4-802 - 4-805,
NS     5-11.01
1526-  Not codified
NS
1527-  Not codified
NS
1528-  5-27.01 -
NS     5-27.03
1529-  5-28.01 -
NS     5-28.06,
       9-4.2404
1530-  Not codified
NS
1531-  4-7.01 -
NS     4-7.07
1532-  1-5.08,
NS     5-8.11
1533-  Repealed
NS
       9-4.904,
1534-  9-4.4201 -
NS     9-4.4206,
       9-4.4208,
       9-4.4209
1535-  Not codified
NS
1536-  Not codified
NS
       7-2.407,
       9-3.927,
1537-  9-3.946,
NS     9-3.1002 -
       9-3.1004,
       9-3.1103
1538-  Not codified
NS
1539-  9-10.403
NS
1540-  9-10.102,
NS     9-10.503
1541-  9-4.2402
NS
1542-  Not codified
NS
       9-10.102,
       9-10.203,
1543-  9-10.301,
NS     9-10.302,
       9-10.401,
       9-10.602
1544-  6-3.101 -
NS     6-3.112
       6-2.245,
1545-  6-2.302,
NS     6-2.306,
       6-2.308
1546-  Repealed
NS
       9-4.202,
       9-4.3202,
       9-4.401,
       9-4.502,
       9-4.702,
1547-  9-4.802,
NS     9-4.1103,
       9-4.1302,
       9-4.1603,
       9-4.1702, Title 9, Appendix A,
       9-4.2525 -
       9-4.2527
1548-  Not codified
NS
1549-  Not codified
NS
1550-  Not codified
NS
       4-3.406,
       9-4.1303,
1551-  9-4.2303,
NS     9-4.2308,
       9-4.2310,
       9-4.2404,
       9-4.2804
1552-  Not codified
NS
1553-  Repealed
NS
1554-  9-4.202,
NS     9-4.1402,
       9-4.2402
       7-3.08,
       9-3.703,
       9-3.806,
       9-4.301,
       9-4.303,
       9-4.402,
       9-4.502,
       9-4.602,
       9-4.702,
       9-4.802,
       9-4.903,
       9-4.908,
       9-4.909,
       9-4.1003,
       9-4.1103,
1555-  9-4.1202,
NS     9-4.1302,
       9-4.1402,
       9-4.1502,
       9-4.1603,
       9-4.1702,
       9-4.2003,
       9-4.2005,
       9-4.2803,
       9-4.2812,
       9-4.2817,
       9-4.3104,
       9-4.3112,
       9-4.3202,
       9-4.3602, 9-4.3702,
       9-4.3902,
       9-12.202
1556-  4-3.418,
NS     7-5.206,
       9-4.904
1557-  Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 1557-NS adopted May 10, 2011 amending Section 9-
NS     4.2308 is not yet effective and is pending codification until effective date as
       determined in Part 4 of the ordinance.
1558-  Not codified
NS
       5-25.02,
1559-  5-25.05,
NS     5-25.06,
       5-25.10,
       5-25.12
       4-3.515.1,
1560-  4-3.518,
NS     4-3.520.7,
       4-3.557.1,
       4-3.557.6
1561-  9-4.202, Title 9, Appendix A
NS
1562-  Not codified
NS
1563-  9-4.1302
NS
1564-  Not codified
NS
1565-  Not codified
NS
1566-  Not codified
NS
1567-  Not codified
NS
1568-  9-10.701 -
NS     9-10.703
       9-4.202,
       9-4.904,
1569-  9-4.2402,
NS     9-4.2405.5,
       9-4.2501,
       9-4.2505
1570-  Not codified
NS
1571-  Not codified
NS
1572-  Repealed
NS
1573-  Title 9, Appendix A
NS
1574-  Not codified
NS
1575-  Not codified
NS
1576-  Not codified
NS
1577-  5-17.01 -
NS     5-17.19
1578-  Not codified
NS
1579-  6-1.100,
NS     6-1.105 -
       6-1.110
1580-  1-15.01 -
NS     1-15.04
       4-3.515.8,
1581-  4-3.516,
NS     4-3.517,
       4-3.532.5,
       4-3.546.3
1582-  Not codified
NS
1583-  1-14.01 -
NS     1-14.04
1584-  Not codified
NS
1585-  Not codified
NS
1586-  Not codified
NS
1587-  Not codified
NS
1588-  Repealed
NS
1589-  Not codified
NS
1590-  5-26.01 -
NS     5-26.08
1591-  Repealed
NS
1592-  1-13.01 -
NS     1-13.07
1593-  Not codified
NS
1594-  Not codified
NS
1595-  Not codified
NS
1596-  Not codified
NS
1597-  Not codified
NS
1598-  Not codified
NS
1599-  Not codified
NS
1600-  Not codified
NS
1601-  1-10.05
NS
1602-  Not codified
NS
1603-  Not codified
NS
1604-  Not codified
NS
1605-  Not codified
NS
1606-  Not codified
NS
1607-  Not codified
NS
1608-  8-1.26
NS
1609-  1-13.03
NS
       5-28.03,
       7-2.902,
       7-3.06,
1610-  7-3.08,
NS     9-4.904,
       9-4.4201 -
       9-4.4209,
       9-4.4301 -
       9-4.4310
1611-  Not codified
NS
1612-  9-4.202
NS
1613-  10-2.1001 -
NS     10-2.1027
       9-4.202,
       9-4.401,
       9-4.502,
       9-4.702,
       9-4.802,
1614-  9-4.903,
NS     9-4.904,
       9-4.1001,
       9-4.1002,
       9-4.1103,
       9-4.2402,
       9-4.3104,
       9-4.3202
1615-  Not codified
NS
1616-  Not codified
NS
1617-  Not codified
NS
1618-  Not codified
NS
1619-  Not codified
NS
       9-4.401,
       9-4.402,
       9-4.404,
       9-4.501,
       9-4.502,
       9-4.601,
       9-4.602,
       9-4.701,
       9-4.702,
       9-4.801,
       9-4.802,
       9-4.902 -
       9-4.904,
       9-4.906,
       9-4.1001 -
       9-4.1003,
       9-4.1102,
       9-4.1103,
       9-4.1201,
       9-4.1202,
       9-4.1205,
       9-4.1301,
       9-4.1302,
       9-4.1305,
       9-4.1401 -
1620-  9-4.1403,
NS     9-4.1406,
       9-4.1501 -
       9-4.1503,
       9-4.1602 -
       9-4.1604,
       9-4.1701,
       9-4.1702,
       9-4.1802 -
       9-4.1804,
       9-4.1808,
       9-4.2002,
       9-4.2003,
       9-4.2101 -
       9-4.2107,
       9-4.2404,
       9-4.2506,
       9-4.2804,
       9-4.2805,
       9-4.3102 -
       9-4.3104,
       9-4.3201 -
       9.4.3203,
       9-4.3601,
       9-4.3602, Title 9, Art. 37,
       9-4.3901,
       9-4.3902
       4-3.207,
1621-  7-2.306,
NS     9-4.2301,
       9-4.2305,
       9-4.2309
1622-  Not codified
NS
1623-  9-4.2402
NS
1624-  Repealed
NS
1625-  Not codified
NS
1626-  Not codified
NS
1627-  9-4.202
NS
1628-  9-2.204,
NS     9-2.501 -
       9-2.506
1629-  9-4.202
NS
1630-  7-2.904
NS
       9-4.202,
1631-  9-4.2104,
NS     9-4.2402,
       9-4.2521,
       10-1.701
1632-  Repealed
NS
1633-  Not codified
NS
1634-  Not codified
NS
1635-  1-13.03
NS
       5-26.01 -
       5-26.03,
1636-  5-29.01 -
NS     5-29.48,
       9-4.202,
       9-4.2105
       4-3.203,
       7-2.205,
1637-  9-3.928,
NS     9-3.932,
       9-3.1008,
       9-3.1207
       3-10.101 -
       3-10.108,
       3-10.201 -
1638-  3-10.209,
NS     3-10.301 -
       3-10.310,
       3-10.401,
       3-10.501,
       3-10.601
1639-  6-3.101 -
NS     6-3.112
1640-  Not codified
NS
1641-  Not codified
NS
1642-  Not codified
NS
1643-  Not codified
NS
1644-  5-29.24
NS
1645-  Not codified
NS
1646-  10-2.701
NS
1647-  9-3.1027
NS
1648-  Not codified
NS
1649-  7-2.902,
NS     7-2.910,
       7-2.913
1650-  4-7.03
NS
1651-  Not codified
NS
1652-  Special
NS
1653-  4-2.01 -
NS     4-2.13
1654-  Special
NS
1655-  Special
NS
1656-  4-3.415,
NS     5-23.01 -
       5-23.14
1657-  3-21.01 -
NS     3-21.30
       6-1.100,
1658-  6-1.106,
NS     6-1.107,
       6-1.109
1659-  6-5.102,
NS     6-5.105,
       6-5.106
1660-  Special
NS
       9-4.202,
1661-  9-4.2103 -
NS     9-4.2105,
       9-4.4401 -
       9-4.4403
       5-29.01,
       5-29.06 -
       5-29.09,
       5-29.12,
1662-  5-29.18,
NS     5-29.22,
       5-29.24,
       5-29.27,
       5-29.34,
       5-29.35
1663-  5-8.08,
NS     5-8.09
       9-4.202,
1664-  9-4.1601,
NS     9-4.2105,
       9-4.2402,
       9-4.2403
1665-  Not codified
NS
1666-  1-13.03
NS
1667-  Not codified
NS
1668-  1-10.13
NS
1669-  Repealed
NS
1670-  Not codified
NS
1671-  Not codified
NS
1672-  10-2.902,
NS     10-2.909
       5.29.08,
1673-  5.29.12,
NS     5.29.24,
       5.29.34
1674-  Not codified
NS
1675-  Not codified
NS
1676-  8-1.26
NS
       6-2.101 -
       6-2.104,
       6-2.200 -
       6-2.291,
       6-2.301 -
1677-  6-2.310,
NS     6-2.401,
       6-2.402,
       6-2.501 -
       6-2.507,
       6-2.601 -
       6-2.610
       9-4.202,
       9-4.802,
       9-4.1803,
1678-  9-4.2104,
NS     9-4.2402,
       9-4.2501,
       9-4.2509,
       9-4.2509.5
1679-  1-8.130
NS
       6-6.101,
       6-6.102,
       6-6.201,
       6-6.301 -
       6-6.303,
1680-  6-6.401,
NS     6-6.501,
       6-6.601 -
       6-6.603,
       6-6.701,
       6-6.801,
       6-6.802
1681-  Not codified
NS
1682-  Not codified
NS
1683-  4-3.424
NS
       10-1.703,
1684-  10-1.901,
NS     10-1.902,
       10-1.908,
       10-1.909
1685-  Special
NS
1686-  5-25.01 -
NS     5-25.14
1687-  1-13.03
NS
       6-2.101 -
       6-2.104,
       6-2.200 -
       6-2.299.15,
       6-2.301 -
       6-2.308,
       6-2.401,
1688-  6-2.402,
NS     6-2.501 -
       6-2.508,
       6-2.601 -
       6-2.610,
       6-2.701 -
       6-2.703,
       6-2.801 -
       6-2.810
1689-  Special
NS
1690-  Repealed
NS
1691-  Special
NS
1692-  Special
NS
1693-  Special
NS
1694-  10-2.701
NS
1695-  10-1.701
NS
1696-  Special
NS
1697-  Special
NS
       9-4.202,
       9-4.2201 -
1698-  9-4.2205,
NS     9-4.2501,
       9-4.2505,
       9-4.2804
1699-  Special
NS
1700-  Special
NS
1701-  Special
NS
1702-  Special
NS
       5-29.01,
       5-29.05,
       5-29.08,
       5-29.11,
       5-29.12,
       5-29.14,
       5-29.18,
1703-  5-29.24,
NS     5-29.27,
       5-29.31,
       5-29.32,
       5-29.34,
       5-29.36,
       5-29.37,
       9-4.202,
       9-4.2105
       9-3.305,
1704-  9-4.202,
NS     9-4.2202,
       9-4.3701 -
       9-4.3708
1705-  10-2.1101 -
NS     10-2.1112
       9-4.202,
1706-  9-4.2105,
NS     9-4.2106,
       9-4.2402,
       9-4.2528
       8-1.01 -
       8-1.05,
       8-1.09,
       8-1.14,
       8-1.17,
       8-1.18,
       8-1.23 -
       8-1.27,
       8-4.01 -
       8-4.18,
       8-5.01 -
       8-5.05,
       8-6.01 -
1707-  8-6.04,
NS     8-7.01,
       8-7.02,
       8-7.04 -
       8-7.09,
       8-8.01 -
       8-8.04,
       8-10.01 -
       8-10.06,
       8-10.08,
       8-14.01,
       8-14.02,
       8-16.01,
       8-16.02,
       8-17.01 -
       8-17.03
1708-  6-7.101 -
NS     6-7.104
1709-  Special
NS
1710-  9-4.202,
NS     9-4.2104,
       9-4.2106
       1-8.106,
       1-8.110,
       1-8.113,
1711-  1-8.114,
NS     1-8.115,
       1-8.124,
       1-8.125,
       1-8.126
1712-  Repealed
NS     8-12.01 -
       8-12.11
1713-  Special
NS
1714-  Special
NS
1715-  1-16.01 -
NS     1-16.04
1716-  Special
NS
1717-  Special
NS
       9-4.202,
1718-  9-4.309,
NS     9-4.2003,
       9-4.2005 -
       9-4.2008
       9-10.102,
       9-10.203,
1719-  9-10.301 -
NS     9-10.308,
       9-10.401,
       9-10.601
       10-2.710,
1720-  10-2.902,
NS     10-2.903,
       10-2.909,
       10-2.911
       10-1.902,
1721-  10-1.903,
NS     10-1.909,
       10-1.911
1722-  Not codified
NS
1723-  1-13.03
NS
1724-  1-6.04
NS
1725-  1-13.04
NS
       9-4.301,
       9-4.310,
1726-  9-4.1050 -
NS     9-4.1052,
       9-4.2104.5,
       9-4.2529,
       9-4.2816
1727-  Special
NS
1728-  Special
NS
1729-  9-4.202,
NS     9-4.2104
1730-  9-4.202,
NS     9-4.2525
1731-  Special
NS
       9-4.202,
       9-4.2104,
       9-4.2202,
1732-  9-4.2402,
NS     9-4.2501,
       9-4.2509,
       9-4.2509.5,
       9-4.4501 -
       9-4.4513
       9-4.202,
       9-4.2104,
       9-4.2104.5,
1733-  9-4.2105,
NS     9-4.2525,
       9-4.2527,
       9-10.501 -
       9-10.504
       9-3.1218,
1734-  9-4.2816,
NS     9-10.801 -
       9-10.804
       9-4.202,
1735-  9-4.2104,
NS     9-4.4505 -
       9-4.4508,
       9-4.4513
1736-  5-13.01 -
NS     5-13.09
1737-  10-1.601 -
NS     10-1.661, repealed 10-1.502 - 10-1.504, 10-1.506, 10-1.508, 10-1.601 - 10-1.607
1738-  Special
NS
1739-  9-4.3703 -
NS     9-4.3708
       
 
SPECIAL ORDINANCES NOT CODIFIED BUT TO REMAIN IN EFFECT
Number Short Title Date
Number Short Title                                                                     Date
       Adopting by Reference the Ventura County Ordinance Code as the Ordinance Code   12-
7      of the City                                                                     15-
                                                                                       64
                                                                                       1-
15     Granting a Franchise to Southern California Edison Company for Electricity      19-
                                                                                       65
                                                                                       1-
16     Granting a Franchise to Southern Counties Gas Company for Gas                   19-
                                                                                       65
                                                                                       1-
17     Granting a Franchise to Southern California Gas Company for Gas                 19-
                                                                                       65
28     Granting a Nonexclusive Franchise to Southern California Cable Television       4-6-
       Corporation for a Community Antenna Television System                           65
                                                                                       5-
32     Authorizing a Contract with the State Employees' Retirement System              18-
                                                                                       65
35     Granting a Nonexclusive Franchise to Clarity TV, Inc. for a Community Antenna   6-1-
       Television System                                                               65
40     Annexing Annexation No. 4                                                       7-6-
                                                                                       65
61     Permitting the Construction by the County of a Portion of Olsen Road as a       11-
       Federal Aid Secondary Project                                                   2-65
97     Establishing Jeaunine Drive as a County Highway                                 7-5-
                                                                                       66
                                                                                       10-
105    Annexing Annexation No. 13                                                      25-
                                                                                       66
                                                                                       10-
106    Annexing Annexation No. 14                                                      25-
                                                                                       66
109    Calling a Special Election for Annexing Annexation No. 15                       12-
                                                                                       6-66
                                                                                       1-
114    Consenting to Establishing a Portion of Lynn Road as a Part of a County Highway 17-
                                                                                       67
116    Annexing Annexation No. 15                                                      2-7-
                                                                                       67
                                                                                       6-
136    Annexing Annexation No. 25                                                      20-
                                                                                       67
       Granting a Nonexclusive Franchise to Conejo Community Television for a          8-
147    Community Antenna Television System                                             22-
                                                                                       67
162    Annexing Annexation No. 28 (Reino Addition)                                     1-2-
                                                                                       68
                                                                                       5-
175    Annexing Annexation No. 31 (Seacrest Annex)                                     28-
                                                                                       68
176    Annexing Annexation No. 32 (Potrero Valley Annex)                               4-2-
                                                                                       68
                                                                                       6-
190    Excluding Decker Road                                                           12-
                                                                                       68
                                                                                       9-
205    Granting a Franchise to Westlake Water Company for Water                        24-
                                                                                       68
       Repealing Subsection (c) of Section 12.1 of Ordinance No. 99 Relating to        2-
218    Business Licensing                                                              17-
                                                                                       68
       Changing the Numbering System of the Zoning Maps and Renumbering the Zoning     3-
230    Maps                                                                            18-
                                                                                       69
251    Adopting the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code (1969 Edition)                        7-1-
                                                                                       69
                                                                                       12-
129-NS Calling a Special Election for Annexing Annexation No. 46 (Ventu Park)          23-
                                                                                       69
       Repealing the Time Expiration Provisions of Ordinance No. 212 Amending the      1-
130-NS Zoning Map                                                                      13-
                                                                                       70
                                                                                       2-
140-NS Annexing Annexation No. 50 (Greenberg Addition)                                 24-
                                                                                       70
                                                                                       3-
146-NS Annexing Annexation No. 46 (Ventu Park)                                         10-
                                                                                       70
155-NS Granting a Private Franchise to the Academy Mutual Water Company for Water      6-9-
                                                                                       70
                                                                                       9-
171-NS Annexing Annexation No. 52 (Douglas Oil Addition)                               15-
                                                                                       70
       Granting a Franchise to Don H. Lee DBA Conejo Valley Stage Lines for a Public   5-
175-NS Bus Line                                                                        28-
                                                                                       68
       Adopting Drainage Plan and Requiring the Payment of Fee for Constructing        6-
184-NS Drainage Facilities                                                             12-
                                                                                       68
                                                                                       3-
198-NS Annexing Annexation No. 55 (Sade Addition)                                      16-
                                                                                       71
206-NS An Interim Ordinance Prohibiting Off-Site Signs Along Route 23 Freeway          8-3-
                                                                                       71
                                                                                       5-
210-NS Annexing Annexation No. 56 (Minnich et al. Addition)                            18-
                                                                                       71
       An Interim Ordinance Prohibiting Any Use or Development in the Undeveloped      5-
212-NS Portion of the Greenwich Village Tract                                          18-
                                                                                       71
222-NS An Interim Ordinance Prohibiting Off-Site Signs Along Route 23 Freeway          8-3-
                                                                                       71
       An Interim Ordinance Prohibiting Any Use or Development in the Undeveloped      8-
228-NS Portion of the Greenwich Village Tract                                          24-
                                                                                       71
       Granting a Nonexclusive Franchise to Westlake Communications, Inc., for a       9-
231-NS Community Antenna Television System                                             21-
                                                                                       71
       Adding Sections 22 and 23 to Ordinance No. 28 Granting a Nonexclusive Franchise 9-
232-NS to Storer Cable Television (as Assigned) for a Community Antenna Television     21-
       System                                                                          71
       Adding Sections 23 and 24 to Ordinance No. 147 Granting a Nonexclusive          9-
233-NS Franchise to Conejo Community Television for a Community Antenna Television     21-
       System                                                                          71
237-NS Declaring the Need and Authorizing a Redevelopment Agency                       10-
                                                                                       5-71
257-NS Calling a Special Bond Election for the Acquisition of the Los Robles Golf      2-8-
       Course                                                                          72
       Adopting a Redevelopment Plan for the Northeast Greenwich Village Redevelopment 4-
273-NS Project                                                                         18-
                                                                                       72
284-NS Repealing Ordinance Nos. 175-NS and 184-NS Granting a Franchise to American     6-6-
       Charter Ins. to Operate a Bus Line                                              72
285-NS An Interim Urgency Ordinance Imposing a Moratorium on All Building,             6-6-
       Construction, and Improvements in Tract No. 2277                                72
       Repealing Ordinance No. 285-NS Imposing a Moratorium on All Building,           7-
286-NS Construction, and Improvements in Tract No. 2277                                11-
                                                                                       72
       Designating Certain Businesses as Trash and Garbage Collection Firms for the    7-
299-NS City on an Interim Basis and Prohibiting Trash and Garbage Collection by Other  18-
       Firms                                                                           72
       An Interim Ordinance Prohibiting Any Use or Development in the Undeveloped      8-
302-NS Portion of the Greenwich Village Tract                                          23-
                                                                                       72
       Amending Interim Ordinance No. 299-NS Designating Certain Businesses as Trash   11-
334-NS and Garbage Collection Firms to Extend the Term to January 16, 1973             14-
                                                                                       72
       Amending Interim Ordinance Nos. 299-NS and 334-NS Designating Certain           1-
346-NS Businesses as Trash and Garbage Collection Firms to Extend the Term to April    16-
       17, 1973                                                                        73
356-NS Granting a Franchise to Shell Oil Company for the Transportation of Oil,        3-6-
       Petroleum, and Liquid Hydrocarbon Products                                      73
       An Urgency Ordinance Amending Ordinance Nos. 299-NS, 334-NS, 346-NS to Extend   4-
367-NS the Term to Expire on July 17, 1973                                             17-
                                                                                       78
       An Interim Ordinance Prohibiting Any Use or Development in the Undeveloped      8-
407-NS Portion of the Greenwich Village Tract                                          28-
                                                                                       73
       Amending Ordinance No. 273-NS to Amend the Redevelopment Plan for the Northeast 11-
417-NS Greenwich Village Redevelopment Project                                         13-
                                                                                       73
                                                                                       11-
419-NS Repealing Section 4-3.301 Prohibiting Riding Bicycles on Sidewalks              27-
                                                                                       73
                                                                                       2-
428-NS Repealing Chapter 6 of Title 5 Relating to Fortunetelling                       19-
                                                                                       74
433-NS Annexing Annexation No. 67 (Hunt Addition)                                      3-5-
                                                                                       74
       Amending Ordinance Nos. 28, 147, 231-NS, 232-NS, and 233-NS Granting            3-
513-NS Nonexclusive Franchises to Storer Cable T.V., Conejo Community Television, and  11-
       Westlake Communications, Inc. for Community Antenna Television Systems          75
       Extending the Time for Filing Claims of Special Exemption for Qualifying Senior 8-
542-NS Citizens for Sewer and Water Service Charges                                    12-
                                                                                       75
       Establishing a Moratorium on the Conversion of Existing Multiple Family Rental  6-
638-NS Dwellings to Condominiums                                                       28-
                                                                                       77
       Authorizing an Amendment to the Contract with the California Public Employees'  9-
646-NS Retirement System                                                               13-
                                                                                       77
647-NS Establishing and Continuing a Moratorium on the Conversion of Existing Multiple 10-
       Family Rental Dwellings to Condominiums                                         4-77
       Establishing and Continuing a Moratorium on the Conversion of Existing Multiple 2-
666-NS Family Rental Dwellings to Condominiums                                         28-
                                                                                       78
708-NS Authorizing an Amendment to the Contract with the California Public Employees'   
       Retirement System
3-13-                                                                                  
79
       Prohibiting All Uses in Conflict with a Contemplated Zoning Proposal for a      7-
721-NS Certain Study Area                                                              24-
                                                                                       79
                                                                                       11-
732-NS Adopting a Redevelopment Plan for Thousand Oaks Redevelopment Project No. 2     27-
                                                                                       79
       Adding Section 3.5 to Ordinance No. 732-NS Adopting a Redevelopment Plan for    12-
735-NS Thousand Oaks Redevelopment Project No. 2                                       18-
                                                                                       79
       Providing for the Temporary Stabilization and Control of Rentals for            4-
747-NS Residential Property                                                            22-
                                                                                       80
748-NS Providing for the Temporary Stabilization and Control of Rentals for            5-6-
       Residential Properties                                                          80
       Prohibiting the Filing of Certain Residential Development Applications for a    6-
752-NS Limited Period of Time                                                          10-
                                                                                       80
755-NS Regulating Rents for Residential Housing                                        7-1-
                                                                                       80
       Repealing Subsection (h) of Section 10-1.503 of Article 5 of Chapter 1 of Title 9-9-
760-NS 10 Relating to Special Exemptions from Sewer Service Charges for Qualifying     80
       Senior Citizens
       Repealing Subsection (a) of Section 10-2.901 of Article 9 of Chapter 2 of Title 10-
761-NS 10 Relating to Special Exemptions from Water Service Charges for Qualifying     7-80
       Senior Citizens
768-NS Authorizing the Issuance of Revenue Bonds or Notes for the Construction of      1-6-
       Library Facilities                                                              81
769-NS Approving an Agreement Relating to a Leaseback with the Thousand Oaks Civic     1-6-
       Center Authority                                                                81
       Extending the Provisions of Ordinance No. 752-NS Prohibiting the Filing of      1-
771-NS Certain Residential Development Applications for a Limited Period of Time       27-
                                                                                       81
                                                                                       5-
782-NS Amending Ordinance No. 755-NS Regulating Rents for Residential Housing          26-
                                                                                       81
                                                                                       7-
787-NS Amending Ordinance No. 755-NS Regulating Rents for Residential Housing          21-
                                                                                       81
       Authorizing an Amendment to the Contract with the California Public Employees'  7-
788-NS Retirement System                                                               21-
                                                                                       81
792-NS Establishing a Moratorium on the Conversion of Existing Mobile Home Parks       9-1-
                                                                                       81
797-NS Amending Ordinance No. 755-NS Regulating Rents for Residential Housing          11-
                                                                                       3-81
       Establishing a Moratorium on the Conversion of Existing Mobile Home Parks from  1-
802-NS a Situation Where the Spaces are Rented or Leased to a Situation Where They Are 12-
       Sold and Owned                                                                  82
                                                                                       1-
803-NS Establishing a Public Municipal Library                                         19-
                                                                                       82
                                                                                       3-
805-NS Amending Ordinance No. 755-NS Regulating Rents for Residential Housing          23-
                                                                                       82
       Establishing a Moratorium on the Conversion of Existing Mobile Home Parks from  7-
814-NS a Situation Where the Spaces are Rented or Leased to a Situation Where They Are 27-
       Sold and Owned                                                                  82
       Amending Ordinance No. 147 to Provide Penalties for Failure to Remedy Service   9-
817-NS Problems Relative to the Nonexclusive Franchise Heretofore Granted to Conejo    14-
       Community Television                                                            82
                                                                                       9-
818-NS Setting Rates and Fees of the City Wastewater Department                        21-
                                                                                       82
       Determining that the General Municipal Election Shall Be Held on the Same Day   10-
821-NS as the Statewide General Elections                                              12-
                                                                                       82
       Amending Ordinance Nos. 732-NS and 735-NS Approving and Adopting Amendments to  11-
823-NS Redevelopment Plan for Thousand Oaks Redevelopment Project No. 2                30-
                                                                                       82
       Setting Rates, Fees and Discharge Limits of the City Wastewater Department;     1-
828-NS Repeals Ordinance No. 818-NS                                                    25-
                                                                                       83
830-NS Amends Ordinance No. 755-NS, Rent Adjustment Commission                         3-1-
                                                                                       83
831-NS Amends Ordinance No. 755-NS, Recovery of Cost of Smoke Detector Installation    3-1-
                                                                                       83
                                                                                       7-
835-NS Amends Ordinance No. 755-NS, Extension of Rent Stabilization                    21-
                                                                                       83
                                                                                       8-
838-NS Amends Ordinance No. 755-NS, Regulating Rents for Residential Housing           23-
                                                                                       83
846-NS Amends Ordinance No. 755-NS, Regulating Rents for Residential Housing           12-
                                                                                       6-83
875-NS Establishing a Home Mortgage Financing Program for Moderate and Low Income      12-
       Families                                                                        4-84
       Adopting an Incentive Program to Encourage Connection with Public Wastewater    3-
885-NS System                                                                          19-
                                                                                       85
       Amends Ordinance No. 147 by Extending Existing Cable Television Franchise       6-
892-NS Granted to Conejo Community Television                                          18-
                                                                                       85
       Amends Ordinance Nos. 732-NS, 735-NS and 823-NS, Approving and Adopting         7-
895-NS Moorpark Road Amendment to the Redevelopment Plan                               16-
                                                                                       85
       Approving and Adopting the Redevelopment Plan for the Newbury Road              7-
926-NS Redevelopment Plan                                                              15-
                                                                                       86
930-NS Imposes Wastewater Service Standby Charge in Special Bond Zone No. 2 of Former  9-2-
       Waterworks District No. 6.                                                      86
       Adopting a Rent Stabilization Program to Regulate Rents for Mobilehome Parks in 9-
933-NS the City                                                                        16-
                                                                                       86
                                                                                       9-
934-NS Adopts Six-month Extension of Rent Stabilization Ordinance 755-NS, as Amended   23-
                                                                                       86
948-NS Establishing Certain Limitations with Respect to the Redevelopment Plan for the 12-
       Northeast Greenwich Village Redevelopment Project                               9-86
                                                                                       3-
956-NS Amending and Adopting an Apartment Rent Stabilizing Program for the City        24-
                                                                                       87
       Approves Development Agreement with Orange Builders for Extension of Tract Map  4-
957-NS 3093                                                                            14-
                                                                                       87
       Prohibiting any Subdivisions, Use Permits, Development Permits, Oak Tree        5-
963-NS Permits, Building Permits or Other Entitlements on Specified Property for a     19-
       Limited Period                                                                  87
       Imposing a Wastewater Service Standby Charge in Special Bond Zone No. 2 of      6-
968-NS Former Waterworks District No. 6                                                23-
                                                                                       87
       Prohibiting any Subdivisions, Use Permits, Development Permits, Oak Tree        6-
969-NS Permits, Building Permits or Other Entitlements on Specified Property for a     30-
       Limited Period                                                                  87
       Interim Zoning Ordinance Regarding the Keeping of Horses and Certain Livestock  9-
975-NS in Certain Zones                                                                22-
                                                                                       87
       Interim Zoning Ordinance Regarding the Keeping of Horses and Certain Livestock  10-
978-NS in Certain Zones                                                                27-
                                                                                       87
982-NS Setting Rates, Fees and Discharge Limits of the City Wastewater Division        11-
                                                                                       3-87
1001-  Setting Rates, Fees and Discharge Limits of the City Wastewater Division        6-7-
NS                                                                                     88
1002-  Imposing a Wastewater Service Standby Charge in Special Bond Zone No. 2 of      6-
NS     Former Waterworks District No. 6                                                28-
                                                                                       88
1007-  Levying Special Taxes Within Community Facilities District No. 1988-1           9-6-
NS                                                                                     88
1021-  Prohibiting Certain Specified Commercial Use Entitlements Within the Highway    4-
NS     and Arterial Business Zone (C-2) and Adopting General Site Planning Guidelines  11-
       for a Specific Area for a Limited Period                                        89
1023-  Adopting and Amending the Extension of the Apartment Rent Stabilization Program 5-9-
NS     (Ord. 956-NS)                                                                   89
1024-  Approving a Twelve-year Development Agreement with Shapell Industries           5-9-
NS                                                                                     89
       Prohibiting Certain Specified Commercial Use Entitlements Within the
1028-  Neighborhood Shopping Center Zone (C-1) and Highway and Arterial Business Zone  6-6-
NS     (C-2) and Adopting General Site Planning Guidelines for a Specific Area for a   89
       Limited Period
1031-  Imposing a Wastewater Service Standby Charge in Special Bond Zone No. 2 of      6-
NS     Former Waterworks District No. 6                                                27-
                                                                                       89
1040-  Adopting and Amending the Extension of the Mobilehome Rent Stabilization        9-
NS     Program (Ord. 933-NS)                                                           19-
                                                                                       89
1042-                                                                                  9-
NS     Adopting Specific Plan No. 11 (Jungleland)                                      26-
                                                                                       89
1057-  Authorizing an Amendment to the Public Employees' Retirement Contract           1-2-
NS                                                                                     90
1070-  Levying Special Taxes Within Community Facilities District No. 1990-1           6-5-
NS                                                                                     90
1073-  An Interim Ordinance Prohibiting Certain Specified Use Entitlements Within the  6-
NS     Neighborhood Shopping Center Zone and Highway and Arterial Business Zone and    26-
       Adopting General Site Planning Guidelines                                       90
1074-  Imposes Wastewater Service Standby Charge in Special Bond Zone No. 2 on all     6-
NS     vacant but developable properties                                               26-
                                                                                       90
1080-                                                                                  7-
NS     Approving a 15-Year Development Agreement with Courtly Homes, Inc.              21-
                                                                                       90
1096-  Setting Rates, Fees and Discharge Limits of the City Wastewater Division        3-5-
NS                                                                                     91
1103-  Approving First Amendment to MGM Ranch Development Agreement with Shapell       4-
NS     Industries                                                                      16-
                                                                                       91
1112-  Setting Rates, Fees and Discharge Limits of the City Wastewater Division        7-2-
NS                                                                                     91
1135-                                                                                  2-
NS     Approves Development Agreement Nos. RCA 91-01, RCA 92-02 and RCA 92-03          18-
                                                                                       92
1138-  Approves Development Agreement Nos. RCA 92-04, RCA 92-05, RCA 92-06, RCA 92-07  3-3-
NS     and RCA 92-08                                                                   92
1141-                                                                                  3-
NS     Approves Development Agreement Nos. RCA 92-09, 92-10, 92-11 and 92-12           17-
                                                                                       92
1143-  Approves Development Agreement No. 92-13                                        4-7-
NS                                                                                     92
1147-                                                                                  4-
NS     Approves Development Agreement No. 92-15                                        21-
                                                                                       92
1148-  Approves Amendment to Specific Plan No. 11                                      5-5-
NS                                                                                     92
1149-  Approves Development Agreement Nos. 92-15, 92-16 and 92-17                      5-5-
NS                                                                                     92
1151-  Approves Development Agreement No. 92-18                                        6-2-
NS                                                                                     92
1152-                                                                                  6-
NS     Approves Development Agreement Nos. 92-19 and 92-20                             23-
                                                                                       92
1161-                                                                                  9-
NS     Approves Development Agreement No. 92-21                                        15-
                                                                                       92
1167-  Provides Moratorium on Enforcement of Re-Roofing Requirements of the Uniform    12-
NS     Building Code                                                                   15-
                                                                                       92
1172-  Approving Development Agreement No. RCA 92-22 Within the Rancho Conejo          1-
NS     Annexation Area (Specific Plan No. 15)                                          12-
                                                                                       93
1176-  Establishing a Fire Protection Facilities Fee to be Imposed on New Development  4-
NS     Within the City                                                                 27-
                                                                                       93
1181-                                                                                  5-
NS     Extends the Apartment Rent Stabilization Program                                25-
                                                                                       93
1184-  Approving Development Agreement No. RCA 93-23 Within the Rancho Conejo          6-8-
NS     Annexation Area (Specific Plan No. 15)                                          93
1191-  Approving and Adopting the 1993 Amendments to the Redevelopment Plan for the    11-
NS     Thousand Oaks Boulevard Redevelopment Project                                   9-93
1193-  Approving Development Agreement No. RCA 93-24 Within the Rancho Conejo          12-
NS     Annexation area (Specific Plan No. 15)                                          7-93
1201-                                                                                  3-
NS     Sets Rates, Fees and Discharge Limits of the City Wastewater Division           22-
                                                                                       94
1204-  Adopts Specific Plan No. 16                                                     4-5-
NS                                                                                     94
1205-  Adopts Cable Television Franchise Rate Regulations                              4-5-
NS                                                                                     94
1207-  Establishes and Amends Certain Limitations with Respect to the Redevelopment    4-
NS     Plan for the Thousand Oaks Boulevard Redevelopment Project                      19-
                                                                                       94
1215-  Levying Special Taxes Within Community Facilities District No. 1994-1           7-
NS     (Marketplace Public Pedestrian, Traffic Circulation and Parking Facilities)     19-
                                                                                       94
1216-  Adopting and Amending the Extension of the Mobilehome Rent Stabilization        7-
NS     Program (Ordinance No. 933-NS)                                                  26-
                                                                                       94
1224-  Establishes and Amends Certain Limitations with Respect to the Redevelopment    12-
NS     Plan for Northeast Greenwich Village Redevelopment Project                      13-
                                                                                       94
1225-  Establishes and Amends Certain Limitations with Respect to the Redevelopment    12-
NS     Plan for Newbury Road Redevelopment Project                                     13-
                                                                                       94
1233-  Prohibits Certain Specified Land Uses, Such as Self-Storage and Other Storage   5-
NS     in the M-1 Zone Along the Freeway Scenic Corridor                               23-
                                                                                       95
1236-                                                                                  6-
NS     Extends Urgency Interim Moratorium Adopted by Ord. No. 1233-NS                  27-
                                                                                       95
1239-  Establishes a Revised Procedure for the Franchising of Cable Television         10-
NS     Systems; Repeals Ord. 1234-NS                                                   3-95
1242-  Repealing Ord. 1234-NS and Establishing a Revised Procedure for the Franchising 10-
NS     of Cable Television Systems                                                     3-95
1245-  Amending Chapter 10.90 of the Los Angeles County Code Incorporated by the       11-
NS     Thousand Oaks Municipal Code Section 6-1.100                                    21-
                                                                                       95
1264-  Setting Rates, Fees and Discharge Limits of the City Wastewater Division        6-4-
NS                                                                                     96
1265-                                                                                  6-
NS     Parks Initiative                                                                18-
                                                                                       96
1267-                                                                                  9-
NS     Approves Development Agreement No. RCA 96-25                                    24-
                                                                                       96
1270-  Approves Automatic Construction Cost Index Adjustment for the City Wastewater   10-
NS     Division                                                                        22-
                                                                                       96
1272-  Moratorium on the Granting of Approvals and Issuance of Permits for             11-
NS     Telecommunication Facilities                                                    19-
                                                                                       96
1275-  Extends Moratorium Adopted by Ordinance 1272-NS                                 1-7-
NS                                                                                     97
1277-  Sets Rates and Fees of the City Water Division                                  2-4-
NS                                                                                     97
1278-  Adopts Specific Plan No. 17                                                     2-4-
NS                                                                                     97
1282-  Authorizes Amendment to the City's Contract with the California Public          4-8-
NS     Employees' Retirement System                                                    97
                                                                                       5-
      Approves Development Agreement No. RCA 97-26                                    20-
                                                                                       97
1284-                                                                                  5-
NS     Amends Ord. 956-NS, Apartment Rent Stabilization                                20-
                                                                                       97
1286-                                                                                  7-
NS     Setting Rates, Fees of Water Division                                           15-
                                                                                       97
1287-  Repeals Ords. 1264-NS and 1270-NS; Sets Forth Rates, Fees and Discharge Limits, 7-
NS     Wastewater Division                                                             15-
                                                                                       97
1293-  Lifting Moratorium on Granting of City Permits for Installation of Wireless     9-2-
NS     Transmitting, Related Facilities in Commercial and Industrial Zones             97
1295-  Authorizing Amendment to Contract With Board of Administration of California    9-2-
NS     Public Employees' Retirement System                                             97
1297-                                                                                  9-
NS     Approves Development Agreement No. RCA 97-27                                    16-
                                                                                       97
1302-                                                                                  9-
NS     Setting Rates, Fees for Water Division                                          23-
                                                                                       97
1303-                                                                                  9-
NS     Setting Rates, Fees and Discharge Limits of Wastewater Division                 23-
                                                                                       97
1308-  Amends Ord. 1303-NS, Setting Rates, Fees and Discharge Limits of Wastewater     10-
NS     Division                                                                        21-
                                                                                       97
1313-                                                                                  1-
NS     Levies Special Taxes Within Community Facilities District No. 1997-1            13-
                                                                                       98
1326-  Setting Rates, Fees and Discharge Limits of Wastewater Division; Repeals Ord.   10-
NS     1303-NS                                                                         22-
                                                                                       98
1327-                                                                                  10-
NS     Setting Rates and Fees of Water Division; Repeals Ord. 1302-NS                  22-
                                                                                       98
1333-  Setting Rates, Fees and Discharge Limits of the City Wastewater Division;       4-1-
NS     Repeals Ord, 1326-NS                                                            99
1334-  Setting Rates and Fees of Water Division; Repeals Ord. 1327-NS                  4-8-
NS                                                                                     99
1335-  Terminates Northeast Greenwich Village Redevelopment Project; Repeals Ord. 273- 6-
NS     NS                                                                              10-
                                                                                       99
1340-                                                                                  7-
NS     Setting Rates and Fees of Water Division; Repeals Ord. 1334-NS                  15-
                                                                                       99
1341-  Setting Rates, Fees and Discharge Limits of the City Wastewater Division;       7-
NS     Repeals Ord. 1333-NS                                                            15-
                                                                                       99
1344-  Setting Rates and Fees of Water Division; Repeals Ord. 1340-NS                  11-
NS                                                                                     1-99
1345-  Setting Rates, Fees and Discharge Limits of the City Wastewater Division;       11-
NS     Repeals Ord. 1341-NS                                                            1-99
1346-                                                                                  11-
NS     Approves Lease Agreement                                                        18-
                                                                                       99
1349-                                                                                  1-
NS     Amends Redevelopment Plan                                                       13-
                                                                                       00
1357-  Approving Development Agreement No. RCA 2000-28 Within the Rancho Conejo        6-
NS     Annexation Area (Specific Plan No. 15)                                          15-
                                                                                       00
1365-  Setting Rates and Fees of Water Division; Repeals Ord. 1344-NS                  11-
NS                                                                                     1-00
1366-  Setting Rates, Fees and Discharge Limits of the City Wastewater Division;       11-
NS     Repeals Ord. 1345-NS                                                            1-00
1377-  Setting Rates and Fees of Water Division; Repeals Ord. 1365-NS                  7-5-
NS                                                                                     01
1378-  Setting Rates, Fees and Discharge Limits of Wastewater Division; Repeals Ord.   7-5-
NS     1366-NS                                                                         01
1383-                                                                                  9-
NS     Adjusting and Setting Rates and Fees of the City Water Division                 18-
                                                                                       01
1384-  Adjusting and Setting Rates, Fees, and Discharge Limits of the City Wastewater  9-
NS     Division                                                                        18-
                                                                                       01
1388-  Authorizing an Amendment to the Contract Between the City Council and the Board 10-
NS     of Administration of the California Public Employees' Retirement System         2-01
1389-                                                                                  12-
NS     Amends Zoning Map and Classification of Properties                              06-
                                                                                       01
1398-                                                                                  9-
NS     Setting Rates and Fees of Water Division                                        24-
                                                                                       02
1399-                                                                                  9-
NS     Setting Rates, Fees, and Discharge Limits of the City Wastewater Division       24-
                                                                                       02
1405-  Setting Rates and Fees of Water Division; Repeals Ord. 1398-NS                  5-6-
NS                                                                                     03
1406-  Setting Rates, Fees, and Discharge Limits of the City Wastewater Division;      5-6-
NS     Repeals Ord. 1399-NS                                                            03
1417-  Setting Rates and Fees of Water Division; Repeals Ord. 1405-NS                  10-
NS                                                                                     7-03
1418-  Setting Rates, Fees, and Discharge Limits of the City Wastewater Division;      10-
NS     Repeals Ord. 1406-NS                                                            7-03
1422-                                                                                  1-
NS     Zoning maps; relating to changes in zoning classification                       13-
                                                                                       04
1424-                                                                                  3-
NS     Adopting Amendment #2 to specific plan #11                                      23-
                                                                                       04
1425-  Amending contribution limits and the like                                       7-7-
NS                                                                                     05
1426-  Amendment relating to zoning maps and changes in zoning classification of       10-
NS     property 04-71034(ZC), located at 2377 Chiquita Lane                            14-
                                                                                       04
1427-  Adjusting and setting rates and fees of City Water Division; repealing Ord.     10-
NS     1417-NS                                                                         28-
                                                                                       04
1428-  Adjusting and setting rates, fees and discharge limits of the City Wastewater   10-
NS     Division; repealing Ord. 1417-NS                                                28-
                                                                                       04
1432-  Amendment relating to zoning maps and changes in zoning classification of       2-
NS     property Z 2003-729, located at 2727 E. Hillcrest Drive                         10-
                                                                                       05
1433-  Amendment to the contract between the City and California Public Employees’   3-
NS     Retirement System Board of Administration                                       20-
                                                                                       05
1435-  Adjusting and setting rates and fees of the City Water Division                 4-2-
NS                                                                                     05
1436-  Adjusting and setting rates, fees and discharge limits of the City Wastewater   4-2-
NS     Division                                                                        05
1441-  Amendment relating to zoning maps and changes in zoning classification of       9-
NS     property Z 2003-730, located at 3303 Old Conejo Road                            13-
                                                                                       05
1442-                                                                                  9-
NS     Adjusting and setting rates and fees of the City Water Division                 27-
                                                                                       05
1443-                                                                                  9-
NS     Adjusting and setting rates and fees of the City Wastewater Division            27-
                                                                                       05
1444-  Amendment to existing time limitations and elimination of existing time         10-
NS     limitations on incurring debt for the redevelopment plan for the Thousand Oaks  11-
       Boulevard Redevelopment Project                                                 05
1445-  Amendment to existing time limitations and elimination of existing time         10-
NS     limitations on incurring debt for the redevelopment plan for the Newbury Road   11-
       Redevelopment Project                                                           05
1447-  Amendment relating to zoning maps and changes in zoning classification of       11-
NS     property Z 04-71517 located at 2499 Chiquita Lane                               1-05
1448-  Amendment relating to zoning maps and changes in zoning classification of       11-
NS     property Z 04-71532 located at 136 N. Oakview Drive                             1-05
1449-  Amendment relating to zoning maps and changes in zoning classification of       11-
NS     property Z 04-71517 located at 2499 Chiquita Lane                               1-05
1450-  Amendment to increase the departmental authority and bid authorities, as well   11-
NS     as other bid processing changes                                                 15-
                                                                                       05
1454-  Declaring a moratorium on the approval or issuance of any permit, license,      1-
NS     approval, or entitlement relating to applications for mobile home park          31-
       subdivisions, changes of use, and/or closures                                   06
1455-  Amending Ord. 1432-NS to allow payment of an in lieu fee (Repealed)             2-7-
NS                                                                                     06
1456-  Amendment relating to zoning map and changing zoning classification of property 2-
NS     located on the west side of Rancho Road at Robert S. Haaland Drive, zone change 21-
       Z 94-683 (Zoning Map Section F-6)                                               06
1458-  Extends moratorium adopted by Ordinance 1454-NS                                 3-7-
NS                                                                                     06
1460-  Amendment relating to the zoning map and changing zoning classification of      5-
NS     property located at the southeast corner of Conejo School Road and Chiquita     26-
       Lane, zone change Z2003-728                                                     06
1461-  Granting to California-American Water Company the right, privilege and          6-9-
NS     franchise to construct, use, maintain and operate pipelines and appurtenances   06
       for the Transmission and distribution of water for any and all purposes
       Amending the official zoning map and changing the zoning classification of      7-
1464-  property at the following locations: (1) Approximately 1,500 feet north of the  14-
NS     intersection of Wendy Drive and the Ventura Freeway; and (2) The southeast      06
       corner of Hillcrest Drive and Teller Road; zone change Z2004-71139
1470-  Adjusting and setting rates and fees of the city water division (as established 12-
NS     in Ord. No. 1442-NS) (Repealed)                                                 1-06
1471-  Adjusting and setting rates, fees and discharge limits of the city wastewater   12-
NS     division (Repealed)                                                             1-06
1472-  Amending the official zoning map and changing the zoning classification of      11-
NS     property located at 1750 and 1752 Los Feliz Drive; zone change Z 2005-70145     25-
       (Applicant: Elan Dorriz, Bernard Cartoon and Steve Cameron)                     06
1474-  Extending a moratorium on the approval or issuance of any permit, license,      1-9-
NS     approval, or entitlement relating to applications for mobile home park          07
       subdivisions, changes of use, and/or closures
1479-  Adjusting and setting fees and restating rates of the City Water Division       6-
NS     (repealing 1470-NS)                                                             14-
                                                                                       07
1480-  Adjusting and setting fees and discharge limits and restating rates of the City 6-
NS     Wastewater Division (repealing 1471-NS)                                         14-
                                                                                       07
1480-  Adjusting and setting fees and discharge limits and restating rates of the City 6-
NS     Wastewater Division (repealing 1471-NS)                                         14-
                                                                                       07
1480-  Adjusting and setting fees and discharge limits and restating rates of the City 6-
NS     Wastewater Division (repealing 1471-NS)                                         14-
                                                                                       07
1480-  Adjusting and setting fees and discharge limits and restating rates of the City 6-
NS     Wastewater Division (repealing 1471-NS)                                         14-
                                                                                       07
1482-  Declaring that the Redevelopment Agency has no power of eminent domain within   7-
NS     the Newbury Road Redevelopment Project Area                                     26-
                                                                                       07
1483-  Declaring that the Redevelopment Agency has no power of eminent domain within   7-
NS     the Thousand Oaks Boulevard Redevelopment Project Area                          26-
                                                                                       07
1487-  Declaring a moratorium on the approval or issuance of any permit, license,      9-
NS     approval, or entitlement relating to Land divisions or development in           25-
       Hillcrest/Rancho Road area                                                      07
1488-  Adjusting and setting fees and restating rates of the City Water Division       11-
NS                                                                                     8-07
1489-  Adjusting and setting fees and discharge limits and restating rates of the City 11-
NS     Wastewater Division                                                             8-07
1490-  Urgency ordinance amending Title 1, Ch. 4 regarding right to appeal, and adding 10-
NS     a section regarding denial/revocation of licenses and permits (See Ord. 1491-   9-07
       NS)
1492-  Extending a 45 day moratorium on the issuance of permits relating to land in    10-
NS     the Hillcrest/Rancho Road Area, pursuant to Ordinance 1487-NS.                  23-
                                                                                       07
1497-                                                                                  2-
NS     Adjusting and setting fees and restating rates of the City Water Division       20-
                                                                                       08
1498-  Amending the official zoning map and changing the zoning classification of      3-
NS     property on the south side of Newbury Road, east of Ventu Park Road (Zone       12-
       Change Z 2007-70017)                                                            08
1501-  Amending the official zoning map and changing the zoning classification of a    4-3-
NS     portion of a property on the Northwest Corner of Lakeview Canyon and Townsgate  08
       Roads (Zone Change Z 2007-70463)
1504-  Amending the official zoning map and changing zoning classification of          8-
NS     properties bounded by Hillcrest Drive and Rancho Road (Zone Change Z 2007-      14-
       70578)                                                                          08
1508-  Adjusting and setting fees and discharge limits and restating rates of the      12-
NS     Wastewater division (Repealed by Ord. 1517-NS)                                  1-08
1509-  Adjusting and setting fees and restating rates of the City Water Division       12-
NS                                                                                     1-08
1510-  Adjusting and setting fees and restating rates of the Water Division (Repealed  12-
NS     by Ord. 1518-NS)                                                                31-
                                                                                       08
1511-                                                                                  2-
NS     Amending Chapter 7 to Ordinance Number 1242-NS regarding State Video Franchises 11-
                                                                                       09
1512-  Amending the official zoning map and changing the zoning classification of      4-9-
NS     property on the west side of Conejo School Road at Chiquita Lane (Zone Change Z 09
       2008-70571)
1513-  Amending the official zoning map and changing zoning classification of property 4-9-
NS     located at 1816, 1818, and 1892 Los Feliz Drive (Zone change Z 2008-70618)      09
1517-  Adjusting and setting fees and discharge limits and restating rates of the city 6-5-
NS     wastewater division                                                             09
1518-  Adjusting and setting fees and restating rates of the city water division       6-5-
NS                                                                                     09
1519-  Amending the official zoning map and changing the zoning classification of      7-9-
NS     various properties within the city (Zone Change Z 2009-70020)                   09
1520-  Amending the official zoning map and changing the zoning classification of      8-
NS     property located at 2736, 2686, 2676 and 2672 East Hillcrest Drive and 2645 Los 13-
       Feliz Drive (Zone Change Z 2008-70690)                                          09
1526-                                                                                  11-
NS     Adjusting and setting fees and restating rates of the City Water Division       12-
                                                                                       09
1527-  Adjusting and setting fees and discharge limits and restating rates of the city 11-
NS     wastewater division                                                             12-
                                                                                       09
1530-  Amending the official zoning map and changing the zoning classification of      12-
NS     property located at 1972, 1990, 1997, 2020, and 2026 Los Feliz Drive from RPD-  17-
       15U and RPD-20U to RPD-30U (Zoning Change Z 2008-70631)                         09
1535-  Approving Pre-zoning of property located on the south side of Lynn Road         6-
NS     opposite Via Andrea (Zone Change Z 2007-70773)                                  11-
                                                                                       10
1536-  Adopting Amendment No. 3 to Specific Plan No. 11 to allow angled parking as a   6-
NS     permitted use within sub-area D (ponds and seasonal ice skating rink) (SPA      25-
       2010-70056)                                                                     10
1538-  Authorizing an amendment to a contract between the City and the California      7-9-
NS     Public Employees’ Retirement System Board of Administration                   10
1542-  Amending the official zoning map and changing the zoning classification of      8-
NS     property located at the northeast corner of Lynn Road and Janss Road (Zone      20-
       Change Z 2008-70301)                                                            10
1548-  Adjusting and setting fees and discharge limits and restating rates of the City 1-
NS     Wastewater Division                                                             13-
                                                                                       11
1549-                                                                                  1-
NS     Adjusting and setting fees and restating rates of the City Water Division       13-
                                                                                       11
1550-  Repealing Ord. 1455-NS and amending Ord. 1432-NS to allow payment of a fee in   1-
NS     lieu of providing affordable housing                                            13-
                                                                                       11
1552-  Amending the official zoning map and changing the zoning classification of      3-
NS     property located on the northwest corner of Grande Vista Drive and Academy      25-
       Drive (Zone Change Z 2007-70741)                                                11
       Amending the official zoning map and changing the zoning classification for
       approximately 4.28 acres on the South Side of Newbury Road, East of Ventu Park
       Road (Zone Change Z 2011-70038)
1558-  * This ordinance shall take effect on the thirty-first (31st) day following its 7-
NS     final passage and adoption, or when all payments have been made to the tenants  29-
       of Conejo Mobile Home Park in accordance with Ordinance 1503-NS and Resolution  11*
       No. 2010-10 whichever occurs later. (Final effective date December 16, 2011,
       per letter from Community Development Director, a copy of which is available
       for review in City Clerk or Community Development Department.)
1562-  Amending the official zoning map and changing the zoning classification of      10-
NS     property located at 1259 E. Thousand Oaks Boulevard (Zone Change Z 2008-70687)  14-
                                                                                       11
       Committing to make community remittances under protest to maintain a
       Redevelopment Program until constitutionality of certain State Bills is         10-
1564-  determined by the State Supreme Court                                           28-
NS     * This ordinance was rendered moot by the California Supreme Court’s December 11*
       29, 2011, decision in California Redevelopment Agency v. Matosantos, which
       declared AB 1X 27 to be unconstitutional.)
1565-  Approving a zone change to .068 acres on the east side of Oakview Drive at      10-
NS     Chiquita Lane (Zone Change Z 2011-70196)                                        28-
                                                                                       11
       Adopting the Thousand Oaks Boulevard Specific Plan to establish new land use    12-
1566-  development and design guidelines for properties within the plan boundary as    17-
NS     well as to establish streetscape improvement designs within the Thousand Oaks   11
       Boulevard Corridor
1567-  Amending Ord. 1215-NS regarding levying of special taxes within Community       2-
NS     Facilities District No. 1994-1 (Marketplace Public Pedestrian, Traffic          24-
       Circulation and Parking Facilities)                                             12
1570-  Adjusting and setting fees and discharge limits and restating rates of the City 3-
NS     Wastewater Division                                                             23-
                                                                                       12
1571-                                                                                  3-
NS     Adjusting and setting rates and fees of the City Water Division                 23-
                                                                                       12
1572-  Amending Title 1, Chapter 13 of the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code relating to    4-6-
NS     city election campaigns: contribution limits and disclosure requirements        12
1574-  Adopting Amendment No. 1 to Specific Plan No. 20 to detach property located at  6-8-
NS     the southwest corner of Thousand Oaks Boulevard and Dallas Drive (Westside      12
       Properties) (SPA 2012-70019)
1575-  Adopting Amendment No. 5 to Civic Arts Plaza Specific Plan to add adjacent      6-
NS     property (Assessors Parcels 670-0-182-060, -190, -210, -220 and -230 (Westside  22-
       Property) and adopt appropriate land use regulations (SPA 2012-70017)           12
1576-  Adopting Amendment No. 2 to Specific Plan No. 20 to permit drive-through eating 6-
NS     and drinking establishments along the Boulevard frontage subject to certain     22-
       development standards (SPA 2012-70074)                                          12
1582-  Approving the development agreement by and between the City of Thousand Oaks    11-
NS     and 1200 Newbury, LLC relative to the development of property located at 1200   23-
       Newbury Road (DAGR 2012-70287)                                                  12
1584-  Amending the zoning maps and changing the zoning classification of property     3-8-
NS     located at 3499 Grande Vista Drive (Zone Change Z 2011-70569)                   13
1585-  Amending the zoning maps and changing the zoning classification of property     5-
NS     located on the west side of Ventu Park Road at Ramona Drive (Z 2011-70412)      10-
                                                                                       13
       Adopting Amendment No. 4 to Specific Plan No. 11 to change the required parking
1586-  ratios for restaurant and retail uses specified by municipal code to be         7-
NS     consistent with the parking ratios established by the recently adopted Thousand 12-
       Oaks Boulevard Specific Plan for Sub-Area A (private commercial) (SPA 2011-     13
       70570)
1587-  Amending the zoning maps and changing the zoning classification of property     10-
NS     located at 2423, 2425, 2441, and 2443 Chiquita Lane (Zone Change Z 2012-70337)  11-
                                                                                       13
1589-  Amending the zoning maps and changing the zoning classification of property     10-
NS     located on the south side of Conejo Ridge Road, approximately 600 feet from     25-
       Willow Lane (Zone Change Z 2008-70630)                                          13
1593-  Approving pre-zoning of property located on the East Side of Upper Ranch Road,  2-
NS     approximately 350 feet north of Kanan Road (2000 Upper Ranch Road) (Zone Change 28-
       Z 2010-70185)                                                                   14
1594-                                                                                  2-
NS     Adjusting and setting rates and fees of the City Water Division                 28-
                                                                                       14
1595-  Adjusting and setting rates, fees and discharge limits of the City Wastewater   2-
NS     Division                                                                        28-
                                                                                       14
       Declaring a moratorium on the administrative processing of requests involving   5-
1596-  removal of four or more planted nursery grown parking lot oak trees or six or   27-
NS     more nursery grown landmark trees and on the issuance of any owner-planted oak  14
       tree exemption permit
1597-  Granting a franchise to maintain and use an oil pipeline to Crimson California  7-
NS     Pipeline, L.P.                                                                  24-
                                                                                       14
       Extending the moratorium established by Ordinance No. 1596-NS, on the           6-
1598-  administrative processing of requests involving removal of four or more planted 24-
NS     nursery grown parking lot oak trees or six or more nursery grown landmark trees 14
       and on the issuance of any owner-planted oak tree exemption permit
1599-  Amending the zoning maps and changing the zoning classification of property     10-
NS     located on 2650 Willow Lane (Zone Change Z 2009-70408)                          24-
                                                                                       14
1600-  Amending the zoning maps and changing the zoning classification of property     11-
NS     located at 1815 and 1825 Los Feliz Drive (Zone Change Z 2014-70040)             28-
                                                                                       14
1602-  Adjusting and setting rates, fees and discharge limits of the City Wastewater   2-
NS     Division                                                                        13-
                                                                                       15
1603-                                                                                  2-
NS     Adjusting and setting rates and fees of the City Water Division                 13-
                                                                                       15
1604-  Approving pre-zoning of property located at 502 Whitegate Road and 21 La Cam    4-
NS     Road (Zone Change Z 2013-70275 and Z 2009-70039)                                24-
                                                                                       15
       Extending the moratorium established by Ordinance No. 1596-NS, and extended by
1605-  Ordinance No. 1598-NS, on the administrative processing of requests involving   4-
NS     removal of four or more planted nursery grown parking lot oak trees or six or   14-
       more nursery grown landmark trees and on the issuance of any owner-planted oak  15
       tree exemption permit
1606-  Amending the zoning maps and changing the zoning classification of property at  6-
NS     the southeast corner of East Kelley Road and Newbury Road (Zone Change Z 2014-  26-
       70198)                                                                          15
       Approving development agreement between the City of Thousand Oaks and Conejo    6-
1607-  Valley Unified School District concerning land use restrictions and limited     26-
NS     authorization to use RDA Bond proceeds for infrastructure improvements relative 15
       to property on the southeast corner of East Kelley Road and Newbury Road
1611-  Pre-zoning property at southwest corner of Elm Road and Combs Road prior to     1-
NS     annexation (Z 2015-70338)                                                       15-
                                                                                       16
1615-  Adjusting and setting rates, fees and discharge limits of the City Wastewater   5-
NS     Division                                                                        27-
                                                                                       16
1616-                                                                                  5-
NS     Adjusting and setting rates and fees of the City Water Division                 27-
                                                                                       16
1617-  Adopting Amendment 1 to Specific Plan No. 16 (Amgen Center) to detach property  6-
NS     on the southeast corner of Rancho Conejo Boulevard and Hillcrest Drive          24-
       (Planning Unit “U”) (SPA 2015-70410)                                        16
1618-  Amending the zoning maps and changing the zoning classification of property at  7-
NS     2080 E. Hillcrest Drive (Zone Change Z 2014-70114)                              29-
                                                                                       16
1619-  Amending the zoning maps and changing the zoning classification of property at  8-
NS     95 North Oakview Drive (Zone Change Z 2016-70001)                               12-
                                                                                       16
       Adopting Amendment 3 to the Thousand Oaks Boulevard Specific Plan to add
1622-  residential capacity, provide for the allocation of the added capacity, set the 9-
NS     maximum density for housing projects, allow on-street parking to be counted     30-
       toward required parking, delete K-12 schools as a permitted use, and modify     16
       other land use and development requirements (SPA 2014-70068 and SPA 2013-70312)
1625-  Adjusting and setting rates, fees and discharge limits of the City Wastewater   1-1-
NS     Division                                                                        17
1626-  Adjusting and setting rates and fees of the City Water Division                 1-1-
NS                                                                                     17
1633-  Adjusting and setting rates, fees and discharge limits of the City Wastewater   10-
NS     Division                                                                        10-
                                                                                       17
1634-                                                                                  10-
NS     Adjusting and setting rates and fees of the City Water Division                 10-
                                                                                       17
1640-  Approving the Joint Powers Agreement for Los Angeles Community Choice Energy    2-9-
NS     Authority and authorizing the implementation of a Community Choice Aggregation  18
       Program
1641-  Reauthorizing the city’s Public, Educational, and Governmental Access Support 2-
NS     Fee and amending Ord. No. 1242-NS and Ord. No. 1511-NS                          23-
                                                                                       18
1642-  Changing the zoning classification of property located at 95 Duesenberg Drive   4-
NS     (Z 2017-70143; Applicant: Griffin Fine Living, LLC)                             20-
                                                                                       18
1643-  Changing the zoning classification of property located at 3525 North Moorpark   4-
NS     Road (Z 2017-70299; Applicant: WSL Castle Hill Retirement, LLC)                 20-
                                                                                       18
1645-  Changing the zoning classification of four sites (Z 2017-70622; Applicant: City 6-
NS     of Thousand Oaks)                                                               15-
                                                                                       18
1648-  Changing the zoning classification of property located at 980 Warwick Avenue (Z 8-
NS     2017-70523; Applicant: Silverado Senior Living)                                 10-
                                                                                       18
1651-  Approving a Development Agreement with Latigo Group, LLC relating to the        10-
NS     development of property located at 299 East Thousand Oaks Boulevard (DAGR 2018- 12-
       70228; Applicant: The Latigo Group LLC)                                         18
1652-  Granting a franchise to construct, use, maintain and operate pipelines and      11-
NS     appurtenances for the transmission and distribution of water to California      9-18
       Water Service Company
1654-  Adjusting and setting rates and fees of the City Water Division                 1-1-
NS                                                                                     19
1655-  Adjusting and setting rates, fees and discharge limits of the City Wastewater   1-1-
NS     Division                                                                        19
       Urgency ordinance establishing local standards and procedures for cleanup of    12-
1660-  debris generated by the Hill and Woolsey fires; establishing enforcement        18-
NS     standards and authorizing the abatement of public nuisances following the issue 18
       of an inspection and abatement warrant
       Declaring a moratorium on the approval or issuance of any permit, license, or   9-
1665-  entitlement relating to applications for the cultivation, processing, drying,   24-
NS     storing, and manufacturing of industrial hemp as well as the non-incidental     19
       retail sale of products derived in any part from industrial hemp seeds
1667-  Interim urgency ordinance extending Ordinance No. 1665-NS                       11-
NS                                                                                     5-19
1670-  Adjusting and setting rates, fees and discharge limits of the City Wastewater   1-
NS     Division                                                                        14-
                                                                                       20
1671-                                                                                  1-
NS     Adjusting and setting rates and fees of the City Water Division                 14-
                                                                                       20
1674-  Changing the zoning classification of five parcels located at 901 Paige Lane    1-
NS     and 835 Combes Avenue; Applicant: Conejo Recreation and Park District           14-
                                                                                       20
1675-  Pre-zoning two separate properties (APN 673-0-110-310 and APN 673-0-120-070)    1-
NS     prior to annexation; Applicants: Dan Driscoll and Bill Vlachos)                 14-
                                                                                       20
1681-                                                                                  12-
NS     Adjusting and setting rates and fees of the City Water Division                 11-
                                                                                       20
1682-  Adjusting and setting rates, fees and discharge limits of the City Wastewater   12-
NS     Division                                                                        11-
                                                                                       20
       Granting to California American Water Company the right, privilege, and
1685-  franchise to construct, use, maintain and operate pipelines and appurtenances   5-
NS     for the transmission and distribution of water for any and all purposes in,     28-
       along, across, upon and under the public streets and rights-of-way as the same  21
       now or may hereafter exist within the City
1689-  Adopting Specific Plan No. 21 (1872 Newbury Road), and its associated General   12-
NS     Plan amendment; and authorizing the land uses and development standards in said 31-
       Specific Plan (applicant: Daylight Thousand Oaks, LLC)                          21
1691-  Amending Specific Plan No. 11 (2200 East Thousand Oaks Boulevard), and its      1-
NS     associated General Plan amendment; and authorizing the land uses and            14-
       development standards in said specific plan (applicant: T.O Lakes, LLC)         22
1692-  Approving Development Agreement (2200 East Thousand Oaks Boulevard; applicant:  1-
NS     T.O. Lakes, LLC                                                                 14-
                                                                                       22
1693-  Approving a Development Agreement (1872 Newbury Road; applicant: Daylight T.O., 2-
NS     LLC)                                                                            11-
                                                                                       22
1696-  Declaring a moratorium on the approval or issuance of any permit, license, or   1-
NS     entitlement relating to applications for the development and construction of    25-
       self-storage facilities                                                         22
1697-  Extending Ordinance No. 1696-NS, which declared a temporary moratorium on the   2-
NS     approval or issuance of any permit, license, or entitlement relating to         22-
       applications for self-storage facilities                                        22
1699-  Adopting Specific Plan No. 22 (325 and 391 Hampshire Road), and its associated  6-
NS     General Plan amendment; and authorizing the land uses and development standards 28-
       in said Specific Plan (applicant: IMT Capital V Hampshire, LLC)                 22
1700-  Approving a Development Agreement (325 and 391 Hampshire Road; applicant: IMT   6-
NS     Capital V Hampshire, LLC)                                                       28-
                                                                                       22
1701-  Adopting Specific Plan No. 23 (1 Baxter Way), and its associated General Plan   7-5-
NS     amendment; and authorizing the land uses and development standards in said      22
       Specific Plan (applicant: One Baxter Way, L.P.)
1702-  Approving a Development Agreement (1 Baxter Way, applicant: One Baxter Way,     7-5-
NS     L.P.)                                                                           22
1709-                                                                                  3-
NS     Changing the zoning classification of the property located at 3020 Crescent Way 17-
                                                                                       23
1713-  Approving a Development Agreement with Shapell Properties, Inc., for property   5-
NS     located at Rancho Conejo Boulevard and Corporate Center Drive                   25-
                                                                                       23
1714-  Approving a Development Agreement with SJG Long Investment, for property        6-9-
NS     located at 88 Long Court                                                        23
1716-  Adopting Specific Plan No. 24 (2150 West Hillcrest Drive), and its associated   8-
NS     zone change; and authorizing the land uses and development standards in said    18-
       specific plan (applicant: Latigo Hillcrest, LLC)                                23
1717-  Approving a Development Agreement with Latigo Hillcrest, LLC, relating to the   8-
NS     development of property located at 2150 West Hillcrest Drive                    18-
                                                                                       23
       Changing the zoning classification of certain properties to Mixed-Use (MU),     4-
1727-  Mixed-Use Overlay Zone (MUOZ), and a site identified as Assessor Parcel Number  26-
NS     660-0-050-125 to Residential Planned Development (RPD-10U) to align with the    24
       General Plan Land Use Designations
1728-  Changing the zoning classification at the property located at 400 East Rolling  5-
NS     Oaks and 355 West Janss Road                                                    10-
                                                                                       24
1731-  Approving a Development Agreement with Cherry Tree Development, LLC, relating   7-5-
N S    to the development of property located at 500 East Thousand Oaks Boulevard      24
1738-  Adjusting and setting rates, discharge limits and fees of the City Wastewater   9-
NS     Division                                                                        26-
                                                                                       25
                                                                                      
 
DISTRIBUTION OF THOUSAND OAKS ORDINANCE CODE SECTIONS
T.O.O.C. Section New Code Section
T.O.O.C. Section       New Code Section
1, 1.1, 1.2            Obsolete
2                      Obsolete
3, 3.1, 3.2            Obsolete
4                      Obsolete
5                      Obsolete
6                      Obsolete
7                      Obsolete
8, 8.1                 Obsolete
9                      Obsolete
10, 10.1, 10.2         Obsolete
11                     Obsolete
12                     Obsolete
13, 13.1--13.4         Obsolete
14                     Obsolete
1111                   Repealed
1211                   Repealed
1241                   2-3.401
1241.1                 2-3.402
1311                   Repealed
1321, 1321.1           Repealed
1331                   Repealed
1341                   Repealed
1342, 1342.1--1342.4   Repealed
1343                   Repealed
1344                   Repealed
1345, 1345.1--1345.4   Repealed
1346                   Repealed
1347, 1347.1--1347.16  Repealed
1348                   Repealed
1349                   Repealed
1350                   Repealed
1351, 1351.1           Repealed
1352, 1352.1--1352.23  Repealed
1411                   Repealed
1511                   Repealed
1512                   Repealed
1513                   Repealed
1514                   Repealed
1515, 1515.1           Repealed
2111, 2111.1, 2111.2   Repealed
2112, 2112.1           Repealed
2113, 2113.1, 2113.2   Repealed
2114, 2114.1--2114.3   Repealed
2115                   Repealed
2116, 2116.1           Repealed
2117                   Repealed
2121, 2121.1           Repealed
2122, 2122.1--2122.3   Repealed
2124, 2124.1--2124.9   Repealed
2125, 2125.1--2125.10  Repealed
2126, 2126.1--2126.4   Repealed
2127                   Repealed
2131, 2131.1           Repealed
2132, 2132.1           Repealed
2133, 2133.1           Repealed
2134, 2134.1           Repealed
2135, 2135.1           Repealed
2136, 2136.1           Repealed
2137, 2137.1--2137.6   Repealed
2138                   Repealed
2141, 2141.1--2141.4   Repealed
2142                   Repealed
2143                   Repealed
2144                   Repealed
2145                   Repealed
2146, 2146.1           Repealed
2147                   Repealed
2148, 2148.1           Repealed
2211                   3-15.01
2211.01--2211.04       Repealed
2211.1--2211.4         Repealed
2212                   3-15.02
2212.1--2212.3         Repealed
2213, 2213.1           Repealed
2214                   3-15.03
2215                   Repealed
2216                   Repealed
2217, 2217.1, 2217.2   Repealed
2218                   Repealed
2219                   Repealed
2220                   Repealed
2221                   5-5.02
2222                   Repealed
2223                   Repealed
2224                   Repealed
2225                   Repealed
2226. 2226.1           Repealed
2227                   Repealed
2228, 2228.1           Repealed
2229, 2229.1           Repealed
2241                   3-2.02
2242                   3-2.01
2243                   3-2.10
2244                   3-2.03
2245                   3-2.04
2246                   3-2.05
2247                   3-2.08
2248                   3-2.07
2249                   3-2.09
2250                   3-2.06
2251                   Repealed
2252                   Repealed
2253                   Repealed
2254                   Repealed
2255                   Repealed
2256                   Repealed
2257                   Repealed
2258                   Repealed
2261                   Repealed
2262                   Repealed
2263                   Repealed
2264                   Repealed
2265                   Repealed
2300                   Repealed
2301                   Repealed
2302                   Repealed
2303, 2303.1           Repealed
2304                   Repealed
2305                   Repealed
2306                   Repealed
2307                   Repealed
2308                   Repealed
2309                   Repealed
2310                   Repealed
2311                   Repealed
2312, 2312.1--2312.4   Repealed
2313                   Repealed
2314                   Repealed
2315                   Repealed
2321                   3-6.02
2321.1                 3-6.01
2322                   3-6.02
2322.1                 3-6.01
2323                   3-6.02
2323.1                 3-6.01
2324                   3-6.02
2324.1                 3-6.01
2325                   3-6.03
2326                   3-6.04
2327                   3-6.06
2328                   3-6.05
2329                   3-6.09
2329.1                 3-6.10
2329.2, 2329.3         3-6.09
2329.4                 3-6.11
2330                   3-6.12
2331                   3-6.13
2332                   3-6.16
2333                   3-6.15
2334, 2334.1           3-6.14
2335                   3-6.17
2336                   3-6.07
2337                   3-6.08
2338                   Repealed
2339                   Repealed
2340                   Repealed
2341                   3-8.02, 3-8.06
2341.1                 3-8.02
2342, 2342.1--2342.5   3-8.01
2343                   3-8.03
2344                   3-8.07
2345                   3-8.04
2346                   3-8.05
2347                   Repealed
2348                   Repealed
2349                   Repealed
2350                   Repealed
2351                   Repealed
2352                   Repealed
2353                   Repealed
2360, 2360.1--2360.17  Repealed
2411                   Repealed
2412                   Repealed
2413                   Repealed
2414                   Repealed
2415                   Repealed
2416                   Repealed
2417                   Repealed
2418                   Repealed
2421                   Repealed
2422                   Repealed
2423                   Repealed
2424                   Repealed
2425                   Repealed
2426                   Repealed
2427                   Repealed
2428                   Repealed
2429                   Repealed
2430                   Repealed
2431                   Repealed
2441                   Repealed
2442                   Repealed
2443                   Repealed
2444                   Repealed
2445                   Repealed
2446                   Repealed
2447                   Repealed
2448                   Repealed
2449                   Repealed
2450                   Repealed
2451                   Repealed
2452                   Repealed
2453                   Repealed
2454                   Repealed
2455                   Repealed
2456                   Repealed
2457                   Repealed
2458                   Repealed
2459                   Repealed
2461                   Repealed
2462                   Repealed
2463                   Repealed
2463.1--2463.4         Repealed
2464                   Repealed
2465                   Repealed
2466                   Repealed
2467                   Repealed
2468                   Repealed
2469                   Repealed
2470                   Repealed
2471                   Repealed
2472                   Repealed
2473                   Repealed
2474                   Repealed
2476                   Repealed
2477                   Repealed
2478                   Repealed
2479                   Repealed
2480                   Repealed
2481                   Repealed
2482                   Repealed
2483                   Repealed
3100                   8-4.01, 8-4.02, 8-5.01, 8-5.02, 8-9.201, 8-9.202
3100.1                 Repealed
3100.2                 Repealed
3101                   Repealed
3102                   Repealed
3103                   Repealed
3104                   Repealed
3111, 3111.1--3111.3   Repealed
3121                   Repealed
3122                   Repealed
3123                   Repealed
3124                   Repealed
3125                   Repealed
3126                   Repealed
3127                   Repealed
3128                   Repealed
3129                   Repealed
3131                   Repealed
3132                   Repealed
3141                   Repealed
3151, 3151.1, 3151.2   Repealed
3154                   Repealed
3161                   Repealed
3162, 3162.1--3162.3   Repealed
3170                   Repealed
3200                   Repealed
3201                   Repealed
3211, 3211.1           Repealed
3212                   Repealed
3214                   Repealed
3215                   Repealed
3216                   Repealed
3221                   Repealed
3222                   Repealed
3223, 3223.1           Repealed
3224                   Repealed
3231                   Repealed
3232                   Repealed
3233                   Repealed
3234                   Repealed
3260                   Repealed
3300                   Repealed
3301                   Repealed
3305                   Repealed
3307                   Repealed
3308                   Repealed
3309                   Repealed
3311                   Repealed
3312, 3312.1, 3312.2   Repealed
3314                   Repealed
3314.1--3314.4         Repealed
3315                   Repealed
3315.1              Repealed
3316, 3316.1, 3316.2   Repealed
3317                   Repealed
3318                   Repealed
3322                   Repealed
3324                   Repealed
3325                   Repealed
3328                   Repealed
3329                   Repealed
3400                   Repealed
3402                   Repealed
3405                   Repealed
3406                   Repealed
3408                   Repealed
3411                   Repealed
3412, 3412.1--3412.3   Repealed
3413                   Repealed
3414                   Repealed
3415, 3515.1, 3415.2   Repealed
3421, 3421.1--3421.7   Repealed
3431, 3431.1--3431.7   Repealed
3432                   Repealed
3441, 3441.1--3441.6   Repealed
3442                   Repealed
3443                   Repealed
3451                   Repealed
3452                   Repealed
3453                   Repealed
3454                   Repealed
3455                   Repealed
3456                   Repealed
3457                   Repealed
3458                   Repealed
3500                   Repealed
3505                   Repealed
3610                   Repealed
3610.1                 Repealed
3611                   Repealed
3612                   Repealed
3613                   Repealed
3614                   Repealed
3615                   Repealed
3616                   Repealed
3617                   Repealed
3618                   Repealed
3619                   Repealed
3630                   Repealed
3631                   Repealed
3632                   Repealed
3633                   Repealed
3634                   Repealed
3635                   Repealed
3636                   Repealed
3637                   Repealed
3640                   Repealed
3650                   Repealed
3651                   Repealed
3652                   Repealed
3653                   Repealed
3654                   Repealed
3655                   Repealed
3660                   Repealed
3661                   Repealed
3662                   Repealed
4110, 4110.1, 4110.2   Repealed
4111                   Repealed
4111.1                 Repealed
4111.2                 Repealed
4111.3                 Repealed
4112                   Repealed
4112.1                 Repealed
4113                   Repealed
4114                   Repealed
4117                   Repealed
4118                   Repealed
4130--4132             Repealed
4134--4140             Repealed
4211                   Repealed
4221--4224             Repealed
4231, 4232             Repealed
4233, 4233.1--4233.3   Repealed
4234, 4234.1--4234.4   Repealed
4235, 4235.1           Repealed
4236                   Repealed
4237, 4237.1--4237.3   Repealed
4238, 4238.1--4238.5   Repealed
4241                   Repealed
4311                   Repealed
4312, 4312.1           Repealed
4313, 4314             Repealed
4321                   Repealed
4411                   6-1.201
4412                   6-1.203
4413                   6-1.204
4414                   6-1.205
4415                   6-1.206, 6-1.207
4416                   6-1.208
4417                   6-1.209
4418                   6-1.210
4419                   6-1.211
4420                   6-1.218, 6-1.506
4431                   6-1.102
4432                   6-1.215
4432.1                 6-1.115
4433                   6-1.216
4434                   6-1.107
4435                   6-1.109
4436                   6-1.110
4437                   6-1.111
4438                   6-1.102
4439                   6-1.103
4441                   6-1.502
4442                   6-1.501
4443                   6-1.503
4444                   6-1.504
4445                   6-1.505
4451                   6-1.301
4452                   6-1.302
4453                   6-1.304
4454                   6-1.303
4455                   6-1.305
4456                   6-1.306
4457                   6-1.307
4458                   6-1.308
4461                   6-1.212
4462                   6-1.214
4463                   6-1.101
4464                   6-1.109
4465                   6-1.117
4466                   6-1.104
4467                   6-1.114
4468                   6-1.217
4469                   6-1.116
4470                   6-1.113
4471                   6-1.105
4472                   6-1.101
4473                   6-1.202, 6-1.213
4474                   6-1.202, 6-1.213
4475                   6-1.118
4476                   6-1.119
4478                   6-1.106
4480                   6-1.201
4481                   6-1.202--6-1.204
4482                   6-1.205
4483                   6-1.209
4484                   6-1.206
4485                   6-1.207, 6-1.208
4700                   6-2.01
4701, 4701.1           6-2.02
4701.2                 Obsolete
4701.3--4701.6         6-2.02
4701.7                 Obsolete
4701.8                 6-2.02
4701.9                 Obsolete
4701.10--4701.12       6-2.02
4702                   Repealed
4703                   6-2.03
4704                   6-2.05
4705                   6-2.04
4706                   6-2.06
4707                   6-2.07
4708                   6-2.08
4709                   6-2.09
4710                   6-2.10
4711--4713             Repealed
4714, 4715             Repealed
4716                   6-2.15
4717, 4718             Obsolete
5211                   5-1102
5211.1                 5-11.01
5212                   5-11.02
5212.1                 5-11.04
5212.23--5212.29       Repealed
5311, 5311.1           Repealed
5312, 5312.1, 5312.2   Repealed
5321, 5321.1--5321.5   Repealed
5322                   Repealed
5323, 5323.1, 5323.2   Repealed
5324                   Repealed
5325                   Repealed
5326, 5326.1--5326.3   Repealed
6111                   Repealed
6112, 6112.1, 6112.2   Repealed
6121                   Repealed
6131--6135             Repealed
6140                   3-3.01
6141                   3-3.02
6142                   3-3.02
6143                   3-3.03
6144                   3-3.05
6145                   3-3.04
6150                   Repealed
6211--6213             Repealed
6221, 6221.1, 6221.2   Repealed
6222, 6222.1           Repealed
6223, 6223.1--6223.4   Repealed
6231                   5-9.02
6231.1                 5-9.01
6231.2                 5-9.03
6231.3                 5-9.04
6231.4                 5-9.05
6231.5                 5-9.06
6231.6                 5-9.07
6241                   5-8.01
6242, 6242.1, 6241.2   5-8.02
6243, 6243.1--6243.6   Repealed
6244                   Repealed
6245                   Repealed
6246                   Repealed
6247, 6247.01, 6247.02 Repealed
6247.03, 6247.04       Repealed
6248                   Repealed
6270--6273             Repealed
6275.1, 6275.2   4  1.01
6275.3, 6275.4   4  1.03
6275.5                 4-1.06, 4-1.07, 4-1.08, 4-1.10, 4-1.11
6275.6                 4-1.02, 4-1.04
6275.7                 Obsolete
6275.8                 4-1.13
6275.9                 4-1.05
6275.10                4-1.13
6275.11, 6275.12       4-1.14
6275.13                4-1.09
6275.14                4-1.14
6275.15                4-1.12
6311, 6311.1, 6311.2   Repealed
6312, 6312.1--6312.4   Repealed
6313, 6314             Repealed
6320--6324             Repealed
6325, 6325.1--6325.9   Repealed
6326, 6326.1--6326.9   Repealed
6327, 6327.1--6327.6   Repealed
6328--6335             Repealed
6400                   Repealed
6401, 6401.1--6401.11  Repealed
6402, 6402.1--6402.3   Repealed
6403, 6403.1, 6403.2   Repealed
6404, 6404.1--6404.7   Repealed
6405, 6405.1--6405.9   Repealed
6406, 6406.1--6406.8   Repealed
6407, 6407.1--6407.4   Repealed
6408, 6408.1           Repealed
6409                   Repealed
6500                   Repealed
6501, 6501.1           Repealed
6502, 6502.1--6502.13  Repealed
6503, 6503.1           Repealed
6504                   Repealed
6505, 6505.1, 6505.2   Repealed
6506                   Repealed
6507, 6507.1--6707.7   Repealed
6508, 6508.1--6508.9   Repealed
6509--6511             Repealed
7111                   4-3.101, 4-3.102
7111.1--7111.10        Repealed
7111.11                4-3.106
7111.12                4-3.112
7111.13                4-3.114
7111.14                4-3.103
7111.15                4-3.105
7111.16                4-3.113
7111.17                4-3.104
7111.18                4-3.109
7111.19                4-3.115
7111.20                Repealed
7111.21                4-3.111
7111.22                4-3.108
7111.23                4-3.110
7111.24                4-3.107
7121                   4-3.201
7121.1                 4-3.202
7121.2                 4-3.203
7122                   4-3.204
7123                   4-3.205
7124                   4-3.206
7125                   4-3.202
7131                   Repealed
7131.1                 Repealed
7132                   Repealed
7133                   Repealed
7134                   4-3.305
7135, 7135.1--7135.9   Repealed
7141                   Repealed
7142, 7142.1, 7142.2   4-3.402
7143, 7143.1--7143.3   4-3.403
7144                   4-3.405
7145, 7145.1, 7145.2   4-3.406
7146                   4-3.411
7147, 7147.1--7147.6   4-3.407
7147.7   4          3.408
7148, 7148.1           4-3.413
7149                   4-3.412
7149.10                4-3.404
7151                   4-3.308
7152                   4-3.207
7153                   5-8.04
7153.1                 4-3.208
7153.2                 4-3.209
7154, 7154.1           4-3.307
7161                   4-3.601
7161.1                 4-3.602
7171                   4-3.309
7172, 7172.1--7172.3   Obsolete
7190                   4-3.409
7191                   4-3.410
7250                   4-3.414
8110                   9-4.101
8111                   9-4.102
8112                   9-4.301--9-4.303
8113                   9-4.304
8114                   Repealed
8115                   Repealed
8116                   9-4.305
8117                   9-4.304
8121                   9-4.401
8121.1                 9-4.402
8121.2                 9-4.403
8121.3                 9-4.404
8123                   9-4.501
8123.1                 9-4.502
8123.2                 9-4.503
8124                   9-4.601
8124.1                 9-4.602
8124.2                 9-4.603
8125                   9-4.701
8125.1                 9-4.702
8126                   9-4.801
8126.1                 9-4.802
8127                   9-4.1001
8127.1                 9-4.1002
8127.2                 9-4.1003
8127.3                 9-4.1004
8128                   9-4.1201
8128.1                 9-4.1202
8128.2                 9-4.1203
8128.3                 9-4.1204
8129                   9-4.1301
8129.1                 9-4.1302
8129.2                 9-4.1303
8129.3                 9-4.1304
8130                   Repealed
8130.1                 9-4.1401
8130.2                 9-4.1403
8130.3                 9-4.1402
8130.4                 9-4.1404
8130.5                 9-4.1405
8131                   9-4.1501
8131.1                 9-4.1502
8131.2                 9-4.1504
8131.3                 9-4.1506
8131.4                 9-4.1503
8131.5                 9-4.1505
8132                   9-4.1601
8132.1                 9-4.1602
8132.2                 9-4.1603
8133, 8133.1--8133.5   Repealed
8135                   9-4.1901
8135.1                 9-4.1902
8135.2                 9-4.1904
8135.3                 9-4.1903
8136                   9-4.2001
8136.1                 9-4.2004
8136.2                 9-4.2002
8136.3                 9-4.2005
8136.4                 9-4.2006, 9-4.2007
8136.5                 9-4.2003
8136.6                 Repealed
8137                   9-4.901
8137.1                 9-4.902
8137.2                 9-4.903
8137.3                 9-4.904
8138                   9-4.1101
8138.1                 9-4.1104
8138.2                 9-4.1102
8138.3                 9-4.1105
8138.4                 9-4.1103
8138.5                 9-4.1106
8138.6                 9-4.1107
8138.7                 9-4.1108
8138.8                 9-4.1109
8139.1                 Repealed
8139.2                 Repealed
8139.3                 Repealed
8139.4                 Repealed
8129.5                 Repealed
8139.6                 Repealed
8139.7                 Repealed
8139.8                 Repealed
8139.9                 Repealed
8139.10                Repealed
8139.11                Repealed
8139.12                Repealed
8139.13                Repealed
8139.14                Repealed
8139.15                Repealed
8139.16, 8139.17       Repealed
8139.18                Repealed
8139.19                Repealed
8139.20                Repealed
8158                   Repealed
8158.1                 Repealed
8158.2                 9-4.2103
8158.3                 9-4.2104
8158.4                 9-4.2105
8158.5                 9-4.2202
8159                   9-4.2202
8159.1                 9-4.2203
8159.2                 9-4.2204
8159.3                 9-4.2205, 9-4.2206
8159.4                 9-4.2207, 9-4.2208
8159.5                 9-4.2209
8159.6                 9-4.2210
8160                   9-4.2401
8160.1                 9-4.2402
8160.2                 9-4.2403
8160.3                 9-4.2406
8160.4                 9-4.2404
8160.5                 9-4.2405
8160.6                 9-4.2408
8160.8                 9-4.2417
8160.9                 9-4.2409
8160.10                9-4.2416
8160.11                9-4.2412
8160.12                9-4.2407
8160.13                9-4.2413
8160.14                9-4.2501--9-4.2509
8160.15                9-4.2419
8160.16                9-4.2414
8160.17                9-4.2415
8160.18                9-4.2410
8160.19                9-4.2418
8161.1                 9-4.2301
8161.2                 9-4.2302
8161.3                 9-4.2303
8161.4                 9-4.2304
8161.5                 9-4.2305
8162.1                 9-4.2601
8162.2                 9-4.2602
8162.3                 9-4.2603
8162.4                 9-4.2604
8162.5                 9-4.2605
8162.6                 9-4.2606
8162.7                 9-4.2608
8162.8                 9-4.2607
8163, 8163.1           Repealed
8163.2                 9-4.2701
8163.3                 9-4.2702
8163.4                 9-4.2703
8163.5                 9-4.2704
8163.6                 9-4.2705
8163.7                 9-4.2706
8163.8                 9-4.2707
8163.9                 9-4.2708
8163.10                9-4.2709
8163.11                9-4.2710
8163.12                9-4.2711
8163.13                9-4.2713
8164.14                9-4.2712
8163.15                9-4.2714
8163.20                9-4.2819
8164                   9-4.2801
8164.1                 9-4.2802
8164.2                 9-4.2803
8164.3                 9-4.2804
8164.4                 9-4.2805
8164.5                 9-4.2806
8164.6                 9-4.2807
8164.7                 9-4.2808
8164.8                 9-4.2809
8164.9                 9-4.2810
8164.10                9-4.2811
8164.11                9-4.2812
8164.12                9-4.2813
8164.13                9-4-2814
8164.14                9-4.2815
8164.15                9-4.2816
8164.16                9-4.2817
8164.17                9-4.2818
8164.18                9-4.2820
8164.19                9-4.2821
8165                   9-4.2901
8165.1                 9-4.2903
8165.2                 9-4.2904
8165.3                 9-4.2905
8165.4                 9-4.2902
8166.1                 9-4.105
8166.2                 9-4.104
8166.3                 9-4.103
8166.4                 1-3.04
8166.5                 1-3.13
8166.6                 1-3.13
8166.7                 9-4.306
8166.8                 9-4.106
8170.1                 49-4.202
8170.2                 9-4.202
8170.3                 9-4.202
8170.4                 9-4.202
8170.5                 9-4.202
8170.6                 9-4.202
8170.7                 9-4.202
8170.8                 Repealed
8170.9                 9-4.202
8170.10                9-4.202
8170.11                9-4.202
8170.12                9-4.202
8170.13                9-4.202
8170.14                9-4.202
8170.15                9-4.202
8170.16                9-4.202
8170.17                9-4.202
8170.18                9-4.202
8170.19                9-4.202
8170.20                9-4.202
8170.21                9-4.202
8170.22                9-4.202
8170.23                9-4.202
8170.24                9-4.202
8170.25                9-4.202
8170.26                9-4.202
8170.27                9-4.202
8170.28                9-4.202
8170.29                9-4.202
8170.30                9-4.202
8170.31                9-4.202
8170.32                9-4.202
8170.33                9-4.202
8170.34                9-4.202
8170.35                9-4.202
8170.36                9-4.202
8170.37                9-4.202
8170.38                9-4.202
8170.39                9-4.202
8170.40                9-4.202
8170.41                9-4.202
8170.42                Repealed
8170.43                9-4.202
8170.44                9-4.202
8170.45                9-4.202
8170.46                9-4.202
8170.47                9-4.202
8170.48                9-4.202
8170.49                9-4.202
8170.50                9-4.202
8170.51                9-4.202
8170.52                9-4.202
8170.53                9-4.202
8170.54                9-4.202
8170.55                9-4.202
8170.56                9-4.202
8170.57                9-4.202
8170.58                9-4.202
8170.59                9-4.202
8170.60                9-4.202
8170.61                Repealed
8170.62                9-4.202
8170.63                9-4.202
8170.64                1-3.13
8170.65                9-4.202
8170.66                9-4.202
8170.67                9-4.202
8170.68                9-4.202
8170.69                9-4.202
8170.70                9-4.202
8170.71                9-4.202
8170.72                9-4.202
8170.73                9-4.202
8170.74                9-4.202
8170.75                9-4.202
8170.76                9-4.202
8170.77                9-4.202
8170.78                9-4.202
8170.79                9-4.202
8180                   Repealed
8200                   9-3.101, 9-3.102
8201.1                 9-3.103
8201.2                 9-3.210
8202                   9-3.116
8203                   9-3.104
8204                   9-3.105
8210                   9-3.106
8211                   9-3.107
8212                   9-3.501
8212.1--8212.6         Repealed
8213                   9-3.502
8213, 8213.1           Repealed
8214                   9-3.503
8215                   9-3.504
8216                   9-3.505
8217                   9-3.109
8218                   9-3.108
8220                   9-3.201
8221                   9-3.206
8222                   9-3.202, 9-3.203
8223, 8224             9-3.203
8225                   9-3.204
8226                   9-3.207
8227                   9-3.208
8228                   9-3.209
8229                   9-3.210
8230                   9-3.211
8231                   9-3.212
8232                   9-3.213
8233                   Repealed
8235                   9-3.205
8236                   9-3.214
8237                   9-3.215
8238                   9-3.216
8239                   9-3.217
8240                   9-3.218
8241                   9-3.219
8241.1--8241.9         Repealed
8242                   9-3.220
8242.1--8242.5         Repealed
8243                   9-3.221
8243.1--8243.3         Repealed
8244                   9-3.222
8245                   9-3.223
8245.1--8245.4         Repealed
8246, 8246.1           Repealed
8247, 8247.1           Repealed
8248, 8248.1, 8248.2   Repealed
8251                   Repealed
8255                   9-3.301
8256                   9-3.302, 9-3.303
8257                   9-3.304
8258                   9-3.305
8259                   9-3.306
8259.1                 9-3.307, 9-3.308
8259.2                 9-3.309
8259.3                 9-3.310
8259.4                 9-3.311
8259.5                 9-3.312
8259.6                 9-3.313
8259.7                 9-3.314
8259.8                 9-3.315
8259.9                 9-3.316
8259.10                9-3.317
8259.11                9-3.318
8259.12                9-3.319
8259.13                9-3.320
8259.14                9-3.321
8259.15                9-3.322
8259.16                9-3.323
8259.17                9-3.324
8259.18                9-3.325
8259.19                9-3.326
8260, 8261             9-3.112
8262                   9-3.327
8262.1                 9-3.328
8262.2                 9-3.329
8262.3                 9-3.330
8262.4                 9-3.331
8262.5                 9-3.332
8262.6                 9-3.333
8262.7                 9-3.334
8262.8                 9-3.335
8262.9                 9-3.337
8262.10                9-3.338
8262.11                9-3.336
8262.12                9-3.340
8262.13                9-3.341
8262.14                9-3.342
8262.15                9-3.339
8263                   9-3.343
8263.1                 9-3.344
8263.2                 9-3.345
8263.3                 9-3.346
8263.4                 9-3.347
8263.5                 9-3.348
8263.6                 9-3.349
8264                   9-3.350
8265                   9-3.408
8266                   9-3.401
8267                   9-3.402
8268                   9-3.403
8269                   9-3.404
8270                   9-3.405
8271                   9-3.406
8272                   9-3.407
8273                   9-3.412
8274                   9-3.409
8275                   9-3.410
8276                   9-3.411
8277                   9-3.413
8278                   9-3.414
8279                   9-3.415
8280                   9-3.416
8281                   9-3.417
8282                   9-3.418
8283                   9-3.419
8284                   9-3.420
8285                   9-3.421
8286                   9-3.422
8287                   9-3.423
8288                   9-3.424
8289                   9-3.425
8290                   9-3.426
8291                   9-3.427
8292                   9-3.428
8293                   9-3.110
8311                   8-3.02
8311.1                 8-3.03
8312                   8-3.03
8312.1                 8-3.04
8312.2                 8-3.05
8312.3                 8-3.08
8312.5, 8312.51        8-3.06
8312.52                8-3.07
8313                   8-3.04
8313.1                 8-3.05
8313.2                 8-3.08
8314                   8-3.01
8400                   7-3.01
8401                   7-3.03
8402, 8402.1--8402.6   7-3.39
8403                   7-3.05
8403.1                 7-3.13
8403.2                 7-3.07
8403.3, 8403.4      7-3.08
8404                   7-3.02
8405, 8405.1--8405.3   7-3.05
8406, 8406.1--8406.10  7-3.06
8407                   7-3.06
8408                   7-3.09
8409                   7-3.36
8409.1                 7-3.37
8410                   7-3.15
8411                   7-3.14
8412                   7-3.12
8413, 8413.1           7-3.10
8413.2                 7-3.11, 7-3.16
8413.3                 7-3.10
8414, 8414.1--8414.3   7-3.21
8414.4                 7-3.22
8415                   7-3.23
8416.1                 7-3.24
8416.2                 7-3.25
8416.3                 7-3.26
8416.4                 7-3.27
8416.5                 7-3.28
8416.6                 Repealed
8416.7                 7-2.29
8416.8                 7-3.30
8416.9                 7-3.24
8416.10                7-3.31
8416.11, 8416.12       7-3.24
8416.13                7-3.32
8416.14                7-3.33
8417, 8417.1           7-3.38
8418                   7-3.34
8418.4                 7-3.22
8419, 8419.1           7-3.17
8419.2                 7-3.18
8419.3                 7-3.17
8420, 8420.1--8320.4   7-3.17
8421                   7-3.19
8421.1                 7-3.20
8422                   7-3.35
8423, 8424             7-3.04
8500--8502             Repealed
8600                   7-4.02
8601                   7-4.03
8602                   7-4.04
8603                   7-4.05
8604                   7-4.01
8605                   7-4.06
9111, 9112             Repealed
9113, 9113.1--9113.5   Repealed
9114, 9115             Repealed
9211, 9212             Repealed
10100--10113           Repealed
11000                  7-2.101
11002                  7-2.208
11003                  7-2.207
11004                  7-2.204
11005                  7-2.205
11006                  7-2.203
11008                  7-2.206
11009                  7-2.202
11050                  7-2.301
11051                  7-2.302
11052                  7-2.303
11053                  7-2.304
11054                  7-2.305
11055                  7-2.601
11056                  7-2.306
11057                  7-2.309
11058                  7-2.314
11059                  7-2.308
11060                  7-2.504
11061                  7-2.310
11062                  7-2.602
11063                  7-2.603
11064                  7-2.604
11065                  7-2.605
11066                  7-2.606
11067                  7-2.607
11068                  7-2.608
11069                  7-2.307
11070                  7-2.311
11071                  7-2.312
11072                  7-2.313
11073                  7-2.609
11100                  7-2.401
11101                  7-2.402
11102                  7-2.403
11102                  7-2.404
11104                  7-2.405
11105                  7-2.406
11106                  7-2.407
11107                  7-2.408
11108                  7-2.409
11150                  7-2.501
11151                  7-2.502
11152                  7-2.503
11200                  7-2.610
11201                  7-2.611
11202                  7-2.612
11203                  7-2.613
11204                  7-2.614
11205                  7-2.615
11206                  7-2.616
11207                  7-2.617
11208                  7-2.618
11209                  7-2.619
11251                  7-2.701
11252                  7-2.701
11253                  7-2.702
11300                  7-2.801
11301                  7-2.802
11302                  7-2.803
11350                  7-2.901
11351                  7-2.902
11352                  7-2.903
11353                  7-2.904
11354                  7-2.905
11400                  7-2.315
11401                  7-2.1001
11402                  7-2.1001
11450                  7-2.1201
11500                  7-2.1101
11500                  7-2.1101
 
