CITY OF TULARE, CALIFORNIA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-34 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2025-05, passed 5-6-2025
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0bf1a20f2574f87b1d689bfa9416489a00654b80/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5225.jpg]
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
FREEHOLDERS’ CHARTER OF THE CITY OF TULARE
(Filed with the Secretary of State February 3, 1923)
   (Statutes of 1923, P. 1508)
   As Amended April 24, 1933 (Statutes of 1933, P. 3043)
   As Amended May 24, 1935 (Statutes of 1935), P. 2640)
   As Amended March 26, 1954 (Statutes of 1953, P. 381)
   As Amended April 14, 1959 (Statutes of 1959, P. 5713)
   As Amended April 13, 1971 (Statutes of 1971, V2, Ch158, P. 4388-4394)
   As Amended April 8, 1975 (Stat. of 1975, V2, App. Chart. Ch10, P.45)
   As Amended November 2, 1982 (Stat. of 1982, V6, App. Chart. P. 138-139)
   As Amended November 5, 1996 (Statutes of 1997, Chart. Ch 7)
   As Amended November 2, 2004 (Statutes of 2005, Chart. Ch. 1)
   As Amended November 2, 2010 (Statutes of 2010, Chart. Ch. 14)
   As Amended June 5, 2012
NAME AND BOUNDARIES
   Section 1.   The municipal corporation now existing and known as the City of
Tulare, shall remain and continue a body, politic and corporate in the name in
fact and in law.
   The boundaries of the City of Tulare shall continue as now established until
changed in some manner authorized by law.
   Section 2:   Repealed March 26, 1954.
POWERS
   Section 3.   Said city shall have and may exercise all the powers heretofore
granted to the other municipalities of the state, also such as may be necessary
or appropriate to a municipal corporation and to the general welfare of its
inhabitants which are not prohibited by the constitution and which it would be
competent for this Charter to set forth particularly or specifically, and the
specification herein of any particular powers shall not be held to be
exclusive.
ELECTIVE OFFICERS
   Section 4.   (As Amended April 13, 1971; June 5, 2012) Elective Officers of
the City shall be five (5) Council Members, each elected from a separate
district.
   Section 5.   (As Amended April 13, 1971; June 5, 2012) In order to
transition to a district based election, on the 6th day of November, 2012, and
every four years thereafter during the general election there shall be  elected
by district three (3) Council Members. On the 4th day of November, 2014, and
every four years thereafter during the general election, there shall be elected
by district two (2) Council Members. The term of office of each of said
Elective Officers shall be four (4) years and until his/her successor is
elected and qualified.
   Section 6:   Repealed April 13, 1971.
   Section 7:   Repealed March 26, 1954.
   Section 8:   Repealed April 13, 1971.
VACANCIES
   Section 9.   (As Amended April 13, 1971; June 5, 2012) A vacancy in any
elective office, from whatever cause arising, shall be filled by appointment by
the Council, such appointee to hold office until the next general Municipal
Election, when a successor shall be chosen by the electors for the unexpired
term. All appointees shall be qualified electors of the district which was
vacated. If the Council fails to agree or for any other reason does not fill
such vacancy within thirty (30) days after the same occurs, then such vacancy
shall be filled by the Mayor; provided, however, that if for any reasons the
seats of a majority of the Council shall become vacant, then the City Clerk
shall call a special election at once to fill the vacancies for the unexpired
terms, and the same shall be conducted as herein provided for general Municipal
Elections.
   If any officer of the City shall remove from the City, or absent himself/
herself therefrom for more than thirty (30) days consecutively without the
permission of the Council, or shall fail or qualify, or shall resign, or be
convicted of a felony, or be adjudged insane, his/her office shall thereupon
become vacant.
QUALIFICATIONS OF OFFICERS
   Section 10.   (As Amended March 26, 1954; June 5, 2012) All elective
officers, at the time of their election, shall be qualified electors of their
district in the City of Tulare.
ELECTIONS
   Section 11.   (As Amended April 8, 1975; November 2, 2010) Except as
otherwise provided, all elections shall be held and conducted, as nearly as may
be, in accordance with the Elections Code of the State of California as amended
from time to time. The regular municipal elections shall be held in even-
numbered years at the same time as the general election for state offices for
the state of California, in accordance with the Elections Code of the State of
California as amended from time to time.
INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL
   Section 12.   (As Amended November 2, 2010) Ordinances may be initiated in
accordance with the Elections Code of the State of California as amended from
time to time. Referendum petitions protesting enacted legislation passed by the
Council under and in accordance with the constitution and general laws of the
state, may be circulated in accordance with the Elections Code of the State of
California as amended from time to time. Any elective officer shall be subject
to the recall in accordance with the provisions of the constitution and general
laws of the state, in accordance with the Elections Code of the Sate of
California as amended from time to time; and in the case an officer is
recalled, the office held by him/her shall be deemed vacant and shall be filled
by the Council as any other vacancy.
   Section 13.   (As Amended May 24, 1935) The legislative body of the City
shall be vested in a City Council to consist of five (5) members who shall
received as compensation the sum of $5.00 for each regular meeting attended by
them.
MEETINGS
   Section 14.   (As Amended November 5, 1996; November 2, 2004) The City
Council shall meet at the first regular session after certification of the
municipal election results, shall take the oath of office, shall choose one of
their number President, who shall be Ex-Officio Mayor and executive head of the
City. The Council shall hold regular meetings at least once in each month at
such times as they shall fix by ordinance, and may adjourn any regular meeting
to a date certain, which shall be specified in the order of adjournment, and
when so adjourned, such adjourned meeting shall be a regular meeting for all
purposes. Special meetings may be called at any time by the Mayor or by three
Council Members by giving prior written notice as required by the Brown Act.
All meetings of the Council shall be public, except for closed sessions as
permitted by state law, and held within the corporate limits of the City at
such places as may be designated by ordinance or Council action, excepting that
joint meetings with other public agencies may be held outside the city
corporate limits consistent with applicable state law.
ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
   Section 15.   (As amended April 13, 1971; November 2, 2004; November 2,
2010) The Council shall act only by Ordinance, Resolution, or motion. All
proposed Ordinances shall be introduced in typewritten or printed form, and no
Ordinance shall be passed by the Council on the date of its introduction, nor
within five (5) days thereafter, nor at any time other than a regular meeting.
Nothing herein shall be construed as prohibiting minor changes, amendments or
modifications of a proposed Ordinance between the time of its introduction and
final passage, providing its general scope and original purpose are retained.
The affirmative vote of three (3) members shall be necessary to the passage of
any Ordinance or Resolution. All Resolutions and Ordinances shall be signed by
the President of the Council and attested by the City Clerk.
   The enacting clause of all Ordinances shall be "Be It Ordained by the
Council of the City of Tulare". All Ordinances, with the exception of the
annual appropriation Ordinance, shall contain but one subject, which shall be
clearly stated in the title.
   If any subject shall be embraced in an Ordinance or Resolution, which shall
not be expressed in its title, such Ordinance or Resolution shall be void only
as to such thereof as shall not be expressed.
   All Ordinances, except emergency Ordinances not subject to referendum before
final action thereon, must be passed to print and the following actions taken:
a summary of the ordinance, not to exceed fifty (50) words, with the "Ayes" and
"Noes", shall be issued in a daily newspaper of general circulation in the City
of Tulare for one (1) day; the ordinance with the "Ayes" and "Noes" shall be
available in at least one public place at the city offices; and, upon request
to the City Clerk, a copy of the ordinance shall be made available to any
citizen.
   No Ordinance shall be amended unless the whole Section to be amended be set
forth, as amended, and the original Section repealed.
POWER OF INVESTIGATION
   Section 16.   The Council, or a committee thereof, may investigate the
affairs of any department or the official acts and conduct of any official. It
shall have power to administer oaths, compel the attendance of witnesses and
the production of books and papers, and may punish for contempt any person
failing to obey its subpoena or refusing to testify. No person shall be excused
from testifying, but his/her testimony shall not be used against him/her in any
criminal proceeding, other than for perjury.
APPOINTIVE OFFICERS
   Section 17.   (As amended April 13, 1971; November 2, 2004; November 2,
2010; June 5, 2012) There shall be the following appointive officers, boards
and commissions, who shall perform the duties assigned them by this Charter or
by Ordinance: City Manager, City Clerk, City Engineer, Public Works Director,
City Attorney, Finance Director, Chief of the Police Department, Chief of the
Fire Department, City Planning Commission, Recreation & Parks Director, Board
of Public Utilities Commissioners, and any other position designated as a
department head by city ordinance or resolution.
   The Council may, by Ordinance, provide for the appointment of all employees
of the City Government, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. The
Council shall appoint the City Manager, City Clerk, and City Attorney, members
of all Boards and Commissions, and such other subordinate officers as in their
judgment may be deemed necessary, and fix their compensation.
   All appointive officers not appointed by the Council shall be appointed and
removed by the City Manager.
   All appointive officers shall, before entering upon the duties of their
office, take the oath herein prescribed for elective officers, and file with
the City Clerk bonds of some responsible Surety Company in such penal sums as
this Charter, or failing such provisions, as the Council may by Ordinance
direct.
   No provisions of this Charter shall be construed to prohibit the adoption of
an Ordinance providing for a personnel, merit, civil service, or other system
for the employment, tenure, discharge or retirement of employees.
CITY CLERK
   Section 18.   (As amended March 26, 1954)The City Clerk shall be the
custodian of the seal of the City; shall safely keep all books, records and
other documents required by this Charter or the laws of the State to be kept
and filed in his/her office. He/She shall be the Clerk of the Council. He/She
shall have the power to administer oaths. It shall be his/her duty to perform
all acts required of his/her by this Charter, by Ordinance, or by the laws of
the state.
CITY ATTORNEY
   Section 19.   The City Attorney shall be an attorney-at-law, duly admitted
to practice in the courts of this state, and having practiced therein at least
two years. He/She shall represent the City in all litigation, including the
prosecution of criminal cases arising out of the violations of city ordinances.
He/She shall be the legal advisor of the Council, the City Manager, and all
other officers, boards and departments of the City, and shall give his/her
opinion in writing when requested in writing by any officer or board. He/She
shall draft all proposed ordinances, or resolutions, when requested to do so by
the Council, and perform such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance.
CITY MANAGER
   Section 20.   The Council shall appoint a City Manager. His/Her powers and
duties shall be as follows:
   a.   To see that all Ordinances are enforced.
   b.   (As amended March 26, 1954) To appoint, except as otherwise provided,
and subject to the provisions of any Ordinance providing for a personnel,
merit, civil service, or other system for the employment, tenure, discharge or
retirement of employees, all heads of departments, subordinate officials, and
employees, and remove the same, except as otherwise herein provided.
   c.   To exercise general supervision over all public utilities operating
within the City so far as the same are subject to municipal control.
   d.    To see that the provisions of all franchises, permits and privileges
granted by the City are fully observed, and to report to the Council any
violation thereof.
   e.   Repealed April 13, 1971.
   f.   Repealed November 2, 2004.
   g.   To attend all meetings of the Council unless excused therefrom by the
Council or the Mayor.
   h.   To examine or cause to be examined, without notice, the conduct of any
officer or employee of the City.
   i.   To keep Council advised as to the needs of the City.
   j.   To devote his/her entire time to the interests of the City.
   k.   To appoint such advisory boards as he/she may deem best to serve
without compensation, to confer with him/her and assist him/her in his/her
work.
   Section 21:   Repealed April 13, 1971.
   Section 22:   Repealed April 13, 1971.
PURCHASE BY CONTRACT OR IN THE OPEN MARKET
   Section 23.   (As amended November 2, 1982; November 2, 2004; June 5, 2012)
When the expenditure required for the purchase of any supplies exceeds the sum
established by a policy through a resolution adopted by the City Council, the
Purchasing Agent shall advertise for sealed proposals in the manner hereinafter
prescribed for proposals for public work and the contract shall be awarded by
the Council to the lowest responsible bidder, provided that the Council may
reject all bids and order the Purchasing Agent to buy in the open market at a
price less than the lowest bid received from a responsible bidder, and provided
that if no bids are received, the Council may order the Purchasing Agent to buy
in the open market.
Until the Council shall otherwise provide by Ordinance, the Finance Director
shall act as Purchasing Agent.
FISCAL YEAR
   Section 24.   (As amended April 24, 1933) The fiscal year shall commence on
the first day of July.
   Section 25.   The Council shall by Ordinance provide for the assessment,
levy and collection of taxes. The tax levy authorized by the Council shall not
exceed one dollar ($1.00) upon each one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the
assessed valuation of all real and personal property within the City exclusive
of the amount necessary to pay the principal of and interest on the bonded
indebtedness of the City, except by Ordinance approved, or adopted by the
affirmative vote of the majority of the people voting at a general or special
election.
ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE 
   Section 26.   (As amended April 14, 1959)On or before the second regular
meeting in May of each year, the City Manager shall submit to the Council an
estimate of revenue and expenditures for the ensuing year. It shall contain an
estimate of the probable revenue from all sources, the amount necessary to meet
the interest and principal of the bonded indebtedness of the City, and the
following information, arranged in parallel columns:
   a.   Detailed estimate of the expenses of conducting each Department, as
submitted by the Department.
   b.   Expenditures for the corresponding items for the last two (2) fiscal
years.
   c.   Expenditures of corresponding items for the current fiscal year,
including adjustments due to transfers between appropriations, and an estimate
of the expenditure necessary to complete the current fiscal year.
   d.   Supplies and materials on hand.
   e.   Such other information as the Council may require.
   f.   Recommendations of the City Manager.
   Sufficient copies shall be prepared by the City Manager to provide one for
each member of the Council, and to place two (2) copies on file in his office
for inspection by the public.
PUBLICATION OF THE BUDGET 
   Section 27.   (As amended April 14, 1959)Upon the receipt of this budget,
the Council shall proceed to consider the same. Before the final action is
taken, the City Manager, at the direction of the Council, shall publish for
general distribution, an abstract of the budget showing the principal items of
expenditure for each Department together with the changes in his/her
recommendation, if any, proposed to be made by the Council.
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS RELATING TO APPROPRIATIONS
   Section 28.   (As amended April 13, 1971) Upon request of the City Manager,
the Council may, by Resolution, transfer any part of an unencumbered balance of
any appropriation to another purpose or object, or may, by Resolution,
authorize a transfer to be made between items appropriated to the same office
or department. At the close of each fiscal year, the unexpended balance of each
appropriation, against which no contracts or works or supplies are outstanding,
reverts to the general fund. Any money in the general fund otherwise
unappropriated may be appropriated by the Council at any time by Ordinance.
   No money shall be drawn from the City Treasury, nor obligation for the
expenditure of money be incurred, except in accordance with the appropriation
made by the Council or otherwise provided for herein.
   Section 29:   Repealed April 13, 1971.
   Section 30:   Repealed April 13, 1971.
   Section 31:   Repealed April 13, 1971.
   Section 32:   Repealed April 13, 1971.
   Section 33:   Repealed April 13, 1971.
PAYMENT OF MONEYS INTO THE TREASURY
   Section 34.   (As amended November 2, 2004)Every officer collecting or
receiving any moneys belonging to or for the use of the city, except when
otherwise provided by law or this Charter, shall pay the same into the City
Treasury and account therefor to the Finance Director daily. The Finance
Director shall direct the proper fund to be credited therewith.
   Section 35:   Repealed April 13, 1971.
POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS
   Section 36.   The Police Department shall consist of a Chief of Police, a
police force and such subordinate officers and employees as the City Council
may prescribe. The Chief of Police and City Manager shall adopt rules for the
government, discipline, equipment and uniform of the department, subject to the
approval of the Council.
CHIEF OF POLICE
   Section 37.   The Chief of Police shall have all the powers that are now or
may hereafter be conferred upon sheriffs and other peace officers by the laws
of the state. He/She shall be responsible for the execution of all laws and
ordinance and rules governing the Police Department. He/She shall have such
other powers and duties as may be conferred by the Council.
FIRE DEPARTMENT
   Section 38.   The Fire Department shall consist of a Chief and such Fire
Fighters and other employees as the Council may determine. The Chief and City
Manager shall prescribe rules for the government of the department.
   Section 39:   Repealed April 13, 1971.
   Section 40:   Repealed March 26, 1954.
   Section 41:   Repealed March 26, 1954.
   Section 42:   Repealed March 26, 1954.
   Section 43:   Repealed March 26, 1954.
   Section 44:   Repealed March 26, 1954.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
   Section 45.   (As amended April 13, 1971; November 2, 2004)The City Engineer
shall be a Civil Engineer, duly licensed under the laws of the State of
California. The Public Works Director shall be head of the Department of Public
Works. He/She shall have all such powers and duties as are conferred on him/her
by this Charter or by Ordinance. He/She shall be ex-officio Superintendent of
Streets. The Public Works Director may be, but is not required to be, the City
Engineer. The Department of Public Works shall have charge of all public works
relating to streets, street cleaning, water, sewers, sewage disposal, garbage
disposal, and the construction and operation of all public utilities owned and
operated by the City, except as otherwise provided herein.
PUBLIC WORKS TO BE DONE BY CONTRACT
   Section 46.   (As amended November 5, 1996; November 2, 2004; November 2,
2010; June 5, 2012) All public buildings and work, when the expenditure
therefor shall exceed the sum established by a policy through a resolution
adopted by the City Council, shall be done by contract, and shall be let to the
lowest responsible bidder, after advertising one (1) time in a daily newspaper
of general circulation, for sealed proposals for the work contemplated.
Provided, that the Council may reject any and all bids, if deemed excessive,
and re-advertise for bids to provide for the work to be done by the Department
of Public Works.
   All contracts shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney, and shall
be signed by the Mayor, and attested to by the City Clerk.
   No contract is valid, except in the case where the work to be done is to be
paid for by special assessment, unless the Finance Director shall endorse
thereon his/her certificate that there remains an unexpended balance of an
appropriation or proceeds of a bond issue applicable thereto.
PENALTY FOR COLLUSION
   Section 47.   If at any time it shall be found that the person, firm or
corporation to whom the contract has been awarded has, in presenting any bid or
bids, colluded with any other party or parties, then the contract so  awarded
shall be null and void, and the contractor and his/her sureties shall be liable
to the City for all loss or damage which the city may suffer thereby, and the
Council may advertise anew for bids for said work.
CITY PLANNING COMMISSION
   Section 48.   There shall be a City Planning Commission established,
governed and maintained under and pursuant to the provisions of the generals
laws of the state.
DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION
   Section 49.   (As amended April 13, 1971; November 2, 2004) The Department
of Parks and Recreation shall consist of a Recreation, Parks and Library
Director, and such other employees as the Council may provide. The Director
shall have complete charge of the parks and reservations of the City, except as
otherwise limited in this Charter. The Director and City Manager shall make
rules for the use of the parks and the preservation of the trees, shrubs,
lawns, etc., subject to the approval of the City Council. The Council may
designate any of the employees of the Parks Department as special police
officers and, as such, they shall have the powers and duties within the parks
and reservations of the City as would be possessed by regular police officers.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
   Section 50.   Repealed November 2, 2010.
ADVISORY BOARD OF HEALTH
   Section 51.   Repealed November 2, 2010.
BOARD OF PUBLIC UTILITIES
   Section 52.   (As amended April 14, 1959; November 2, 2004)There is hereby
created a Department of Public Utilities. Said department shall be under the
control and management of a board of five (5) commissioners. Said Board shall
be known as the Board of Public Utilities Commissioners, and the members of
such Board shall be known as the Commissioners of said department. Said Board
shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the
Council, who shall hold office for four (4) years and until their successors
are appointed and qualified; they may be removed by the Mayor, subject to the
approval of the Council by a majority vote.
   The Board shall hold regular meetings at a regular meeting place within the
corporate limits of the City of Tulare. All meetings shall be public. The
members of the Board shall receive as compensation the sum of $5.00 each for
each regular meeting attended by them, and necessary expenses incurred by them
shall be properly charged against the City, and when certified by the Finance
Director shall be paid.
   Section 52a.   As soon as practicable after the first day of July in each
year, the Board shall organize by electing one of its members President and one
Vice President, which officers shall hold office for one year and until their
successors are elected, unless their membership on the Board sooner expires.
The election of each succeeding President and Vice President shall be held at
the meeting of the Board during the last week in July of each year. The Board
may fill the unexpired term of any vacancy occurring in the office of President
or Vice President. All meetings shall be in a public office of the Board, with
reasonable provision for attendance by the public.
   Section 52b.   (As amended November 2, 2004)The Board shall appoint the City
Clerk as secretary of the Board and the Finance Director as chief accounting
employee. The secretary shall keep a record of the proceedings and transactions
of the Board, specifying therein the names of the Commissioners at all meetings
and giving the ayes and noes upon all votes. He/She shall post and publish all
orders, and resolutions and notices which the Board shall order to be posted or
published, and shall perform such other duties as are herein or may be by order
of the Board imposed upon him/her.
   Section 52c.   The Board of Public Utilities shall have power (subject to
the provisions of this Charter and to such Ordinances of the City as are not in
conflict with the grants of power made to this department of the City
government elsewhere in this Charter) to supervise, control, regulate and
manage the department and to make and enforce all necessary and desirable rules
and regulations therefor and for the exercise of the powers conferred upon the
department by this Charter. It shall have such additional powers and perform
such other duties as may be granted or imposed elsewhere in this Charter, or by
Ordinance not in conflict with the provisions of this Charter. No grant of
power by this Charter to this department of the City government shall be
construed to restrict the power of the Council to enact Ordinances under the
police power of the City except as otherwise specifically provided in this
Charter.
   Section 52d.   The power conferred by this Charter upon the Board shall be
exercised by order or resolution adopted by a majority of its members and
recorded in the minutes with the ayes and noes at length. Such action shall be
attested by the signature of the President or Vice President, or two members of
the Board, and by the signature of the secretary of the Board.
   Section 52e.   (As amended November 2, 2004)The Department of Public
Utilities shall have the power to use a corporate seal, to sue and be sued, and
to have perpetual succession; it shall have the power and duty:
   1.   To acquire, construct, operate, maintain, extend, manage, and control
works and property for the purpose of supplying the City and its inhabitants
with water and electric energy, gas, heat, sewers, transportation, telephone
and telegraph service, ice or other systems of providing and distributing
refrigerating means, materials and service, or any of them, and to acquire and
take, by purchase, lease, condemnation, or otherwise, and to hold, in the name
of the City, all property situated within or without the City, and within or
without the state, that may be necessary or convenient for such purpose. To
borrow money for any or all of such purposes on terms and conditions prescribed
by said Board, said indebtedness to be payable only out of the revenue fund
pertaining to the municipal works for or on account of which such indebtedness
was created.
   2.   To regulate and control the use, sale, and distribution of water,
electric energy, gas, transportation, and other utility owned or controlled by
the City; the collection of rates therefor and the granting of permits for
connection with said water or electric works or gas or transportation or sewer
or other utilities; and to fix the rates to be charged for such connection; and
subject to approval of the Council by Ordinance or Resolution, to fix by
contract or otherwise and for a term deemed reasonable by the Board the rates
charged for water or electric energy, or gas, or transportation, or any other
utility for use within or without the City, and to prescribe the time and the
manner of payment of the same; provided that, except as hereafter otherwise
prescribed, such rates shall be of uniform operation as near as may be, and
shall be fair and reasonable taking into consideration, among other things, the
nature of the use, the quantity supplied, and the value of the service;
provided further that the rates inside the City may be less, but no greater,
than the rates outside the City for the same or similar uses.
   3.   To supply and distribute, at rates fixed as hereinbefore provided, any
surplus water or surplus electric energy or surplus gas or surplus of any other
utility owned or controlled; and subject to the approval of the Council by
Ordinance, to fix by contract or otherwise the rates to be charged for public
utilities for use without the City, and to prescribe the time and the manner of
the same.
   4.   At the discretion of the Board, to divide the work of the department
into as many bureaus as the number of public utilities it controls, and to
discontinue such bureaus and to consolidate the work of any such. In case such
division is made, the General Manager, subject to confirmation by the Board,
shall have the power to appoint a manager for each bureau, who shall operate
under and shall be subject to the supervision and direction of the General
Manager for the entire department. Each such manager shall be directly
responsible to the General Manager and shall have such powers and duties as
shall from time to time be conferred on by the General Manager.
   5.   In the event that all or any portion of a utility is acquired by the
Department of Public Utilities under a contract providing for the payment in
whole or in part of the purchase price thereof out of revenues to be obtained
from said utility, then, at its option, to appoint an agent, corporate or
individual, to have charge of and to manage the said utility, so far as may be
permitted by law, pending the time that the revenues of the utility shall pay
the full purchase price thereof. In the event of the appointment of such agent
by contract, the provisions of sections affecting the powers and duties of the
manager and of the manager of such utility shall be suspended as to such
utility during the term of such contract.
   6.   To sue and to be sued, and to require the services of the City Attorney
in all cases to which the Board or Department is a party, provided that the
Board may employ other attorneys to assist the City Attorney therein, with the
latter's written approval.
   7.   To lease, for a term not exceeding five years, any or all of the lands
under its control for agricultural or other purposes, which shall not conflict
with the beneficial uses of said lands by the City for the purposes for which
they are held by the Board; and except as otherwise provided in this Charter,
to sell, from time to time, such personal property, placed under its control,
as shall not be longer necessary or suitable for the use of such Department.
The Board shall have the right, in conjunction with the joint use of pipe
lines, poles, or pole facilities, to buy, sell, or lease fractional interests
in pipe lines, poles or pole facilities owned or controlled by said other
utilities or by said Board. No real property nor any rights or interests in
real property held by said Board shall be sold, leased, or otherwise disposed
of, or in any manner withdrawn from its control, save as above provided, unless
by written instrument duly authorized by Ordinance of the City and a Resolution
of the Board, and duly executed by the City and the Board.
      No water or water rights nor any of the following property now or
hereafter owned or controlled by the City, to wit; gas, electric energy, or the
right to develop electric or other power by means of any water or water right
now or hereafter owned or controlled by the City, shall ever be sold, leased,
or disposed of, in whole or in part, without the assent of two-thirds of the
qualified voters of the City voting on the proposition at a general or special
election, at which such proposition shall be lawfully submitted, and no water
shall ever be sold, supplied, or distributed to any person or corporation,
other than municipal, for resale, rental, or disposal to consumers or other
persons. Neither shall any electric power or gas ever be sold, supplied or
distributed to any person or corporation other than municipal for resale,
rental or disposal to consumers or other persons without the assent of two-
thirds of the qualified voters of said City given, as aforesaid; provided that
nothing in this section contained shall be construed to prevent the ordinary
sale and distribution by the City of water, gas, and electric energy to its own
inhabitants for their own use, or to prevent the supplying or distribution by
the City of surplus electric energy or gas to consumers or municipal
corporations outside of the City, as elsewhere in this Charter provided.
   8.   To control, and order, except as otherwise in this Charter provided,
the expenditure of all money received for the sale or use of water, or from any
other source in connection with the operation of said water works, and all
money received from the sale or use of electric energy or from any other source
in connection with the operation of said electric works, and all money received
from the sale or use of gas or of transportation or of any other public
utility, or from any other source in connection with the operation of said
public utilities; provided that all money pertaining to each of said utilities
shall be deposited in the City Treasury to the credit of a special fund created
for each of said utilities; and the money so deposited in each special fund
shall be kept separate and apart from other money of the City and shall be
drawn only from said fund upon demands authenticated by signature of the
Finance Director. Any interest or increment received on the money in any such
special fund shall be paid into such special fund and become a part thereof.
   Section 53.   (As amended May 24, 1935)None of the money in or belonging to
any of said special revenue funds shall be appropriated or used for any purpose
except the following purposes pertaining to the municipal works from or on
account of which such money was received, to wit:
   1.   For the necessary expenses of operating and maintaining such works.
   2.   For the payment of the principal and interest or either due or coming
due under contract or upon outstanding notes, certificates or other evidences
of indebtedness issued against revenue of such works or bonds or other evidence
of indebtedness, general or district, heretofore or hereafter issued for the
purpose of such works or parts thereof.
   3.   For the necessary expenses of constructing, extending, and improving
such works, including the purchase of lands, water rights, and other property;
also the necessary expenses of conducting and extending the business of the
department pertaining to such works; also for reimbursement to another bureau
on account of services rendered, or materials, supplies, or equipment
furnished; also for expenditures for the purpose for which bonds, or evidences
of indebtedness shall have been authorized, subject to reimbursement as soon as
practicable from monies derived from the sale or issuance of such bonds or
evidence of indebtedness.
   4.   For establishing and maintaining a reserve fund to insure payment at
maturity of the principal and interest on all bonds and all other contract
obligations not outstanding or hereafter issued or made for the purchase of
municipal works and such other reserve funds pertaining to such works as the
Board may provide for by Resolution subject to approval of the Council by
Ordinance. The money set aside and placed in such fund or funds so created
shall remain in said fund or funds until expended for the purpose thereof, and
shall not be transferred to any other fund of the City. Any interest or
increment received on the money in any such special fund shall be paid into
such special fund and become a part thereof.
   5.   Any balance may be appropriated for use in any ensuing fiscal year or
years or be transferred to the general fund of the City with the consent of the
Board of Public Utilities, and not otherwise.
   Section 53a.   The Board may provide for the cost of acquisition of a public
utility and or extensions and or betterments of said public utility from funds
from the sale of bonds, general or district, and/or from revenues received from
said works to which such acquisition, extensions, and betterments pertain and/
or from the proceeds of loans contracted in accordance with the provisions of
this Charter.
   Whenever in the exercise of such power to provide for the cost of
acquisition of a public utility and/or extensions and/or betterments from such
revenues, the Board may deem it advisable to make any such acquisition,
extension or betterment which cannot be provided for out of the appropriations
for a single fiscal year, it may at any time adopt a special budget and make
special appropriations therefor specifying the amount of such appropriation for
each fiscal year during which the cost of such acquisition, extension or
betterment is expected to be paid, and when such special budget is so adopted,
said Board may incur financial obligations and make expenditures as authorized
thereby; provided that no such special appropriation for a future fiscal year
shall be made unless, on report of the Manager, it shall find that the
reasonably expected revenues of such works in each fiscal year for which such
appropriation is made will be amply sufficient to permit the making of such
appropriation in addition to the following:
   1.   Appropriations to cover the necessary expenses of operating and
maintaining such works, and such payments of principal and interest on
outstanding bonds, as, under the provisions of this Charter, and findings or
resolutions provided for therein, said Board is required to apportion and set
apart;
   2.   Appropriation to cover all sums coming due in said year for principal
and interest upon notes, certificates or other evidences of indebtedness issued
under the provisions of this Charter;
   3.   Appropriations to cover all appropriations made by any prior special
budget; and
   4.   Appropriations to cover all other reasonably anticipated expenses for
said year.
   Any such special budget shall be subject to modification or extension upon
like report and finding. It shall be the duty of the Board in adopting the
annual departmental budget for each fiscal year to include therein
appropriations for each item for which an appropriation for that year has been
made by any such special budget.
   Section 53b.   (As amended November 2, 2004)The Board shall each year
apportion and set apart out of the revenue fund in the city treasury pertaining
to each such municipal works an amount or amounts sufficient to pay at maturity
all sums coming due in said year for principal and interest, upon all
outstanding general bonds, and/or other obligations issued for the purposes of
the works, to which such revenue fund pertains, and also all sums coming due in
said year for principal and interest upon all outstanding district bonds,
issued for such purposes or such part of the last mentioned sums as can be paid
from moneys in said fund not appropriated to other purposes and the Board finds
are not required to meet outstanding obligations or liabilities payable out of
said fund, including the principal and interest of general bonds, and/or other
obligations; and said amounts shall be transferred forthwith into a special
fund in the city treasury, to be designated by name indicating the nature or
purpose of such special fund, and the money in such special fund shall be
subject to apportionment by the Finance Director as may be required to make
such payments on the principal and interest of said bonds and/or other
obligations, and for no other purpose. Any interest or increment received on
the money in any such special fund shall be paid into such special fund and
become a part thereof. The foregoing provisions of this section shall apply to
all such bonds now outstanding or hereafter issued; except as in this section
provided said Board may, at its discretion, apply the moneys in such revenue
funds to such purposes permitted by this Charter and in such order and such
amounts as in the exercise of such discretion it shall determine. Balances
remaining unexpended in said revenue funds, and all sums receivable into said
fund from unpaid bills of consumers and other similar sources at the close of
any fiscal year shall be available for appropriations for, and expenditures in,
succeeding fiscal years in like manner and for like purposes as revenues
received during such succeeding years. The Board shall appoint and shall have
the power to remove the General Manager who shall be the chief administrative
officer. The City Manager may be appointed General Manager.
   Section 53c.   Subject to the provisions of this Charter, the rules of the
department and instructions of this Board, said General Manager shall have the
power and duty:
   1.   To administer the affairs of the department as its chief administrative
officer.
   2.   To appoint, discharge, suspend, or transfer the employees of the
department, other than the secretary of the Board and the chief accounting
employee of the department, and to issue instructions to said employees, other
than the secretary and the chief accounting employee, in the line of their
duties.
   3.   To expend the funds of the department in accordance with the provisions
of the budget appropriations or of appropriations made subsequent to the
budget.
   4.   To recommend to the Board prior to the beginning of each fiscal year an
annual departmental budget covering the anticipated revenues and expenditures
of the department, conforming as far as practicable to the forms and dates
provided in this Charter in relation to the general city budget.
   5.   To certify all expenditures of the department to the chief accounting
employee.
   6.   To exercise such further powers in the administration of the department
as may be conferred upon him/her by the Board.
   Section 53d.   Repealed: April 13, 1971.
   Section 53e.   The Board shall provide suitable quarters, equipment, and
supplies for the department. It shall create the necessary positions in said
department, authorize the necessary deputies, assistants and employees and fix
their salaries and duties, and fix the salary of the General Manager and may
require bonds of any or all such employees for the faithful performance of
their duties.
   Section 54.   (As amended May 24, 1935)Whenever in this Charter provision is
made for the discharge of specific duties by a specific appointee, the
appointing power of such appointee may designate an employee or employees in
the same department with full power to act in place of such appointee in case
of his/her temporary absence or other inability to act; and in other cases upon
the written request of such appointee.
   Section 55.   (As amended May 24, 1935; November 2, 2004)The Board shall,
prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, adopt an annual departmental budget
and make an annual departmental budget appropriation covering the anticipated
revenues and expenditures of said department. Such budget shall conform, as far
as practicable, to the forms and times provided in this Charter for the general
city budget. Such budget shall contain a sum to be known as the "unappropriated
balance", which sum shall be available for appropriation by the Board later in
the ensuing fiscal year to meet contingencies as they may arise. A copy of such
budget, when adopted, and of every Resolution subsequently adopted making
appropriations from said unappropriated balance shall promptly be filed with
the City Council and Finance Director. No expenditure shall be made for
financial obligations incurred by such department except as authorized by the
annual department budget appropriation, or appropriations made subsequent to
said annual budget, or as otherwise provided in this Charter. Provided,
however, and anything contained in this Charter to the contrary
notwithstanding, the Board shall have power at any time to pledge said
unappropriated balance, or to contract with reference therefor, for any of the
purposes set forth in this Charter.
   Section 55a.   (As amended November 2, 2004)No money shall be drawn from any
fund under the control of such department, except upon warrants authenticated
by the signature of the Finance Director, who shall be directly appointed by
the Board and shall be directly responsible to it in the discharge of his/her
duties. The Board, by resolution, may authorize a temporary substitution in the
case of the absence or inability to act of the person whose signature is herein
required.
   Section 56.   Repealed: June 5, 2012.
   Section 56a.   1.   The Board is hereby authorized to borrow money from the
federal government or the state government, or any duly authorized agency
created by either said government and acting therefor, to defray the expenses
of construction work in the department.
   The principal and interest of such borrowed money shall be paid from the
revenue fund pertaining to the municipal works for or on account of when such
indebtedness was created, and the principal shall be repaid in not more than
forty (40) years, no payments of principal need be required the first three (3)
years following the date of any such loan.
   2.   The Board is hereby authorized to make contracts providing for
expenditure or incurring financial obligations to be paid in whole or in part
in succeeding fiscal years, for or on account of the acquisition of any public
utility, and of extensions and improvements of the works under the control of
said department, all payments under said contracts to be made out of the
revenue fund pertaining to the municipal works for or on account of which such
indebtedness was created.
FRANCHISES
   Section 57.   The general power of the Council to grant franchises for the
construction and operation of public utilities in the streets and public
grounds of the City of Tulare shall be exercised as provided in this article,
and not otherwise.
   Section 58.   No franchise shall be granted except by ordinance, specifying
the streets or other public grounds to which the same may apply.
PUBLIC LIBRARY
   Section 59.   The public library of the City of Tulare shall be maintained
and managed in accordance with the provisions of the general laws of the state.
BOARD OF EDUCATION
   Section 60:   Repealed November 5, 1996.
   Section 61:   Repealed November 5, 1996.
   Section 62:   Repealed November 5, 1996.
   Section 63:   Repealed November 5, 1996.
   Section 64:   Repealed November 5, 1996.
SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS
   Section 65:   Repealed November 5, 1996.
   Section 66:   Repealed November 5, 1996.
ORDINANCES TO REMAIN IN EFFECT
   Section 67.   All lawful ordinances of the City of Tulare, including
resolutions and regulations of the several boards and commissions in force and
effect at the time this Charter takes effect, and not inconsistent therewith,
shall remain in force until duly amended or repealed.
GENERAL MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
   Section 68.   (As amended April 13, 1971; November 2, 2004; November 2,
2010; June 5, 2012) All fees, fines or other moneys collected by the Library
and by the Recreation & Parks departments shall be paid into the city treasury
daily.
   Section 69.   (As amended March 26, 1954; November 2, 2004)At the beginning
of each fiscal year the Council shall designated Certified Public Accountants
or qualified Public Accountants, duly licensed by the State Board of
Accountancy or the State of California, who, at such time or times specified by
the Council, shall make an independent audit of accounts and other evidences of
financial transactions of the city government, and shall submit their reports
to the Council and to the City Manager, and shall, at the end of the fiscal
year, submit a final report to the Council and to the City Manager, a copy of
such report to be placed on filed with the City Clerk for inspection by the
general public.
   Such Accountants shall have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the
fiscal affairs of the city government, or any of its officials; they shall not
maintain any accounts or records of the City business, but within the
specifications approved by the Council, shall post audit the books and
documents kept by the Finance Director, and any separate or subordinate account
kept by any office, department or agency of the city government.
   Section 70.   No officer, board, or member of any board, of this city shall
recommend the appointment of, appoint, vote for or elect, to any office,
position of employment, in any department of the city government, any person
related by consanguinity or connected by marriage with such officer or such
member, or with any member of such board. A breach of this section shall be
cause for removal of any such officer, board or member of such board.
   Section 71.   (As amended March 26, 1954; November 2, 2004)Except as
otherwise provided for by law, this Charter, or by Ordinance, all public
offices shall be kept open every day of the business week, as determined by the
City Council, except legal holidays, and all books and records of every officer
and department shall be open to the inspection of any citizen at any time
during business hours, subject to the proper rules and regulations of the
efficient conduct of the business of each department or office.
   Section 72.   All general laws of the State applicable to municipal
corporations, now or hereafter enacted, and which are not in conflict with the
provisions of this Charter or with Ordinances or Resolutions hereafter enacted,
shall be applicable to the City.
   Section 73.   Unless otherwise provided by this Charter, any officer or
board authorized to appoint any deputy, clerk, assistant or employee, shall
have the right to remove the person so appointed.
   Section 74.   All officers and employees, when this Charter takes effect,
shall continue to hold and exercise their respective offices or employment,
under the terms of this Charter until the election or appointment and
qualification of their successors.
   Section 75.   No Council Member shall in any manner attempt to influence the
City Manager in the making of any appointment or in the purchase of supplies. A
violation of this provision shall work a forfeiture of the office of the
Council Member.
   Section 76.   Repealed November 2, 2010.
TAKING INTO EFFECT OF THIS CHARTER
   Section 77.   If this Charter be approved by the 1923 session of the State
Legislature, then for the purposes of nominating and electing candidates for
Council Member, City Auditor, Treasurer and Police Judge and for the exercise
of the initiative referendum and recall, this Charter shall take effect from
the time of its approval by said legislature. For all other purposes it shall
take effect on the first day of May, 1923.
TITLE 1: ADMINISTRATIVE
Chapter
   
1.01.   CODE ADOPTION
   
1.04.   SAVING CLAUSE
   
1.08.   DEFINITIONS
   
1.12.   PENALTY
   
1.16.   COUNCIL MEETINGS
   
1.20.   BONDS OF OFFICERS
   
1.24.   CITY OFFICE HOURS
   
1.28.   FUNDS
   
1.32.   REVENUE AND TAXATION
   
1.36.   ELECTIONS
   
1.40.   RETIREMENT SYSTEM
   
1.44.   CORPORATE SEAL
   
1.48.   TAX COLLECTOR
   
1.52.   PERSONNEL SYSTEM
   
1.56.   CITY OFFICERS
   
1.60.   ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS
   
1.61.   ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
   
1.64.   FEE AND SERVICE CHARGE; REVENUE/COST COMPARISON SYSTEM
   
1.68.   [REPEALED BY ORD. 18-04]
   
1.70.   PREVAILING WAGES
CHAPTER 1.01: CODE ADOPTION
Section
   
1.01.010   Adoption.
   
1.01.020   Title—Citation—Reference.
   
1.01.030   Reference applies to all amendments.
   
1.01.040   Title, chapter and section headings.
   
1.01.050   Reference to specific ordinances.
   
1.01.060   Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code.
   
1.01.070   Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
   
1.01.080   Constitutionality.
   
1.01.090   References to prior code.
§ 1.01.010   Adoption.
   There is hereby adopted the Tulare Municipal Code, as compiled, edited and
published by American Legal Publishing Corporation; Cincinnati, Ohio.
(1995 Code, § 1.01.010) (Ord. 97-1813, passed 1-21-1997)
§ 1.01.020   Title—Citation—Reference.
   This code shall be known as the “City Code of Tulare, California”, and it
shall be sufficient to refer to the code as the “Tulare Municipal Code” in any
prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at
law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to,
amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an
addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the Tulare Municipal Code.
References may be made to the titles, chapters, sections and divisions of the
Tulare Municipal Code and the references shall apply to those titles, chapters,
sections or divisions as they appear in the code.
(1995 Code, § 1.01.020) (Ord. 97-1813, passed 10-21-1997)
§ 1.01.030   Reference applies to all amendments.
   Whenever a reference is made to this code as the “City Code of Tulare,
California”, or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the City of
Tulare, California, codified herein, the reference shall apply to all
amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made.
(1995 Code, § 1.01.030) (Ord. 97-1813, passed 10-21-1997)
§ 1.01.040   Title, chapter and section headings.
   Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to
govern, limit, modify or, in any manner, affect the scope, meaning or intent of
the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof.
(1995 Code, § 1.01.040) (Ord. 97-1813, passed 10-21-1997)
§ 1.01.050   Reference to specific ordinances.
   The provisions of this code shall not, in any manner, affect matters of
record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances which are
therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included
within the code, but the reference shall be construed to apply to the
corresponding provisions contained within this code.
(1995 Code, § 1.01.050) (Ord. 97-1813, passed 10-21-1997)
§ 1.01.060   Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code.
   The last ordinance included in this code as of the last supplement (2024 S-
33) is Ord. 2024-02. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ord. 2024-
02, but prior to adoption of this supplement (2025 S-34), are hereby adopted
and made a part of this code: 2024-06, 2025-01, 2025-04, 2025-05.
(1995 Code, § 1.01.060) (Ord. 97-1813, passed 10-21-1997)
§ 1.01.070   Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
   The adoption of this code does not affect prosecutions for ordinance
violations committed prior to the effective date of this code, does not waive
any fee or penalty due and unpaid on the effective date of this code and does
not affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit posted, filed or deposited
pursuant to the requirements of any ordinance.
(1995 Code, § 1.01.070) (Ord. 97-1813, passed 10-21-1997)
§ 1.01.080   Constitutionality.
   If any section, division, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any
reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, the decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this code.
(1995 Code, § 1.01.080) (Ord. 97-1813, passed 10-21-1997)
§ 1.01.090   References to prior code.
   References in city forms, documents and regulations to the chapters and
sections of the former city code shall be construed to apply to the
corresponding provisions contained within this code.
(1995 Code, § 1.01.090) (Ord. 97-1813, passed 10-21-1997)
CHAPTER 1.04: SAVING CLAUSE
Section
   
1.04.010   Repeal of general ordinances.
   
1.04.020   Public utility ordinances.
   
1.04.030   Court proceedings.
§ 1.04.010   Repeal of general ordinances.
   All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this city
code are hereby repealed, except such as are referred to herein as being still
in force or are, by necessary implication, herein reserved from repeal (subject
to the saving clauses contained in the following list), from which are excluded
the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances;
appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
city; and all special ordinances.
(1995 Code, § 1.04.010)
§ 1.04.020   Public utility ordinances.
   No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and
other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of
public utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this city code
or by virtue of the preceding section, excepting as this city code shall be
considered as amending the ordinance or ordinances in respect of the provisions
only.
(1995 Code, § 1.04.020)
§ 1.04.030   Court proceedings.
   No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance,
whether the former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against the former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance or, in any way, whatever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of the proceeding, so far as practicable. If any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, the provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied
to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect. This section
shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether
the repeal is, in the ordinance, making any new provisions upon the same
subject or in any other ordinance. Nothing contained in this or the preceding
section shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue
of any general ordinance of the city herein repealed; or as discontinuing,
abating, modifying or altering any, penalty accrued or to accrue, or as
affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any
right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time
of the adoption of this city code.
(1995 Code, § 1.04.030)
CHAPTER 1.08: DEFINITIONS
Section
   
1.08.010   Definitions—General.
§ 1.08.010   Definitions—General.
   Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the content makes the meaning
repugnant thereto.
   AGENT. A person acting on behalf of another.
   CITY. The City of Tulare, California.
   CODE. Unless otherwise specifically stated, this city code.
   EMPLOYEES. Whenever reference is made in this code to a city employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words “of the
City of Tulare”.
   FEE. A sum of money charged by the city for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
   KNOWINGLY. Imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which brings the
act or omission within the provisions of this code. It does not require any
knowledge of the unlawfulness of the act or omission.
   LICENSE. The permission granted for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
   MISDEMEANOR. Any offense deemed a violation of the provisions of this code
which is a lesser offense than a felony, as defined by state law.
   NEGLIGENT. As well as NEGLECT, NEGLIGENCE and NEGLIGENTLY, imports a want of
the attention to the nature or probable consequences of the act or omission as
a prudent human ordinarily bestows in acting in his or her own concern.
   NUISANCE. Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the city; or any act or thing repugnant to, creating a hazard to
or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or to the
community.
   OCCUPANT. Applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies
the whole or any part of a building or land whether alone or with others.
   OFFENSE. Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of
any act required by the provisions of this code.
   OFFICERS. Whenever reference is made in this code to a city officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words “of the City of
Tulare”.
   OPERATOR. The person who is in charge of any operation, business or
profession.
   OWNER. Applied to a building or land, shall include any part-owner, joint-
owner, tenant-in-common, joint-tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of a
building or land.
   PERSON. The singular and the plural and shall also mean and include any
person, firm, corporation, association, partnership or any other form of
association or organization.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Every description of money, goods, chattels, effects,
evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any pecuniary
obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred,
increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or interest
therein.
   RETAILER. Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to
relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small
quantities direct to the consumer.
   STREET. Alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public squares,
public places and sidewalks.
   TENANT. Applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of a building or land, whether alone or with others.
   WHOLESALER or WHOLESALE DEALER. Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall
be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things
in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
   WILFULLY. When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted,
implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the omission
referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law, or to injure
another, or to acquire an advantage.
(1995 Code, § 1.08.010)
CHAPTER 1.12: PENALTY
Section
   
1.12.010   Violation and infraction.
   
1.12.020   Liability of officers.
   
1.12.030   Failure to appear after release on bond or own recognizance—
Penalty—Presumption.
Editor’s note:
   Prior Code § 1.12.020 was repealed by Ord. 1152; 7-15-1975; eff. 8-14-1975;
§ 1.12.030 was repealed by Ord. 1152; 7-15-1975; eff. 8-14-1975; § 1.12.040 was
repealed by Ord. 1152; 7-15-1975; eff. 8-14-1975; § 1.12.050 was repealed by
Ord. 1152; 7-15-1975; eff. 8-14-1975. The sections in this chapter have been
renumbered accordingly.
§ 1.12.010   Violation and infraction.
   In addition to the penalties provided by §
1.61.040, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the
provisions of this code, or the provisions of any code adopted by reference by
this code, shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by the
city.
(1995 Code, § 1.12.010) (Ord. 10-16, passed 5-4-2010)
§ 1.12.020   Liability of officers.
   No provision of this city code designating the duties of any officer or
employee shall be so construed as to make the officer or employee liable for
any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform the duty, unless the
intention of the governing body to impose a fine or penalty on the officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the
duty.
(1995 Code, § 1.12.060)
§ 1.12.030   Failure to appear after release on bond or own
recognizance—Penalty— Presumption.
   Every person who is charged with the commission of an infraction who is
released from custody on an appearance bond or on his or her own recognizance
and who, in order to evade the process of the court, wilfully fails to appear
as required, is guilty of an infraction. It shall be presumed that a defendant
who wilfully fails to appear within 14 days of the date assigned for his or her
appearance intended to evade the process of the court. Any person convicted of
an infraction under this section shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding
$250.
(1995 Code, § 1.12.070) (Ord. 96-1790, passed - -1996)
CHAPTER 1.16: COUNCIL MEETINGS
Section
   
1.16.010   Time, place of regular meetings.
   
1.16.020   Special meetings.
   
1.16.030   Other City Council sessions.
§ 1.16.010   Time, place of regular meetings.
   The regular meetings of the Council shall be held on the first and third
Tuesdays of each month at the hour of 7:00 p.m., local time, in the City of
Tulare Council Chambers, unless any such Tuesday shall fall upon a holiday, in
which instance the regular meeting may be held at the same hour and place on
the next succeeding evening that is not a holiday. The City Council, at their
discretion, may schedule a regular meeting at another location within city
limits as needed to allow for appropriate accommodations.
(1995 Code, § 1.16.010) (Ord. 10-05, passed 3-2-2010)
Statutory reference:
   Statute authority, see Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 36805 to 36810
§ 1.16.020 Special meetings.
   A special meeting may be ordered at any time by the Mayor or by his or her
designee whenever the public business may require it or upon the request from
three members of the City Council. Special meetings are to address specific
issues only. Meetings may be held in the City of Tulare Council Chambers or at
another location within city limits as needed to allow for appropriate
accommodations.
(Ord. 10-05, passed 3-2-2010)
§ 1.16.030 Other City Council sessions.
   The City Council may schedule Study Sessions and/or Closed Sessions prior to
or after regular meetings or during special meetings. Meetings may be held in
the City of Tulare Council Chambers or at another location within city limits
as needed to allow for appropriate accommodations.
(Ord. 10-05, passed 3-2-2010)
CHAPTER 1.20: BONDS OF OFFICERS
Section
   
1.20.010   Individual bonds required for Finance Director/Treasurer, City Clerk
and Deputy City Clerk.
   
1.20.020   Master bond requirement for all other city officers and employees.
§ 1.20.010   Individual bonds required for Finance Director/Treasurer, City
Clerk and Deputy City Clerk.
   The following specified officers and employees of the City of Tulare shall
be required to provide to the City Clerk a bond of a responsible surety company
in the penal sums as set forth hereinbelow.
   (A)   The Finance Director/Treasurer shall provide the bond in the penal sum
of $1,000,000.
   (B)   The City Clerk and the Chief Deputy City Clerk of the City of Tulare
shall file bonds with the Finance Director in the penal sum of $500,000 each.
(1995 Code, § 1.20.010) (Ord. 98-1822, passed - -1998)
§ 1.20.020   Master bond requirement for all other city officers and employees.
   Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 1481, a master bond in the penal sum of
$50,000 is herewith required to be provided covering all other city officers
and employees.
(1995 Code, § 1.20.020) (Ord. 98-1822, passed - -1998)
Statutory reference:
   Statute authority, see Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 36518 to 36521
CHAPTER 1.24: CITY OFFICE HOURS
Section
   
1.24.010   City office hours.
   
1.24.020   Exceptions.
§ 1.24.010   City office hours.
   Except as otherwise provided for by law, all public offices of the city
shall be kept open for business, every day, except legal holidays and
Saturdays, from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
(1995 Code, § 1.24.010)
§ 1.24.020   Exceptions.
   In addition to the days that the public offices of the city shall be kept
open as above provided, and as provided in § 71 of the Freeholders Charter of
the city, all public offices shall be kept open on the following days: Election
Day, Columbus Day and Lincoln’s Birthday, unless the days fall on a Saturday or
Sunday.
(1995 Code, § 1.24.020)
CHAPTER 1.28: FUNDS
Section
   
1.28.010   Motor Vehicle in Lieu Tax Fund.
   
1.28.020   Gas Tax Fund.
   
1.28.030   Traffic Safety Fund.
   
1.28.040   Parking Meter Fund.
   
1.28.050   Delinquent Tax Fund.
   
1.28.060   Special Aviation Fund.
§ 1.28.010   Motor Vehicle in Lieu Tax Fund.
   There is hereby created a fund to be known as the Motor Vehicle in Lieu Tax
Fund, into which all moneys received from the state from the In Lieu Tax shall
be paid, and which moneys shall be used for such purposes as street lighting,
signs, markings, paintings, signals and cost of court operation, and from which
Fund all claims approved by the Council for such purposes shall be paid.
(1995 Code, § 1.28.010)
§ 1.28.020   Gas Tax Fund.
   There is hereby created a fund to be known as the Gas Tax Fund, into which
all moneys received from the state from the Gas Tax shall be paid, and which
moneys shall be used for such purposes as major street construction and for
such expenditures as are specified by the Streets and Highways Code of the
State of California, and from which Fund all claims approved by the Council for
such purposes shall be paid.
(1995 Code, § 1.28.020)
§ 1.28.030   Traffic Safety Fund.
   There is hereby created a fund to be known as the Traffic Safety Fund, into
which all moneys received from fines and forfeitures collected under the
Vehicle Code of the State of California shall be paid, and which moneys shall
be used for such purposes as maintenance, improvement or construction of
bridges, culverts and streets, including street sweeping, and from which Fund
all claims approved by the Council for such purposes shall be paid.
(1995 Code, § 1.28.030)
§ 1.28.040   Parking Meter Fund.
   There is hereby created a fund to be known as the Parking Meter Fund, into
which all moneys received from meters collected under the Parking Meter Chapter
shall be paid, and which moneys shall be used for such purposes as all costs
and expenses of parking meters, off-street parking lots, traffic control,
traffic officers’ salaries, costs and expenses of motorcycle operation and
traffic engineering, and from which fund all claims approved by the Council for
such purposes shall be paid.
(1995 Code, § 1.28.040)
§ 1.28.050   Delinquent Tax Fund.
   There is hereby created a fund to be known as the Delinquent Tax Fund, into
which moneys received from payment of delinquent taxes shall be placed pending
their annual distribution at the end of the fiscal year to the appropriate
funds.
(1995 Code, § 1.28.050)
§ 1.28.060   Special Aviation Fund.
   There is hereby established a special fund for the deposit of monies in the
City of Tulare, to be designated as Special Aviation Fund for Tulare Airpark,
pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Public Utilities Code § 21684. All funds
received by the city pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Public Utilities Code
Article IV of Division 9, of Part 1, entitled Aeronautics Fund shall be
deposited in the Special Aviation Fund for Tulare Airpark and all funds of the
city to be deposited pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Public Utilities Code §
21684, shall be deposited in the Fund for expenditures solely for airport and
aviation purposes.
(1995 Code, § 1.28.060)
CHAPTER 1.32: REVENUE AND TAXATION
Section
   
1.32.010   Provisions of state law adopted.
   
1.32.020   Finance Director/Treasurer as Tax Collector.
   
1.32.030   Recorded assessments—Bonds.
§ 1.32.010   Provisions of state law adopted.
   Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code § 2617 is hereby made applicable as to the
time and manner of collecting all property taxes for city purposes, the
imposition of penalties and all other matters to which the section relates in
the city.
(1995 Code, § 1.32.010)
§ 1.32.020   Finance Director/Treasurer as Tax Collector.
   The Finance Director/Treasurer shall be ex-officio Tax Collector of the city
and shall perform all of the duties now required or that may hereafter be
required to be performed by the provisions of this code or other laws of the
city.
(1995 Code, § 1.32.020)
§ 1.32.030   Recorded assessments—Bonds.
   Where any assessment is hereafter recorded pursuant to the provisions of the
Municipal Improvement Act of 1913, the period provided for the payment of
assessments in cash shall be 30 days from the date of recordation of the
assessment; and any bonds, thereafter issued, may be dated on the thirty-first
day after the recordation of the assessment and interest may be made to run
from the date.
(1995 Code, § 1.32.030)
Statutory reference:
   Statute authority, see Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 51500 to 51519
CHAPTER 1.36: ELECTIONS
Section
   
1.36.010   [Repealed by Ord. 10-17].
   
1.36.020   Cost of obtaining signatures.
§ 1.36.010   [Repealed by Ord. 10-17].
§ 1.36.020   Cost of obtaining signatures.
   The city shall not be required to pay, nor shall there be approved or paid,
any claims for the cost of obtaining any signatures to any initiative,
referendum or recall petition.
(1995 Code, § 1.36.020)
Statutory reference:
   Statute provisions concerning municipal elections generally, see Cal.
Elections Code §§ 9480 et seq.
CHAPTER 1.40: RETIREMENT SYSTEM
Section
   
1.40.010   Retirement system authorized.
§ 1.40.010   Retirement system authorized.
   (A)   A contract between the Council and the Board of Administration,
California State Employees’ Retirement System is hereby authorized, a copy of
the contract being on file in the office of the Clerk, marked “Exhibit A”, and
by such reference made a part as though herein set out in full. The President
of the City Council is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to execute the
contract for and on behalf of the agency.
(Ord. 775, passed 5-23-1962)
   (B)   The above contract is amended by Ord. 1146, passed 2-18-1975,
effective 3-20-1975. The amending ordinance is incorporated by reference
herein. The above contract is amended by Ord. 1229, passed 8-16-1977, effective
9-15-1977. The amending ordinance is incorporated by reference herein. The
above contract is amended by Ord. 1459, passed 11-6-1984. The amending
ordinance is incorporated by reference herein.
(1995 Code, § 1.40.010)
Statutory reference:
   Statute authority, see Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 45300 to 45345
CHAPTER 1.44: CORPORATE SEAL
Section
   
1.44.010   Adoption of seal—Description.
   
1.44.020   Facsimile.
§ 1.44.010   Adoption of seal—Description.
   The Common Seal of the city is hereby adopted and described as follows: an
artesian well, which shall occupy the central place of the seal, surrounded by
an agricultural scene, in the margin of which shall appear the words: "City of
Tulare, Incorporated April 5, 1888".
(1995 Code, § 1.44.010)
§ 1.44.020   Facsimile.
   A facsimile of the seal shall be reproduced on this page as follows.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0bf1a20f2574f87b1d689bfa9416489a00654b80/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5225.jpg]
(1995 Code, § 1.44.020) (Ord. 10-22, passed 12-7-2010)
CHAPTER 1.48: TAX COLLECTOR
Section
   
1.48.010   Definitions.
   
1.48.020   Transfer of duties.
§ 1.48.010   Definitions.
   The following words and expressions, when used in this chapter, shall, for
the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them as
follows.
   CITY. The City of Tulare, a municipal corporation, situated in the County of
Tulare, State of California.
   COUNTY. The County of Tulare, a political subdivision of the State of
California.
(1995 Code, § 1.48.010)
§ 1.48.020   Transfer of duties.
   The assessment and tax collection duties, and the collection of assessments
levied for municipal improvements, now performed by the Assessor and the Tax
Collector of the city, are hereby transferred to the Assessor and the Tax
Collector of the county for the purpose of assessment and collection of and for
ad valorem property taxes that become a lien after the adoption of this
chapter, and the collection of assessments for municipal improvements becoming
due and payable on and after July 1, 1966, pursuant to the provisions of Cal.
Gov’t Code §§ 51540 through 51562, 51800 and 43072.
(1995 Code, § 1.48.020)
CHAPTER 1.52: PERSONNEL SYSTEM
Section
   
1.52.010   Adoption of personnel system.
   
1.52.020   Personnel officer.
   
1.52.030   Competitive service.
   
1.52.040   Adoption and amendment of rules.
   
1.52.050   Appointments.
   
1.52.060   Probationary period.
   
1.52.070   Status of present employees.
   
1.52.080   Applicability of rules to certain exempt positions.
   
1.52.090   Demotion—Dismissal—Reduction in pay—Suspension.
   
1.52.100   Abolition of position.
   
1.52.110   Improper political activity.
   
1.52.120   Discrimination.
   
1.52.130   Right to contract for special service.
§ 1.52.010 Adoption of personnel system.
   In order to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with
personnel matters; to attract to municipal service the best and most competent
persons available; to assure that appointments and promotions of employees will
be based on merit and fitness; and to provide a reasonable degree of security
for qualified employees, the following personnel system is hereby adopted.
(1995 Code, § 1.52.010)
§ 1.52.020   Personnel officer.
   The City Manager shall be the Personnel Officer. The City Manager may
delegate any of the powers and duties conferred upon him or her as Personnel
Officer under this chapter to any other officer or employee of the city or may
recommend that the powers and duties be performed under contract as provided in
§
1.52.130. The Personnel Officer shall:
   (A)   Administer all the provisions of this chapter and of the personnel
rules not specifically reserved to the City Council or the Personnel Board;
   (B)   Prepare and recommend to the City Council personnel rules and
revisions and amendments to the rules. The City Attorney shall approve the
legality of the rules and amendments prior to their submission to the City
Council;
   (C)   Prepare or cause to be prepared a position classification plan,
including class specifications and revisions of the plan. The plan, and any
revisions thereof, shall become effective upon approval by the City Council;
   (D)   Prepare or cause to be prepared a plan of compensation, and revisions
thereof, covering all classifications in the competitive service. The plan, and
any revisions thereof, shall become effective upon approval by the City
Council; and
   (E)   Provide for the publishing or posting notices of tests for positions
in the competitive service, the receiving of applications therefor; the
conducting and grading of tests, the certification to the appointing power of a
list of all persons eligible for appointment to the appropriate position in the
competitive service.
(1995 Code, § 1.52.020)
§ 1.52.030   Competitive service.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all offices, positions and
employments in the service of the city except:
   (A)   The City Manager;
   (B)   Elective officers;
   (C)   Members of appointive boards, commissions and committees;
   (D)   City Clerk, Administrative Services Director, Development Services
Director, Human Resources Director, Finance Director/Treasurer, Police Chief,
Planning and Building Director, Fire Chief, Public Works Director/City Engineer
and Community Development Director;
   (E)   Persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional,
technical or other services;
   (F)   Volunteer personnel, such as volunteer firefighters;
   (G)   City Attorney;
   (H)   Emergency employees who are hired to meet the immediate requirements
of an emergency condition, such as extraordinary fire, flood or earthquake
which threatens life or property; and
   (I)   Employees, other than those listed elsewhere in this section, who are
employed less than half time, which is hereby defined as employees who are
expected to or work less than 1,040 hours in any one fiscal year.
(1995 Code, § 1.52.030) (Ord. 14-05, passed 10-21-2014; Ord. 98-1818, passed -
-1998)
§ 1.52.040   Adoption and amendment of rules.
   Personnel rules shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council after
notice of the action has been publicly posted at least five days prior to City
Council consideration. Amendments and revisions may be suggested by any
interested party and shall be processed as provided in the personnel rules. The
rules shall establish regulations governing the personnel system, including:
   (A)   Preparation, installation, revision and maintenance of a position plan
covering all positions in the competitive service, including employment
standards and qualifications for each class;
   (B)   Preparation, revision and administration of a plan of compensation
directly correlated with the position classification plan, providing a rate or
range of pay for each class;
   (C)   Public announcement of all tests and acceptance of applications for
employment;
   (D)   Preparation and conduct of tests and the establishment and use of
resulting employment lists containing names of persons eligible for
appointment;
   (E)   Certification and appointment of persons from employment lists and the
making of provisional and emergency appointments;
   (F)   Evaluation of employees during the probationary period;
   (G)   Transfer, promotion, demotion, reinstatement, disciplinary action and
layoff of employees in the competitive service;
   (H)   Separation of employees from the city service;
   (I)   Standardization of hours of work, attendance and leave regulations,
working conditions and the development of employee morale, welfare and
training;
   (J)   The establishment of adequate personnel records; and
   (K)   The establishment of grievance and appeal procedures.
(1995 Code, § 1.52.040)
§ 1.52.050   Appointments.
   Appointments to vacant positions in the competitive service shall be made in
accordance with the personnel rules. Appointments and promotions shall be based
on merit and fitness to be ascertained, so far as practicable, by competitive
examination. Examinations shall be used and conducted to aid in the selection
of qualified employees and shall consist of selection techniques which will
test fairly the qualifications of candidates such as achievement and aptitude
tests, written test, personal interview, performance tests, physical agility
tests, evaluation of daily work performance, work samples or any combinations
of these or other tests. Physical and medical tests may be given as a part of
any examination. In any examination the Personnel Officer may include, in
addition to competitive tests, a qualifying test or tests, and set minimum
standards therefor. Appointments shall be made by the City Manager. When
appointment is to be made to a vacancy in the competitive services, the
Personnel Officer shall transmit, to the appointing power, the names of all
persons on the appropriate certified employment list, in the order in which
they appear on the list. In the absence of appropriate employment lists, a
provisional appointment may be made not to exceed one year by the appointing
authority of a person meeting the minimum training and experience
qualifications for the position. A provisional employee (when not a member of
the competitive service) may be removed at any time without the right of appeal
or hearing. During the period of suspension of an employee or pending final
action on proceedings to review suspension, demotion or discharge of an
employee, the vacancy may be filled by the appointing authority subject to the
provisions of this chapter and the personnel rules.
(1995 Code, § 1.52.050)
§ 1.52.060   Probationary period.
   All regular appointments, including promotional appointments, shall be for a
probationary period of not less than six months. During the probationary
period, the employee may be rejected at any time, without the right of appeal
or hearing. An employee rejected during the probationary period from a position
to which he or she has been promoted shall be reinstated to a position in the
class from which he or she was promoted unless he or she is discharged from the
city service, as provided in this chapter and the personnel rules. An employee
in the competitive service promoted or transferred to a position not included
in the competitive service shall be reinstated to a position in the class from
which he or she was promoted or transferred if action is taken to reject him or
her unless he or she is discharged in the manner provided in this chapter and
the personnel rules for positions in the competitive service.
(1995 Code, § 1.52.060)
§ 1.52.070   Status of present employees.
   Any person holding a position included in the competitive service who, on
the effective date hereof, shall have served continuously in such position, or
in some other position in the competitive service, for a period equal to the
probationary period prescribed in the rules for his or her class, shall assume
regular status in the competitive service in the position held on such
effective date without qualifying test, and shall thereafter be subject in all
respects to the provisions of this chapter and the personnel rules. Any other
person holding positions in the competitive service shall be regarded as
probationers who are serving out the balance of their probationary periods as
prescribed in the rules before obtaining regular status. The probationary
period shall be computed from the date of appointment or employment.
(1995 Code, § 1.52.070)
§ 1.52.080   Applicability of rules to certain exempt positions.
   The provisions of the personnel rules relating to termination of employment,
disciplinary proceedings and grievance proceedings shall not apply to the
incumbents of full-time exempt positions set forth in §
1.52.030 of the city code. Persons serving in such positions shall serve at the
pleasure of their appointing power and may be terminated without cause.
(1995 Code, § 1.52.080)
§ 1.52.090 Demotion—Dismissal—Reduction in pay—Suspension.
   Any appointing power shall have the right, for due cause, to demote,
dismiss, reduce in pay or suspend without pay for 30 calendar days any
permanent employee. Notice of the action must be in writing and served
personally on the employee, except where an emergency situation exists, in
which case the notice shall be served within three working days of the action
taken. The notice shall specify the penalty and contain a statement of the
reason or reasons therefor. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
reductions in pay which are a part of a general plan to reduce salaries and
wages or to eliminate positions.
(1995 Code, § 1.52.090)
§ 1.52.100   Abolition of position.
   Whenever, in the judgment of the City Council, it becomes necessary, the
City Council may abolish any position of employment in the competitive service.
Employees transferred, demoted or laid off because of the abolishment of
positions shall not be subject to written charges, nor shall they have the
right of appeal in such cases. Seniority shall be observed in effecting the
reduction in personnel and the order of lay-off shall be in the reverse order
of total cumulative time served in permanent and probationary status in the
competitive service upon the effective date of the lay-off. Lay-off shall be
made within classes of positions and all provisional employees in the affected
class or classes shall be laid off prior to the lay-off of any probationary or
permanent employee. For the purpose of determining order of lay-off, total
cumulative time shall include time served on military leave of absence. The
names of probationary and permanent employees laid off shall be placed upon re-
employment lists for classes which, in the opinion of the Personnel Officer,
require basically the same qualifications and duties and responsibilities of
those of the class of positions from which lay-off was made. Names of persons
laid off shall be placed upon re-employment lists in order of total cumulative
time served in probationary and permanent status and shall remain on the lists
for a period of one year unless re-employed sooner.
(1995 Code, § 1.52.100)
§ 1.52.110   Improper political activity.
   The political activities of city employees shall conform to pertinent
provisions of state law.
(1995 Code, § 1.52.110)
§ 1.52.120   Discrimination.
   No person in the competitive service, or seeking admission thereto, shall be
employed, promoted or discharged or, in any way, favored or discriminated
against because of political opinions or affiliations or because of race,
color, ancestry, national origin or religious belief.
(1995 Code, § 1.52.120)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Cal. Labor Code §§ 1410 et seq.
§ 1.52.130   Right to contract for special service.
   The City Manager shall consider and make recommendations to the City Council
regarding the extent to which the city should contract for the performance of
technical services in connection with the establishment or operation of the
personnel system. The City Council may contract with any qualified person or
agency for the performance of all or any of the following responsibilities and
duties imposed by this chapter:
   (A)   The preparation of personnel rules and subsequent revisions and
amendments thereof;
   (B)   The preparation of a position classification plan and subsequent
revisions and amendments thereof;
   (C)   The preparation of a plan of compensation and subsequent revisions and
amendments thereof;
   (D)   The preparation, conduct and grading of competitive tests; and
   (E)   Special and technical services of advisory or informational character
on matters relating to personnel administration.
(1995 Code, § 1.52.130)
CHAPTER 1.56: CITY OFFICERS
Section
   
1.56.010   Finance Director.
§ 1.56.010   Finance Director.
   The Finance Director of the City of Tulare shall, in addition to all other
authority and all other duties, have the authority and duties of a Finance
Director/Treasurer for the City of Tulare, and shall be in charge of the
Treasury of the city.
(1995 Code, § 1.56.010)
CHAPTER 1.60: ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS
Section
   
1.60.010   Planning and Building Department.
   
1.60.020   Public Works Department.
   
1.60.030   Water Superintendent.
   
1.60.040   Solid Waste Superintendent.
   
1.60.050   Wastewater Superintendent.
   
1.60.060   Street Superintendent.
   
1.60.070   Public Works Inspector.
   
1.60.080   Finance Department.
   
1.60.090   Water Conservation Coordinator.
   
1.60.100   Parks, Library and Recreation Department.
Editor’s note:
   Prior history: Ord. 1333.
§ 1.60.010   Planning and Building Department.
   In accordance with Cal. Penal Code § 836.5, the Planning and Building
Director, the Senior Planner, the Assistant Planners, the Chief Building
Inspector and the Building Inspectors are hereby authorized to make arrests
without warrants, and issue citations, for the violation of the following
portions of this code:
   (A)   Title 4 (commencing with §
4.04.010); and
   (B)   Title 10 (commencing with §
10.04.010).
(1995 Code, § 1.60.010)
§ 1.60.020   Public Works Department.
   In accordance with Cal. Penal Code § 836.5, the Director of Public Works/
City Engineer, the Assistant Director of Public Works and the Assistant City
Engineer are hereby authorized to make arrests without warrants, and issue
citations, for the violation of the following portions of this code:
   (A)   
Chapter 7.08 (commencing with §
7.08.010) and Chapters
7.16 through
7.20 (commencing with §
7.16.010) of Title 7;
   (B)   Chapters
8.08 through
8.16 (commencing with §
8.08.010) of Title 8; and
   (C)   
Chapter 7.32 (commencing with §
7.32.010) of Title 7.
(1995 Code, § 1.60.020)
§ 1.60.030   Water Superintendent.
   In accordance with Cal. Penal Code § 836.5, the Water Superintendent is
hereby authorized to make arrests without warrants, and issue citations, for
the violation of the following portions of this code:
   (A)   
Chapter 7.08 (commencing with §
7.08.010) of Title 7; and
   (B)   
Chapter 7.32 (commencing with §
7.32.010) of Title 7.
(1995 Code, § 1.60.030)
§ 1.60.040   Solid Waste Superintendent.
   In accordance with Cal. Penal Code § 836.5, the Solid Waste Superintendent
is hereby authorized to make arrests without warrants, and issue citations for
the violation of
Chapter 7.16 (commencing with §
7.16.010) of Title 7 of this code.
(1995 Code, § 1.60.040)
§ 1.60.050   Wastewater Superintendent.
   In accordance with Cal. Penal Code § 836.5, the Wastewater Superintendent is
hereby authorized to make arrests without warrants, and issue citations, for
the violation of
Chapter 7.20 (commencing with §
7.20.010) of Title 7 of this code.
(1995 Code, § 1.60.050)
§ 1.60.060   Street Superintendent.
   In accordance with Cal. Penal Code § 836.5, the Street Superintendent is
hereby authorized to make arrests without warrants, and issue citations for the
violation of Chapters
8.08 through
8.16 (commencing with §
8.08.010) of Title 8 of this code.
(1995 Code, § 1.60.060)
§ 1.60.070   Public Works Inspector.
   In accordance with Cal. Penal Code § 836.5, the Public Works Inspector is
hereby authorized to make arrests without warrants, and issue citations, for
the violation of the following portions of this code:
   (A)   
Chapter 7.08 (commencing with §
7.08.010) and
Chapter 7.20 (commencing with §
7.20.010) of Title 7; and
   (B)   Chapters
8.08 through
8.16 (commencing with §
8.08.010) of Title 8.
(1995 Code, § 1.60.070)
§ 1.60.080   Finance Department.
   In accordance with Cal. Penal Code § 836.5, the Finance Director, City Clerk
and the Finance Field and Revenue Officer are hereby authorized to make arrests
without warrants, and issue citations, for the violation of the provisions of
Chapter 5.04 (commencing with §
5.04.010) of Title 5 of this code.
(1995 Code, § 1.60.080)
§ 1.60.090   Water Conservation Coordinator.
   In accordance with Cal. Penal Code § 836.5, the Water Conservation
Coordinator is hereby authorized to make arrests without warrants, and issue
citations, for the violation of the following provisions of this code:
   (A)   
Chapter 7.32 (commencing with §
7.32.010) of Title 7.
(1995 Code, § 1.60.090)
§ 1.60.100 Parks, Library and Recreation Department.
   In accordance with Cal. Penal Code § 836.5, the Community Development
Director, the Parks and Landscape Services Superintendent, the Parks
Supervisor, the Parks Services Specialist and the Park Ranger and all other
employees of the Parks, Library and Recreation Department so designated by the
Director, are hereby authorized to make arrests without warrants, and issue
citations, for violations of
Chapters 6.44,
6.52,
8.32 and
8.36 of the city code, as set chapters pertain and are applicable to the
operations and responsibilities of the Parks, Library and Recreation
Department.
(1995 Code, § 1.60.100) (Ord. 14-05, passed 10-21-2014; Ord. 03-1915, passed -
-; Ord. 01-1885, passed - -)
CHAPTER 1.61: ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
Section
   
1.61.010   Legislative findings and statement of purpose.
   
1.61.020   Definitions.
   
1.61.030   Authority.
   
1.61.040   Violations, penalties and enforcement.
   
1.61.050   Service procedures.
   
1.61.060   Contents of notice.
   
1.61.070   Satisfaction of administrative citation.
   
1.61.080   Appeal of administrative citation.
   
1.61.085    Waiver of deposit.
   
1.61.090   Hearing Officer.
   
1.61.100   Hearing procedure.
   
1.61.110   Hearing Officer’s decision.
   
1.61.120   Failure to pay fines.
   
1.61.130   Right to judicial review.
   
1.61.140   Notices.
§ 1.61.010   Legislative findings and statement of purpose.
   (A)   The City Council hereby finds that there is a need for an alternative
method of enforcement for minor violations of the Tulare Municipal Code or
state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of the
Tulare Municipal Code. The City Council further finds that an appropriate
method of enforcement for minor violations is an Administrative Citation
Program, as authorized by Cal. Gov’t Code § 53069.4.
   (B)   The procedures established in this chapter shall be in addition to
criminal, civil or any other legal remedy established by law, which may be
pursued to address violations of the Tulare Municipal Code and state codes
specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of the Tulare
Municipal Code.
   (C)   The City Council hereby finds and determines that enforcement of the
Tulare Municipal Code, other ordinances adopted by the city, conditions on
entitlements and terms and conditions of city agreements are matters of local
concern and serve important public purposes. Consistent with its powers as a
Charter City, the City of Tulare adopts this Administrative Citation Program
provision in order to achieve the following goals, and:
      (1)   To protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of
the City of Tulare;
      (2)   To gain compliance with the Tulare Municipal Code and state codes
specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of the Tulare
Municipal Code in a timely and efficient manner;
      (3)   To provide a method to hold parties responsible when they fail or
refuse to comply with the provisions of the Tulare Municipal Code and state
codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of the
Tulare Municipal Code;
      (4)   To minimize the expense and delay where the sole remedy is to
pursue responsible parties in the civil or criminal justice system; and
      (5)   To provide for an administrative process to appeal the imposition
of administrative citations and fines.
   (D)   (1)   The purpose of this chapter is to enable the city, acting as a
charter city pursuant to Article XI, §§ 5 and 7 of the state’s Constitution, to
impose and collect civil administrative fines in conjunction with the
enforcement of provisions of the Tulare Municipal Code or state codes
specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of the Tulare
Municipal Code. Notwithstanding the provisions herein, the city has and shall
continue to employ the philosophy of voluntary compliance when seeking
compliance with the Tulare Municipal Code and state codes specifically adopted
by reference in the applicable chapters of the Tulare Municipal Code.
      (2)   Prior to the implementation of the enforcement policies and
penalties stated herein, voluntary compliance approaches, when practical,
should first be used in order to educate city property owners and businesses
concerning the requirements of the Tulare Municipal Code or state codes
specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of the Tulare
Municipal Code, and the corrective action necessary to correct a violation of
the Tulare Municipal Code and state codes specifically adopted by reference in
the applicable chapters of the Tulare Municipal Code.
   (E)   Use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the city.
(1995 Code, § 1.61.005) (Ord. 04-1953, passed - -2004)
§ 1.61.020   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any officer or employee with the authority to enforce
the Tulare Municipal Code and state codes specifically adopted by reference in
the applicable chapters of the Tulare Municipal Code as provided in Chapters
1.60,
3.04,
3.24 and
6.16.
   HEARING OFFICER. Any person appointed by the City Manager to preside over
the administrative hearings provided for in §
1.61.080.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON. Any individual or entities who are the registered owner
or occupant of real property, owner or authorized agent of any business,
company or entity, or the parent or the legal guardian of any person under the
age of 18 years, who causes or maintains a violation of the Tulare Municipal
Code or state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable
chapters of the Tulare Municipal Code.
(1995 Code, § 1.61.010) (Ord. 04-1953, passed - -2004)
§ 1.61.030   Authority.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of the Tulare Municipal Code or
state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of the
Tulare Municipal Code may be issued an administrative citation by an
Enforcement Officer as provided in this chapter. A violation of this code
includes, but is not limited to all violations of the Tulare Municipal Code and
applicable state codes, ordinances or regulations adopted by the City Council,
failing to comply with any condition imposed by any entitlement, permit,
agreement or environmental document issued or approved under the provisions of
this code.
   (B)   Each and every day a violation exists may constitute a separate and
distinct offense.
   (C)   A civil fine shall be assessed by means of an administrative citation
issued by the Enforcement Officer and shall be payable directly to the City of
Tulare.
(1995 Code, § 1.61.020) (Ord. 04-1953, passed - -2004)
§ 1.61.040   Violations, penalties and enforcement.
   The City Council of the City of Tulare intends to secure compliance with the
provisions of the Tulare Municipal Code and state codes specifically adopted by
reference in the applicable chapters of the Tulare Municipal Code. To the
extent that such compliance may be achieved by less drastic methods of
enforcement the following alternate, separate and distinct methods may be
utilized. Each method set forth herein is intended to be mutually exclusive and
does not prevent concurrent or consecutive methods being used to achieve
compliance against continuing violations. Each and every day any such
violations exist constitutes a separate offense. Notwithstanding any other
provision of the Tulare Municipal Code and state codes specifically adopted by
reference in the applicable chapters of the Tulare Municipal Code, each
violation of the provisions of this code may be enforced alternatively as
follows:
   (A)   Infraction. Violations of any provision or failing to comply with any
mandatory requirement is punishable as an infraction unless the applicable
chapter specifically states otherwise. Written citations for infractions may be
issued by police officers or non-safety employees designated by Tulare
Municipal Code Chapters
1.60.
3.04.
3.24 and
6.16. Fines shall be assessed in the amounts specified as follows:
      (1)   A fine not exceeding $100 for a first violation;
      (2)   A fine not exceeding $200 for a second violation of the same
ordinance within 12 months; and
      (3)   A fine not exceeding $500 for each additional violation of the same
ordinance within 12 months.
   (B)   Misdemeanor. A violation is punishable as a misdemeanor if the
applicable chapter so states, but the City Attorney may prosecute as an
infraction with concurrence of the court. Written citations for misdemeanors
may be issued by police officers or by non-safety employees designated by
Tulare Municipal Code Chapters
1.60,
3.04,
3.24 and
6.16. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of the Tulare
Municipal Code and state codes specifically adopted by reference in the
applicable chapters of the Tulare Municipal Code, shall be punished by a fine
not exceeding $1,000 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
   (C)   Civil action. The City Attorney, or an attorney hired for such
purposes by and at the request of the City Council, may institute an action in
any court of competent jurisdiction to restrain, enjoin or abate the condition
(s) found to be in violation of the provisions of the Tulare Municipal Code or
state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of the
Tulare Municipal Code, as provided by law.
   (D)   Administrative citation. Upon a finding by the city official vested
with the authority to enforce the various provisions of the Tulare Municipal
Code or state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable
chapters of the Tulare Municipal Code, that a violation exists, he or she may
issue an administrative citation under the provisions of this chapter.
   (E)   Administrative fine schedule. All administrative fines referenced
throughout the Tulare Municipal Code shall be as set forth in the
Administrative Fine Schedule as established and adopted by resolution of the
City Council of the City of Tulare. If any ordinance establishes an
administrative fee amount which is in conflict with the Administrative Fine
Schedule the amount as defined in the schedule will be deemed the correct
amount.
(1995 Code, § 1.61.030) (Ord. 10-16, passed 5-4-2010; Ord. 10-15, passed 4-20-
2010; Ord. 04-1953, passed --2004)
§ 1.61.050   Service procedures.
   (A)   An administrative citation on a form approved by the City Manager
shall be issued to the responsible person by an Enforcement Officer for
violations of the Tulare Municipal Code or state codes specifically adopted by
reference in the applicable chapters of the Tulare Municipal Code, in the
following manner:
      (1)   Personal service. In any case where an administrative citation is
issued:
         (a)   The Enforcement Officer shall attempt to locate and personally
serve the responsible person and obtain the signature of the responsible person
on the administrative citation.
         (b)   If the responsible person served refuses or fails to sign the
administrative citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the
validity of the administrative citation or of subsequent proceedings.
      (2)   Service of citation by mail. If the Enforcement Officer is unable
to locate the responsible person, the administrative citation shall be mailed
to the responsible person by certified mail, postage prepaid with a requested
return receipt. Simultaneously, the citation may be sent by first class mail.
If the citation is sent by certified mail and returned unsigned, then service
shall be deemed effective pursuant to first class mail, provided the citation
sent by first class mail is not returned.
      (3)   Service by citation by posting notice. If the Enforcement Officer
does not succeed in serving the responsible person personally, or of certified
mail or regular mail, the Enforcement Officer shall post the administrative
citation on any real property within the city where the city has knowledge that
the responsible person has a legal interest, and the posting shall be deemed
effective service.
(1995 Code, § 1.61.040) (Ord. 04-1953, passed - -2004)
§ 1.61.060   Contents of notice.
   Each administrative citation shall contain the following information:
   (A)   Date, approximate time and address or definite description of the
location where the violation(s) was observed;
   (B)   The code sections or conditions violated and a description of the
violation(s);
   (C)   An order to the responsible person to correct the violations within
the time specified and an explanation of the consequences of failure to correct
the violation(s);
   (D)   The amount of the fine for the violation(s);
   (E)   An explanation of how the fine shall be paid and the time period by
which it shall be paid;
   (F)   Identification of rights of appeal, including the time within which
the citation may be contested and the place to obtain a request for hearing
form to contest the administrative citation;
   (G)   The name and signature of the Enforcement Officer; and
   (H)   If possible, the signature of the responsible person.
(1995 Code, § 1.61.050) (Ord. 04-1953, passed - -2004)
§ 1.61.070   Satisfaction of administrative citation.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a citation, the responsible person shall:
      (1)   Pay the fine to the city within 15 working days from the issuance
date of the administrative citation. All fines assessed shall be payable to the
City of Tulare. Payment of a fine shall not excuse or discharge the failure to
correct the violation(s) nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the
city; and
      (2)   Remedy the violation(s), if the responsible person fails to correct
the violation(s), subsequent administrative citations may be issued for the
same violation(s).
   (B)   The amount of the fine for failure to correct the violation shall
increase at a rate specified in this chapter or by ordinance.
(1995 Code, § 1.61.060) (Ord. 04-1953, passed - -2004)
§ 1.61.080   Appeal of administrative citation.
   Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest that there was a
violation of the Tulare Municipal Code or state codes specifically adopted by
reference in the applicable chapters of the Tulare Municipal Code or that he or
she is the responsible person by completing a request for hearing form and
returning it to the city within 15 working days from the issuance date of the
administration citation, together with an advanced deposit (full amount) of the
fine. Any administrative citation fine, which has been deposited, shall be
refunded if it is determined, after a hearing, that the person charged in the
administrative citation was not the responsible person for the violation(s) or
that there was no violation(s) as charged in the administrative citation.
(1995 Code, § 1.61.070) (Ord. 04-1953, passed - -2004)
§ 1.61.085 Waiver of deposit.
   Requirements to pay the advance deposit (full amount of the fine) may be
waived in part or in total by the City Manager or his or her designee upon
showing of undue financial hardship by the appellant.
(Ord. 14-04, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 1.61.090   Hearing Officer.
   The Tulare City Manager shall designate the Hearing Officer for the
administrative citation hearing. The Hearing Officer shall not be a Tulare city
employee. The employment, performance evaluation, compensation and benefits of
the Hearing Officer, if any, shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned
upon the amount of administrative citation fines upheld by the Hearing Officer.
(1995 Code, § 1.61.080) (Ord. 04-1953, passed - -2004)
§ 1.61.100   Hearing procedure.
   (A)   No hearing to contest an administrative citation before a Hearing
Officer shall be held unless and until a request for hearing form has been
completed and submitted and the fine has been deposited in advance or waived
under provisions of §
1.61.085 .
   (B)   A hearing before the Hearing Officer shall be set for a date that is
not less than 15 working days and not more than 60 working days from the date
that the request for hearing is filed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. The person requesting the hearing shall be notified of the time and
place set for the hearing at least ten working days prior to the date of the
hearing.
   (C)   The Enforcement Hearing Officer shall only consider evidence that is
relevant to whether the violation(s) occurred and whether the responsible
person has caused or maintained the violation(s) of the Tulare Municipal Code
or state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of
the Tulare Municipal Code, on the date(s) specified in the administrative
citation.
   (D)   The responsible person contesting the administrative citation shall be
given the opportunity to testify and present witnesses and evidence concerning
the administrative citation.
   (E)   The failure of any recipient of an administrative citation to appear
at the administrative citation hearing shall constitute a forfeiture of the
fine and a failure to exhaust their administrative remedies.
   (F)   The administrative citation and any additional documents submitted by
the Enforcement Officer shall constitute prima facia evidence of the respective
facts contained in those documents.
   (G)   If the Enforcement Officer submits an additional written report
concerning the administrative citation to the hearing officer for consideration
at the hearing, then a copy of this report also shall be served by mail on the
person requesting the hearing at least five working days prior to the date of
the hearing. At least ten working days prior to the hearing, the recipient of
an administrative citation shall be provided with copies of the citations,
reports and other documents submitted or relied upon by the Enforcement
Officer. No other discovery is permitted. Formal rules of evidence shall not
apply.
   (H)   The Hearing Officer may continue the hearing and request additional
information from the Enforcement Officer or the recipient of the administrative
citation prior to issuing a written decision.
(1995 Code, § 1.61.090) (Ord. 14-04, passed 10-21-2014; Ord. 04-1953, passed -
-2004)
§ 1.61.110   Hearing Officer’s decision.
   (A)   After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the
hearing, the Hearing Officer shall issue a written decision within ten working
days of the close of the hearing to uphold or deny the administrative citation
and shall list in the decision the reasons for that decision. The decision of
the Hearing Officer shall be final, subject to judicial review.
   (B)   If the Hearing Officer determines that the administrative citation
should be upheld then the fine amount on deposit with the city shall be
retained by the city.
   (C)   If the Hearing Officer determines that the administrative citation
should be dismissed, the City shall refund the amount of the deposit within ten
working days of the date of its receipt of the decision.
   (D)   The recipient of the administrative citation shall be served with a
copy of the hearing officer’s written decision in the manner prescribed above.
(1995 Code, § 1.61.100) (Ord. 04-1953, passed - -2004)
§ 1.61.120   Failure to pay fines.
   The failure of any person to pay the civil fines assessed by an
administrative citation within the time specified on the citation may result in
the matter being referred to the City of Tulare–Finance, to file a claim with
the Small Claims Court. Alternatively, the city may pursue any other legal
remedy to collect the civil fines. The city may also recover all of its
collections costs.
(1995 Code, § 1.61.110) (Ord. 04-1953, passed - -2004)
§ 1.61.130   Right to judicial review.
   Any person aggrieved by a decision of a Hearing Officer on an administrative
citation may obtain review of the administrative decision by filing a petition
for review with the Tulare County Municipal Court in accordance with the
timelines and provisions as set forth in Cal. Gov’t Code § 53069.4.
(1995 Code, § 1.61.120) (Ord. 04-1953, passed - -2004)
§ 1.61.140   Notices.
   (A)   The administration citation and all notices to be given by this
chapter shall be served on the responsible person in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Failure to receive any notice specified in this chapter does not
affect the validity of proceedings conducted here under.
(1995 Code, § 1.61.130) (Ord. 04-1953, passed - -2004)
CHAPTER 1.64: FEE AND SERVICE CHARGE; REVENUE/COST COMPARISON SYSTEM
Section
   
1.64.010    Findings and intent.
   
1.64.020   Delegation of authority and direction to Manager.
   
1.64.030   “Costs reasonably borne” defined.
   
1.64.040   Master fee schedule.
   
1.64.050   Statutory public meeting.
   
1.64.060   Provision of data.
   
1.64.070   Appeal to City Council.
§ 1.64.010   Findings and intent.
   (A)   Pursuant to Article XIIIB of the California Constitution, it is the
intent of the City Council to require the ascertainment and recovery of costs
reasonably borne from fees, charges and regulatory license fees levied therefor
in providing the regulation, products or services hereinafter enumerated in
this chapter.
   (B)   The fee and service charge revenue/cost comparison system set for in
this chapter provides a mechanism for ensuring that fees adopted by the city
for services rendered do not exceed the reasonable estimated cost for providing
the services for which the fees are charged.
   (C)   The adoption of the chapter is exempt from the California Environment
Quality Act (Cal. Public Resources Code §§ 2100 et seq.), because it approves
and sets forth a procedure for determining fees for the purpose of meeting the
operating expenses of city departments, as set forth in Cal. Public Resources
Code § 21080(b)(8)(1).
(1995 Code, § 1.64.010)
§ 1.64.020 Delegation of authority and direction to Manager.
   (A)   The City Manager is hereby delegated the authority and directed to
provide documents to the City Council to implement its herein enumerated policy
to adjust fees and charges to recover the percentage of costs reasonably borne
as established hereby, in providing the regulation, product or service
enumerated in this chapter in the percentage of cost reasonably borne and on
the schedule of rate review and revision, as hereinafter established in this
chapter.
   (B)   The City Manager is hereby delegated the authority to issue executive
orders defining terms, setting out administrative, fee collection and financial
procedures, definitions and establishing effective dates of all fees set by the
City Council by resolution. All executive orders shall be originated and signed
by the affected department head, shall be signed by the Finance Director
certifying that the financial requirements of this chapter are complied with
and shall be signed by the City Manager connoting the effective date of the
executive order and new or revised rate structure, procedure or definition.
   (C)   “Costs reasonably borne” shall be as defined in §
1.64.030. In adjusting fees and charges, the City Manager shall act in an
administrative and ministerial capacity and shall consider only the standards
and criteria established by this chapter and the procedures set hereby and by
applicable state law. All executive orders issued hereunder shall comply in all
respects with this chapter, and the several schedules of fees and rates as set
by the City Council by resolution.
(1995 Code, § 1.64.020)
§ 1.64.030   “Costs reasonably borne” defined.
   COSTS REASONABLY BORNE, as used and ordered to be applied in this chapter,
are to consist of the following elements:
   (A)   All applicable direct costs including, but not limited to salaries,
wages, overtime, employee fringe benefits, services and supplies, maintenance
and operation expenses, contracted services, special supplies and any other
direct expense incurred;
   (B)   All applicable indirect costs including, but not restricted to,
building maintenance and operations, equipment maintenance and operations,
communications expenses, computer costs, printing and reproduction, vehicle
expenses, insurance, debt service and like expenses when distributed on an
accounted and documented rational proration system;
   (C)   Fixed asset recovery expenses, consisting of depreciation of fixes
assets, and additional fixed asset expense recovery charges calculated on the
current estimated cost of replacement, divided by the approximate life
expectancy of the fixed asset. A further additional charge to make up the
difference between book value depreciation not previously recovered and
reserved in cash and the full cost of replacement, also shall be calculated and
considered a copy so as to recover the unrecovered costs between book value and
cost of replacement over the remaining life of the asset;
   (D)   General overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and charging
the expenses of the City Council, City Attorney, City Administration, City
Clerk, Finance Director/Treasurer, Economic Development, Finance Department,
Personnel Office and City Promotion and all other staff and support service
provided to the entire city organization. Overhead shall be prorated between
tax-financed services and fee-financed services on the basis of the percentage
so that each of taxes and fees and charges shall proportionately defray the
overhead costs;
   (E)   Departmental overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and
charging the cost of each department head and his or her supporting expenses as
enumerated in divisions (A), (B), (C) and (F) of this section; and
   (F)   Debt service cost, consisting of repayment of principal, payment of
interest and trustee fees and administrative expenses for all applicable bond,
certificate, note or securities issues or loans of whatever nature or kind. Any
required coverage factors or required or established reserves beyond basic debt
service costs also shall be considered a cost if required by covenant within
the securities ordinance, resolution, indenture or general all applicable to
the city.
(1995 Code, § 1.64.030)
§ 1.64.040   Schedule of fees and service charges.
   (A)   All fees and service charges are listed on the master fee schedule.
   (B)   The City Manager, Finance Director and each city department head,
under the direction of the City Manager, shall review annually the fees and
service charges listed on the master fee schedule, and provide an adjusted
master fee schedule, by resolution, to the City Council for its consideration
so as to recover the listed percentage of cost reasonably borne necessary to
provide the listed regulation, product or service. In the alternative, the
Council may elect, by resolution, to automatically adjust fees by percentage
equal to the Consumer Price Index as published by the Department of Labor for
the preceding 12 months. Any such automatic adjustments shall not apply to fees
which are based on variable factors which themselves result in an automatic
adjustment or those which are specifically indicated otherwise.
   (C)   (1)   For all fees and charges for services and programs provided by
the Recreation Parks Divisions of the City of Tulare, the City Council does
hereby designate the Parks and Community Services Commission as the body which
shall establish a list of all such fees and charges. The Recreation, Parks and
Library Director shall review the fees and charges as frequently as deemed
necessary and provide an adjusted fee or charge schedule to the Parks and
Community Services Commission for its consideration and adoption, so as to
recover the established percentage of cost reasonably borne necessary to
provide the listed service or program. With regard to Parks and Recreation fees
and charges, whenever in this chapter there is a reference to the City Council,
it shall mean the Parks and Community Services Commission; and whenever there
is a reference to the City Manager it shall mean the Recreation, Parks and
Library Director.
      (2)   For all fees and charges for services and programs provided by the
Library Department of the City of Tulare, the City Council does hereby
designate the Library Board as the body which shall establish a list of all
such fees and charges. The Library Director shall review the fees and charges
as frequently as deemed necessary and provide an adjusted fee or charge
schedule to the Library Board for its consideration and adoption, so as to
recover the established percentage of cost reasonably borne necessary to
provide the listed service or program. With regard to Library fees and charges,
whenever in this chapter there is a reference to the City Council, it shall
mean the Library Board; and whenever there is a reverence to the City Manager
it shall mean the Library Director.
   (D)   All fees and charges set pursuant to this chapter and section shall
take effect 60 days after the City Council adopts a resolution establishing the
fee amount.
   (E)   The schedule of frequency of rate adjustments may be varied by the
City Manager to adjust revenues sufficient to meet debt service coverage
requirements of any bond, certificate or ordinance, resolution, indenture,
contract or action under which securities have been issued by the city which
contain any coverage factor requirement.
   (F)   The City Manager may vary the annually scheduled review if, in the
judgment of the City Manager and a directly affected and requesting department
head, gross inequity would be perpetrated by not revising the rate schedule.
Any such rate revision which deviates from the annually scheduled review shall
be reported to the City Council at its next succeeding meeting.
   (G)   The City Manager is further delegated the authority to round off,
either upward or downward as he or she deems appropriate, to the nearest
dollar, five or ten dollars, as may be appropriate in light of the magnitude of
the fee, the actual fee or service charge to be imposed, after applying the
appropriate percentage rate, for the sale of ease of administration, accounting
and financial operations.
(1995 Code, § 1.64.040) (Ord. 2020-05, passed 6-2-2020; Ord. 10-04, passed 2-
16-2010; Ord. 06-2029, passed - -2006; Ord. 03-1925, passed - -2003; Ord. 03-
1915, passed - -2003; Ord. 01-1887, passed - -2001; Ord. 01-1873, passed - -
2001;)
§ 1.64.050   Statutory public meeting.
   Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 54992, 54994.1 and 54994.2, the City Clerk
shall cause notice to be provided as set out in Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 54992,
54994.1 and 6062a, and the City Council periodically, at least annually, shall
receive at a regularly scheduled meeting oral and written presentations
concerning fees and charges proposed to be increased or added. The notice, oral
and written presentation and public meeting shall be provided prior to the City
Council taking any action on any new or increased fees or charges. At least one
such public hearing shall be held annually, in conjunction with the city annual
budget process and hearing.
(1995 Code, § 1.64.050)
§ 1.64.060   Provision of data.
   Pursuant to the Cal. Gov’t Code, at least ten days prior to the required
public hearing set out herein, the City Manager shall make available to the
public appropriate data indicating the cost, or estimated cost required to
support the fees and charges for which changes are proposed to be made or fees
or charges imposed. The City Manager also shall provide a summary of the
present fee and charge schedules and those proposed at the annual public
hearing. A general explanation of the changes also shall be published per the
requirements of Cal. Gov’t Code § 6062a.
(1995 Code, § 1.64.060)
§ 1.64.070   Appeal to City Council.
   (A)   Any person who feels that any fee or charge determined and set is in
excess of the percentage of costs reasonably borne to be recovered as set out
in this chapter, or that the fee or charge has been reviewed prior to or has
not been reviewed within the review schedule as set out herein, may appeal in
writing to the City Council.
   (B)   No fee or charge for which an appeal has been filed shall take effect
until heard by the City Council. The appeal shall be placed on the agenda of
the next ensuing Council meeting after receipt of the appeal and heard at the
next ensuing Council meeting. The appealed fee or charge shall take effect
immediately upon hearing by the City Council unless ordered otherwise by the
City Council by ordinance amending this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 1.64.070)
CHAPTER 1.68: [REPEALED BY ORD. 18-04]
CHAPTER 1.70: PREVAILING WAGES
Section
   
1.70.010   Payment of prevailing wages for public works projects.
   
1.70.020   Exceptions.
§ 1.70.010   Payment of prevailing wages for public works projects.
   Except as provided in §
1.70.020, the city shall require the payment of prevailing wages for all of its
public works projects to the same extent and in the same manner such wages
would be required to be paid, if the city was subject to the requirements
imposed upon contracts entered into pursuant to the provisions of Article 2 of
Chapter 1, Part 7, Division 2 of the California Labor Code, as those provisions
may be amended from time to time. Any notice inviting bids for such public
works projects shall include notifications of the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 18-08, passed 10-16-2018)
§ 1.70.020   Exceptions.
   In accordance with California Labor Code § 1782, the city’s prevailing wage
requirement does not apply to the following:
   (A)   A contract of $25,000 or less when the contract is for construction
work; or
   (B)   A contract of $15,000 or less when the contract is for alteration,
demolition, repair, or maintenance work.
(Ord. 18-08, passed 10-16-2018)
TITLE 2: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Chapter
   
2.04.   PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
   
2.08.   [REPEALED BY ORD. 14-05]
   
2.12.   POLICE DEPARTMENT CITIZEN COMPLAINT REVIEW BOARD
   
2.16.   [REPEALED BY ORD. 10-06]
CHAPTER 2.04: PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
Section
   
2.04.010   Establishment.
   
2.04.020   Definitions.
   
2.04.030   Appointments and qualifications.
   
2.04.040   Terms.
   
2.04.050   Officers—Meetings—Records.
   
2.04.060   Forfeiture of office.
   
2.04.070   General powers and duties of the Commission.
§ 2.04.010   Establishment.
   The Parks and Recreation Commission, heretofore established, is
reestablished as modified. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall serve in
an advisory capacity to the City Council. It shall consist of seven members who
shall serve without compensation.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.010) (Ord. 2020-01, passed 1-21-2020; Ord. 95-1773, passed
- -1995)
§ 2.04.020   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.
   COMMISSION. The Parks and Recreation Commission.
   DEPARTMENT. The Community Services Department.
   DIRECTOR. The Community Services Director.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.020) (Ord. 2020-01, passed 1-21-2020; Ord. 14-05, passed
10-21-2014; Ord. 03-1915, passed - -2003; Ord. 95-1773, passed - -1995)
§ 2.04.030   Appointments and qualifications.
   Each member of the City Council shall select and appoint one member to the
Commission, subject to approval of the appointment by the remainder of the
Council. The remaining two members shall be selected at large by the City
Council as a whole. Each appointee shall:
   (A)   Maintain their principal place of residence within the city limits or
sphere of influence of the City of Tulare at the time of their appointment and
throughout the term of service; and
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other law, a person, regardless of citizenship or
immigration status, is eligible to hold an appointed civil office if the person
is 18 years of age and a resident of the state. Officials of the city shall not
be eligible to appointment as Commissioners, except as may be provided in this
chapter for ex-officio officers.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.030) (Ord. 2022-13, passed 10-4-2022; Ord. 2020-01, passed
1-21-2020; Ord. 95-1773, passed - -1995)
§ 2.04.040   Terms.
   The terms of office of all members of the Commission shall be four years
and/or until his or her successor shall be appointed and qualified. Should a
vacancy occur in the Commission for any reason, the vacancy shall be filled for
the unexpired term by an appointment by the City Council. Whenever, in the
discretion of the City Council, the best of interests of the city shall be
served thereby, any member of the Commission may be removed from office by a
majority vote of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.040) (Ord. 2020-01, passed 1-21-2020; Ord. 95-1773, passed
- -1995)
§ 2.04.050   Officers—Meetings—Records.
   The Commission shall hold meetings regularly and shall designate the time
and place thereof. The Director, or his or her designee, shall be the Secretary
to the Commission, who shall keep a record of its proceedings and transactions.
This record shall be a public record. All meetings of the Commission shall be
open to the public pursuant to the rules adopted by the Commission. A majority
of Commissioners shall constitute a quorum. The Parks and Recreation
Commission, in July of each year, shall elect a chairperson and vice-
chairperson from members of the Commission for a term of one year.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.050) (Ord. 2020-01, passed 1-21-2020; Ord. 95-1773, passed
- -1995)
§ 2.04.060   Forfeiture of office.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of the chapter, any Parks and Recreation
Commissioner who absents himself or herself for any reason other than illness
or family emergency from any three consecutive regular meetings of the
Commission or who is absent from a total of 50% or more of all meetings of the
Commission in any consecutive 12-month period shall thereby automatically
forfeit his or her position as a member of the Commission, unless the City
Council shall find and determine that there was good cause to excuse the
absences.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.060) (Ord. 2020-01, passed 1-21-2020; Ord. 95-1773, passed
- -1995)
§ 2.04.070   General powers and duties of the Commission.
   (A)   Advise the City Council regarding policies for the acquisition,
development, maintenance and improvement of park facilities and make
recommendations as appropriate;
   (B)   Formulate and recommend to the City Council, fee schedules, policies,
rules and regulations for park sites and other recreation facilities;
   (C)   Formulate and recommend to the City Council a recreation and park
program for the inhabitants of the city which emphasizes general educational
and recreational objectives for children and adults of the city; promotes and
stimulates public interest in parks and recreation programs; and which
encourages to the fullest extent possible, the cooperation of the local school
authorities and other public and/or private agencies or interests;
   (D)   Advise the City Council regarding the acceptance or rejection of
offers of donations of money, personal and/or real property to the city for
recreation, park purposes and use and make recommendations where appropriate;
   (E)   Advise the City Council regarding the Community Services Department
budgets and make recommendations as appropriate;
   (F)   Serve in an advisory capacity to the City Council and the Director
with regard to all questions concerning the growth, maintenance or location of
trees within the city;
   (G)   Recommend programs, policies and ordinances to implement and support
the city's street tree plan, and encourage and promote the planting and proper
husbandry of trees throughout the city;
   (H)   Establish educational and informational programs; and
   (I)   Perform other duties relating to community services and park matters
as may be dictated from time to time by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.070) (Ord. 2020-01, passed 1-21-2020; Ord. 14-05, passed
10-21-2014; Ord. 95-1773, passed - -1995)
CHAPTER 2.08: [REPEALED BY ORD. 14-05]
CHAPTER 2.12: POLICE DEPARTMENT CITIZEN COMPLAINT REVIEW BOARD
Section
   
2.12.010   Purposes and objectives.
   
2.12.020   Scope of authority of the Board.
   
2.12.030   Filing of citizen complaints.
   
2.12.040   Investigation of complaints.
   
2.12.050   Report to Board.
   
2.12.060   Preliminary review by Board.
   
2.12.070   In-depth review by Board.
   
2.12.080   Conduct of in-depth review.
   
2.12.090   Action by the Board.
   
2.12.100   Report to Police Chief.
   
2.12.110   Notice to complainant.
   
2.12.120   Confidentiality of material, information and deliberation.
   
2.12.130   Penalty for wilful and/or intentional disclosure of information.
   
2.12.140   Action by the Chief of Police.
   
2.12.150   Annual report.
   
2.12.160   Selection of members of the Board.
   
2.12.170   Terms of office of Board members.
   
2.12.180   Qualifications of Board members.
   
2.12.190   Severability.
§ 2.12.010   Purposes and objectives.
   It is hereby declared that, in order to promote the best interest of the
city and its citizens, there is a need to establish and create a board
consisting of community residents, to review citizen complaints filed against
Police Department personnel and the investigation thereof by the Police
Department. The Board shall be charged with the responsibility to review the
Police Department’s investigation of the citizen complaints and provide its
independent review to the Chief of Police. The Board is not intended to, nor
shall it be invested with authority to, review disciplinary action if any,
proposed and/or imposed upon police personnel as a result of the investigation
of the citizen complaints. The creation of this Board for these purposes is
intended to ensure continued and ongoing public confidence in Police Department
personnel and Police Department operations.
(1995 Code, § 2.12.010)
§ 2.12.020   Scope of authority of the Board.
   The Board shall have the authority to receive citizen complaints of alleged
police officer misconduct in the form of misuse of force, false arrest,
discrimination, criminal conduct, use of racial or ethnic slurs, abuse of
authority, extreme discourtesy and/or serious misconduct. The Board shall also
have the authority to review the Police Department investigation of all such
allegations of police officer misconduct. The Board shall further have the
authority to make an annual report summarizing its activities and providing
statistical information regarding the receipt and processing of citizen
complaints of police officer misconduct.
(1995 Code, § 2.12.020)
§ 2.12.030   Filing of citizen complaints.
   Citizen complaints of alleged police officer misconduct in the form of
misuse of force, false arrest, discrimination, criminal conduct, use of racial
or ethnic slurs, abuse of authority, extreme discourtesy and/or serious
misconduct may be submitted, in either oral or written form, to either the
Police Department, the City Clerk or the Board. However, to be subject to
review under this chapter all such citizen complaints are required to be
completed in writing, on the Police Department approved form, and must contain
the signature of the complainant. The formal written complaints shall be filed
in person or by mail, within 60 days of the occurrence of the alleged
misconduct. Copies of all such formal complaints shall be provided to the
complainant, the Police Chief and the Chairperson of the Review Board. Citizen
complaints of alleged police officer misconduct of a nature other than as set
forth hereinabove shall be referred directly to the Police Department for
review and appropriate action and shall not be subject to review by the Board.
The entire Board shall review all citizen complaints and determine, by majority
approval, which of the complaints are within the authority of the Board to
review. Written notice of this determination shall be provided by the Board to
the complainant and the Police Department.
(1995 Code, § 2.12.030)
§ 2.12.040   Investigation of complaints.
   All citizen complaints of alleged police officer misconduct subject to this
chapter shall, once received in formal written form, be referred to the Police
Department for review and investigation. The Investigations Captain or other
person designated by the Police Chief shall review the citizen complaint and
conduct an investigation as appropriate and consistent with the Department’s
citizen’s complaint policy in effect at the time of the filing of the citizen
complaint. The investigation by the Police Department shall be completed within
30 days of receipt by the Department of the formal written complaint. Under
special circumstances and with the approval of the Chief of Police, the
investigation may take longer than 30 days to complete. In such circumstances,
the Chief shall provide written notice to the Board that it is necessary to
allow for a longer period of time to complete the subject investigation.
(1995 Code, § 2.12.040)
§ 2.12.050   Report to Board.
   Upon completion of the investigation, the Investigations Captain shall
prepare and deliver to the Board a written report, along with a copy of all
documentation gathered in the course of the investigation. The report shall be
the same document as the Investigations Captain would deliver to the Police
Chief upon completion of his or her investigation under the Department’s
citizen’s complaint policy. The report shall be submitted to the Board before
it is submitted to the Chief. The report shall include the findings and
conclusions of the Investigations Captain and any recommendations relating to
adjudication of the citizen’s complaint.
(1995 Code, § 2.12.050)
§ 2.12.060   Preliminary review by Board.
   Upon receipt of the copy of the Investigation Captain’s report, the
Chairperson of the Board shall place the matter on the agenda for the next
regular meeting of the Board, or shall schedule a special meeting of the Board
to consider the matter, as he or she deems appropriate to ensure timely
processing, for a preliminary review by the Board. The report shall be
presented to and reviewed by the Board at that time. At the conclusion of the
preliminary review, the Chairperson shall poll the Board and proceed as
follows:
   (A)   If three or more of the voting members of the Board agree that more
information is necessary, the Chairperson shall note this in writing and return
the matter to the Investigations Captain for further investigation and
submission of a supplemental report;
   (B)   If the Board determines that the information provided is sufficient to
proceed, it shall take one of the following actions:
      (1)   If a majority of the voting members of the Board believe that there
is no need for a more in-depth review of the matter, they shall adopt findings
by a majority vote and direct the Chairperson to prepare a report and submit it
to the Chief of Police. The report shall specify whether the Board supports or
disagrees with the findings of the Investigations Captain. In the event the
Board disagrees, the report shall further set forth specific reasons and
analysis therefor.
      (2)   If a majority of the voting members of the Board believe that an
in-depth review of the matter is necessary and appropriate, the Chairperson
shall schedule such a review at a meeting of the Board to be held within two
weeks, or as soon thereafter as is possible. Thereafter, at the subsequent
meeting of the Board, an in-depth review of the matter shall be conducted
pursuant to the provisions of §
2.12.070 hereinbelow.
(1995 Code, § 2.12.060)
§ 2.12.070   In-depth review by Board.
   When, pursuant to §
2.12.060(B)(2) hereinabove, an in-depth review of a citizen complaint
investigation is scheduled by the Board, notice of the date, time and place of
the meeting shall be provided by the Board, in writing, to the Investigations
Captain, the complainant and to the officer or officers involved. At the time
and place of the meeting, the Board shall meet with the Investigations Captain
to discuss the matter. The complainant, the officer or officers involved and
other interested parties shall be provided with the opportunity to appear
before the Board and make written and/or oral statements.
(1995 Code, § 2.12.070)
§ 2.12.080   Conduct of in-depth review.
   All such in-depth reviews shall be conducted in an informal manner. It shall
not be necessary to have any party wishing to make a statement swear an oath,
nor shall any party be provided with the opportunity to ask questions or
otherwise cross-examine any other party providing a statement to the Board.
Board members shall have the opportunity to ask questions from any person
appearing and making a statement. The in-depth reviews shall be closed to the
public and no one shall be permitted to be present during the process except
for the Board members, the Investigations Captain, the staff representative(s)
to the Board and the person presenting the statement at that particular time.
Any person shall have the right to have an attorney present while the person is
making his or her statement; provided, that the attorney cannot participate in
any way in the proceedings, other than to advise his or her client.
(1995 Code, § 2.12.080)
§ 2.12.090   Action by the Board.
   At the conclusion of the in-depth review of the matter, the Board shall
deliberate, in private, and make written findings by a majority vote of the
voting members as to the matter as follows:
   (A)   Determine that the matter requires further investigation and direct
the Investigations Captain to proceed with a follow-up investigation and submit
a supplemental report back to the Board;
   (B)   Support the findings and report of the Investigations Captain; or
   (C)   Disagree with the report of the Investigations Captain and set forth
specific reasons and analysis therefor.
(1995 Code, § 2.12.090)
§ 2.12.100   Report to Police Chief.
   Upon completion of the written report and findings of the Board, as set
forth in §§
2.12.060(B)(1),
2.12.090(B) or (C) hereinabove, the report shall be transmitted to the Chief of
Police simultaneously with the transmission to the Chief of the report of the
Investigations Captain. The written findings of the Board shall be submitted to
the Chief within seven days of the completion of the review of the matter by
the Board. To the extent required by law, a copy of the report shall be made
available to the officer or officers involved at the same time and in the same
manner as the Investigation Captain’s report is made available. No one else,
including the complainant, is entitled to a copy of the findings of the Board.
(1995 Code, § 2.12.100)
§ 2.12.110   Notice to complainant.
   The complainant, and only the complainant, shall be provided with a written
notice that the Board has completed its review of the complaint and it has been
forwarded to the Chief. The complainant shall not be provided with the findings
of the Board, nor its adjudication in relation thereto.
(1995 Code, § 2.12.110)
§ 2.12.120   Confidentiality of material, information and deliberation.
   The actions of the Board shall be deemed part of the city’s personnel
process and all documentation and other information presented to the Board with
regard to any citizen complaint and the investigation thereof shall be deemed
to be part of a personnel matter and therefore confidential and not subject to
public disclosure. No such documentation or other information shall be
disclosed to the public, absent a court order. Furthermore, neither the
deliberations of the Board, nor its decision, shall be made public, absent
court order.
(1995 Code, § 2.12.120)
§ 2.12.130   Penalty for wilful and/or intentional disclosure of information.
   Disclosure of any such confidential information by a member of the Board, if
it is found to be wilful and/or intentional, shall result in the removal of the
Board member by the City Council.
(1995 Code, § 2.12.130)
§ 2.12.140   Action by the Chief of Police.
   Upon receipt of the report from the Board and the report and recommendations
from the Investigations Captain, the Chief of Police shall proceed to take such
action with regard to the subject citizen complaint, as he or she deems
appropriate, pursuant to applicable departmental rules and policies, including
the citizen complaint policy, and the applicable personnel rules and policies
of the city. In addition, should the Chief disagree with the findings and
report of the Board, he or she shall so inform the Board in writing, setting
forth the reasons for his or her determination. The written communication to
the Board from the Chief shall be made within ten days of receipt by the Chief
of the report and findings of the Board.
(1995 Code, § 2.12.140)
§ 2.12.150   Annual report.
   The Board shall annually, during the month of December, prepare and submit a
report, in summary form, of its activities, including statistical information
regarding citizen complaints it reviewed. The report may also include such
other comments as the Board deems appropriate. The report shall be submitted to
the Police Chief, City Manager and City Council and shall be a public document.
(1995 Code, § 2.12.150)
§ 2.12.160   Selection of members of the Board.
   The Board shall consist of seven members. Each member of the City Council
shall select and appoint one member to the Board, subject to approval of the
appointment by the remainder of the Council. The remaining two members shall be
selected at large by the City Council as a whole. To the greatest extent
possible, it is the goal of the Council to select Board members in a manner
designed to provide a diversity of ethnic, racial and socioeconomic backgrounds
as well as a diversity of geographic representation from all areas of the city.
In addition to the seven members of the Board appointed by the City Council, an
eighth, nonvoting member shall be appointed by the membership of the recognized
bargaining unit representing the sworn employees of the Police Department. The
appointee shall be entitled to participate in all aspects of the Board’s
activities, including the reviewing citizen complaint investigations and
discussions related thereto, except that the appointee shall not be entitled to
vote on any matter before the Board. All appointees to the Board shall be
residents of the city.
(1995 Code, § 2.12.160)
§ 2.12.170   Terms of office of Board members.
   Appointments to the Board shall be for two-year terms and shall be made
during the month of January immediately following the bi-annual November
election of City Council members; provided, that the initial appointments to
the Board shall be for a period of time of less than two years, as the initial
appointees shall serve only until their successors are named. Vacancies on the
Board shall be filled for the unexpired term and shall be made pursuant to the
same procedures that were used for the initial selection of the departing Board
member. At the first meeting of the Board after the bi-annual January
appointment of a new Board, the Board members shall select a chairperson and a
vice-chairperson from among their members.
(1995 Code, § 2.12.170)
§ 2.12.180   Qualifications of Board members.
   In addition to the requirements for diversity of membership on the Board, as
set forth in §
2.12.160, to be eligible for appointment to the Board, individuals must be
objective, unbiased and without any conflict of interest as it applies to the
Police Department, its officers and employees, and relationships between
members of an individuals family and the Department and its employees. The
phrase CONFLICT OF INTEREST, as used herein, shall, in addition to the meaning
given to it under the Fair Political Practices Act and regulations promulgated
thereunder, also mean that an individual, and the individual’s immediate
family, are free of any disputes, disagreements, claims or legal action against
the Police Department and any of its officers and employees.
(1995 Code, § 2.12.180)
§ 2.12.190   Severability.
   If any section, division, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is, for any reason, held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, the portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision, and the holdings shall not effect the validity of the
remaining portions of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 2.12.190)
CHAPTER 2.16: [REPEALED BY ORD. 10-06]
TITLE 3: FIRE REGULATIONS
Chapter
   
3.04.   FIRE DEPARTMENT
   
3.08.   FIRE PREVENTION CODE
   
3.12.   OUTDOOR BURNING
   
3.16.   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
   
3.20.   DISASTER MANAGEMENT
   
3.22.   HAZARD/WEED ABATEMENT
   
3.25.   ADMINISTRATIVE FINES
CHAPTER 3.04: FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
3.04.010   Code enforcement.
   
3.04.020   Rules and regulations.
   
3.04.030   Right of entry.
   
3.04.040   Apparatus and equipment usage.
   
3.04.050   Unlawful tampering with apparatus or equipment.
   
3.04.060   Interference with emergency operations.
   
3.04.070   Fire operations.
   
3.04.075   Fire lanes.
   
3.04.080   Fire hydrant clearance.
   
3.04.090   Investigations.
   
3.04.100   Powers of arrest.
   
3.04.110   Misdemeanors.
§ 3.04.010   Code enforcement.
   Under the direction of the Fire Chief, the Fire Department is authorized to
enforce all ordinances of the city pertaining to the following:
   (A)   The prevention of fires;
   (B)   The suppression of dangerous or hazardous fires;
   (C)   The storage, use and handling of hazardous materials;
   (D)   The installation and maintenance of alarm systems and fire
extinguishing equipment;
   (E)   The maintenance and regulation of fire escapes;
   (F)   The maintenance of fire protection and the elimination of fire
hazards;
   (G)   The maintenance of exists; and
   (H)   The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fire and
unauthorized releases of hazardous materials.
(1995 Code, § 3.04.010) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022; Ord. 16-12, passed
11-1-2016)
§ 3.04.020   Rules and regulations.
   The Chief, with the approval of the City Manager, is authorized to make and
enforce such rules and regulations for the prevention and control of fires and
fire hazards, as may be necessary from time to time, to carry out the intent of
this code.
(1995 Code, § 3.04.020) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022)
§ 3.04.030   Right of entry.
   Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this
code, or whenever the Chief has reasonable cause to believe that there exists
in any building or upon any premises any condition which makes such a building
or premises unsafe, the Chief or designee may enter the building or premises,
at all reasonable times, to inspect the same or to perform any duty authorized
by this code.
(1995 Code, § 3.04.030)
§ 3.04.040   Apparatus and equipment usage.
   Only authorized personnel shall operate or otherwise ride on any fire
apparatus while en route to an emergency incident.
(1995 Code, § 3.04.040) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022; Ord. 16-12, passed
11-1-2016)
§ 3.04.050   Unlawful tampering with apparatus or equipment.
   No person shall tamper with, handle, remove or otherwise injure any hose,
ladder, fire apparatus or other equipment belonging to the city.
(1995 Code, § 3.04.050) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022; Ord. 16-12, passed
11-1-2016)
§ 3.04.060   Interference with emergency operations.
   Except as directed by authorized personnel, it shall be unlawful for any
person to interfere with any Fire Department personnel performing their duty.
(1995 Code, § 3.04.060) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022; Ord. 16-12, passed
11-1-2016)
§ 3.04.070   Fire operations.
   The Chief, or any other officer of the Fire Department in charge of the
scene of a fire or other emergency involving the protection of life or
property, shall have the authority to direct such operations as may be
necessary to extinguish or control any fire, perform any rescue operation,
investigate the existence of suspected or reported fires, gas leaks or other
hazardous situations and take any other action necessary in the reasonable
performance of their duty.
(Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022)
§ 3.04.075   Fire lanes.
   No person shall stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended
or unattended, except when in conflict with other traffic, in a fire lane. Fire
lanes may be designated on public or private property. Any person in violation
of this section is subject to an administrative fine. Vehicles may also be
subject to removal at the owner's expense.
(1995 Code, § 3.04.070) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022)
§ 3.04.080   Fire hydrant clearance.
   No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle within ten feet of
a fire hydrant, except as provided in the Cal. Vehicle Code § 22514.
(1995 Code, § 3.04.080) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022)
§ 3.04.090   Investigations.
   All fires of suspicious cause shall be referred to Fire Department
investigator(s) who shall complete the investigation to determine cause, to
secure and process evidence and to apprehend and prosecute those involved in
criminal activity.
(1995 Code, § 3.04.090) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022)
§ 3.04.100   Powers of arrest.
   Each member of the Fire Department is hereby granted police power to arrest
any person violating any of the terms or provisions of this chapter. If the
arrest is to be made at any time or place other than the site and time of the
emergency incident where the crime was committed, the Police Department or Fire
Department investigator shall make the arrest.
(1995 Code, § 3.04.100) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022)
§ 3.04.110   Misdemeanors.
   Failure to depart the lands and structures embraced within the emergency
scene when requested to do so by Fire Departmental personnel, entering within
clearly established boundaries denoting a restricted area, or violation of any
of the other terms of this chapter are misdemeanors.
(1995 Code, § 3.04.110) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022)
CHAPTER 3.08: FIRE PREVENTION CODE
Section
   
3.08.010   Adoption of fire codes, regulations and standards
   
3.08.020   Establishment and duties of Bureau of Fire Prevention.
   
3.08.030   Definitions.
   
3.08.040   Dangerous and illegal fireworks.
   
3.08.070   Amendments to the California Fire Code (CFC).
   
3.08.080   Safe and sane fireworks.
   
3.08.090   Appeals.
   
3.08.100   Penalties.
   
3.08.110   Repeal of conflicting ordinances.
§ 3.08.010   Adoption of fire codes, regulations and standards.
   The city hereby adopts and incorporates into this code, as if fully set
forth at length herein except as modified or amended by §
3.08.070, the following fire codes, standards and regulations to be controlling
within city limits:
   (A)   The 2022 California Fire Code (CFC), which is drafted in the image of
the 2021 International Fire Code (IFC), and which is found in the California
Code of Regulations, Title 24, part 9, including Appendices B through N.
(1995 Code, § 3.08.010) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022; Ord. 19-11, passed
12-3-2019; Ord. 16-12, passed 11-1-2016; Ord. 13-07, passed 12-3-2013; Ord. 10-
21, passed 12-7-2010; Ord. 07-30, passed 12-18-2007; Ord. 03-1919, passed - -
2003; Ord. 99-1850, passed - -1999)
§ 3.08.020   Establishment and duties of Bureau of Fire Prevention.
   The California Fire Code shall be enforced by the Bureau of Fire Prevention
in the Fire Department of the city, which is hereby established and which shall
be operated under the supervision of the Fire Marshal.
(1995 Code, § 3.08.020) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022; Ord. 19-11, passed
12-3-2019; Ord. 16-12, passed 11-1-2016; Ord. 03-1919, passed - -2003; Ord. 99-
1850, passed - -1999)
§ 3.08.030   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DANGEROUS AND ILLEGAL FIREWORKS. All fireworks not defined and classified as
"Safe and Sane" under the provisions of California Code of Regulations, Title
19 et seq.
   JURISDICTION. Where the word is used in the California Fire Code, it shall
mean the "City of Tulare".
(1995 Code, § 3.08.030) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022; Ord. 2021-05, passed
12-21-2021; Ord. 19-11, passed 12-3-2019; Ord. 03-1919, passed - -2003; Ord.
99-1850, passed - -1999)
§ 3.08.040 Dangerous and illegal fireworks.
   (A)   In order to enforce this chapter, only visual verification is required
by an enforcement officer of where the offense occurred. Any person observed
possessing dangerous or illegal fireworks, or accepting responsibility, may be
issued a citation. In all other instances, any adult person legally entitled to
reside at the location where it is reasonably believed dangerous or illegal
fireworks originated may be cited.
   (B)   In addition to any other remedy, penalty, or punishment stated herein
or authorized by state law, each person who possesses or causes to be ignited
dangerous or illegal fireworks, or violates any other provision of state law,
as it relates to the sale, possession, or use of dangerous and illegal
fireworks shall be subject to the imposition of an administrative fine. The
schedule of administrative fines for such violations shall be imposed as per §
3.08.040(D).
   (C)   Persons in possession of dangerous and illegal fireworks in excess of
5,000 pounds shall be punishable under Cal. Health and Safety Code § 12700(b)
(4). Persons in possession of "destructive devices" as defined in Cal. Penal
Code § 16460, shall be punishable under Cal. Penal Code § 18710.
   (D)   Each person who violates any section of this code shall be subject to
the administrative fine as provided below:
 
Number of Offenses                  Amount of Fine
First violation                     $2,000
Second violation                    $3,000
Third and all subsequent violations $4,000
Possession for sale                 $10,000
 
   (E)   For purposes of calculating the fine amount as specified in this
section, the number of offenses shall include every documented instance within
a 36-month period.
   (F)   Fines collected pursuant to this section shall be utilized for the
safe disposal of confiscated fireworks, public outreach to prevent the
possession or use of illegal fireworks and for the continued enforcement of
this section.
   (G)   Any duly appointed City of Tulare employee, as specified in this code,
having the authority to issue an administrative citation, may lawfully enforce
the provisions of this section.
   (H)   Any person wishing to appeal a citation as issued per this section,
shall follow the procedures as established in §§
1.61.010 and
3.25.010 of this code. An advanced deposit of 50% of the fine levied shall be
required. This shall not preclude an appellant the right to apply for a
hardship.
(Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022; Ord. 2021-05, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 3.08.070   Amendments to the California Fire Code (CFC).
   The following sections of the 2022 California Fire Code (CFC) are amended
and modified, for purposes of this chapter, as follows:
   Section 105.6.30 of the California Fire Code is amended to read:
   105.6.32.34 Open Burning. An operational permit is required for any open
burning, which has been approved by the San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution
Control District.
   Prohibited Open Burning. Notwithstanding other provision, open burning is
prohibited as follows:
   3.   The fire code official is authorized to order the immediate
extinguishment of any unauthorized open burning and may issue administrative
citations and seek to recover costs in accordance with Sections 1.61 and 3.25
of this Code.
   C103.3 Maximum spacing. The maximum spacing between fire hydrants shall be
500 feet for residential development and 300 feet in commercial development.
   CC105.1 The average spacing between fire hydrants shall not exceed 300 feet
for any school building.
   D103.5(l) Where a single gate is provided, the gate width shall be not less
than 20 feet. Where a fire apparatus road consists of a divided roadway, the
gate width shall be not less than 16 feet.
   The following list of CFC sections are not adopted by the City of Tulare and
are hereby deleted:
   109.1 through 109.3 111.1 through 111.4
   307
   308.1 through 308.1.1
   308.1.6.1 through 308.1.6.2
   308.2
   308.3.1
   319
   Chapter 36
   Appendix #A
(1995 Code, § 3.08.070) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022; Ord. 19-11, passed
12-3-2019; Ord. 16-12, passed 11-1-2016; Ord. 15-01, passed 9-15-2015; Ord. 13-
07, passed 12-3-2013; Ord. 11-04, passed 6-7-2011; Ord. 07-30, passed 12-18-
2007; Ord. 06-2009, passed 3-21-2006; Ord. 03-1919, passed - -2003; Ord. 99-
1850, passed - -1999)
§ 3.08.080   Safe and sane fireworks.
   (A)   Condition of sale. It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation,
association or organization to sell or offer for sale any fireworks within the
city, except as expressly permitted under the terms of and for the time period
set forth in this section.
   (B)   Time of sale. Subject to the provisions of the State Fireworks Law
(Cal. Health and Safety Code, Division II, Part 2 and §§ 12500—12637), and the
provisions of this code and Cal. Health and Safety Code § 12599.5, "safe and
sane" fireworks as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 12529, may be sold
within the city beginning at 12:00 p.m. on June 28 through 12:00 p.m. July 6
(hereinafter "days of sale"). The daily hours of sale on days of sale shall be
9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. Pyrotechnic displays may deviate from these
restrictions subject to applicable provisions of the Cal. Health and Safety
Code, and provided they are approved by the Fire Chief or his or her designated
representative.
   (C)   Permit required. No person, firm, association, corporation or
organization shall sell fireworks within the city without first having obtained
a permit thereof ("fireworks permit"). Prior to issuance of a permit the
requesting party shall fulfill all municipal licensing requirements and fire
safety conditions outlined by the Fire Department. All permit applications
shall be received in the Fire Marshal's office by no later than 5:00 p.m. May
1, of each year. Each sales booth must obtain its own permit.
   (D)   Information required for application. Each applicant for such permit
shall file a written application within the Bureau of Prevention including:
      (1)   Tulare Fire Department Fireworks Application Form;
      (2)   Property Use Agreement Form with required signatures;
      (3)   Certificate of Liability Insurance;
      (4)   State Fire Marshal Fireworks Retail License; and
      (5)   Copy of the organizations non-profit status, such as 501 C3 filing.
   (E)   Qualified organization. Permits shall only be granted to nonprofit
organizations, corporations or local community service organizations organized
primarily for veteran, patriotic, welfare, civic betterment or charitable
purposes (hereinafter "qualified organization"), which can demonstrate that a
majority of their financial resources and manpower are donated to projects of
benefit to the total community within the city limits of Tulare.
   (F)   Number of available fireworks permits.
      (1)   The total number of fireworks permits available to the public shall
be determined by one booth for every 4,500 persons residing within the city as
determined by the Planning Department population statistics.
      (2)   (a)   Once approved for a fireworks permit, a qualified
organization shall maintain the right to that permit from year to year unless
terminated by any of the following:
            1.   A failure to engage in the business of retailing safe and sane
fireworks in the city during the prior calendar year;
            2.   A safety violation that in the determination of the Fire
Department created or had the potential to create a danger to the public;
            3.   A failure to maintain the requirements of this section; or
            4.   Any other violations of federal, state, or local law.
         (b)   Such termination is immediate. An appeal may be made to the City
Council by giving notice to the City Manager within five days of receipt of the
notice of revocation.
      (3)   If a permit becomes available, either due to termination, voluntary
relinquishment, or an increase in population, a notice shall be posted publicly
for a two-week application process. All completed applications will be reviewed
and one eligible organization will be selected randomly by the City Clerk's
office to fill the vacancy. Applications can be picked up at either the Fire
Department or the City Clerk's office. All completed applications must be
turned in to the City Clerk's office by the date and time specified in the
public notice.
   (G)   Application insurance requirements. Each applicant for a permit shall
provide, prior to the issuance of any permit, a policy of public liability
insurance with coverage of at least $1,000,000.
   (H)   Fees.
      (1)   Prior to issuance of a fireworks permit, a permit fee, as
determined by the current fee schedule for fireworks booth investigation, must
be tendered to the city upon receipt of permit.
      (2)   A $50 safety clean-up fee is required for each organization
approved to sell. This fee is forfeited to the city in the event that the sales
booth site is not left in a clean and orderly condition. Organizations
forfeiting this fee must resubmit this fee prior to being permitted to sell the
following year.
   (I)   Identification of fireworks booth locations.
      (1)   Each application shall contain a description of the site desired.
Written permission of the property owner must be included in the application.
      (2)   No booth shall be within 100 feet of any flammable liquid storage.
      (3)   No booth shall be placed closer than 30 feet to any building or
structure.
      (4)   No booth shall be placed within 400 feet of another booth.
   (J)   Fireworks booth construction.
      (1)   All retail sales of fireworks shall be permitted only from within a
temporary fireworks booth. The sale from any other building or structure is
hereby prohibited.
      (2)   Fireworks booths need not comply with provisions of the Uniform
California Building Code; provided the booth is erected under the supervision
of the local Building Inspector who shall require the booth be constructed in a
manner, which will, reasonably, ensure the safety of attendant and patrons.
      (3)   Each booth shall have a minimum of two exit doors.
      (4)   All lighting appliances used in the booth must be safe and in good
condition, all bulbs or fluorescent tubes must be shielded against accidental
breakage or contact. No heating devices of any kind are permitted in or near
fireworks booths.
      (5)   All electrical wiring, including the power source, shall be
installed to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector. Electrical wiring
shall be at least 12 feet above the ground when subject to foot traffic, and 16
feet above the ground when subject to vehicle traffic.
   (K)   Operational requirements.
      (1)   No person other than a member of the licensee organization will be
permitted to sell or otherwise participate.
      (2)   All permits are non-transferable.
      (3)   All persons engaged in the selling of fireworks shall be over the
age of 18 years. At least one person 21 years of age or older must be in
attendance and in charge during the hours of booth operation.
      (4)   The hours of operations shall be limited as identified in division
(B) of this section.
      (5)   Fireworks may be sold at the booth only.
      (6)   No sale or delivery thereof shall be made to any person under 16
years of age in accordance with Cal. Health and Safety Code § 12689(b).
      (7)   All permits and licenses shall be posted inside the booth.
      (8)   Broken or damaged fireworks are not to be sold. The items will be
collected and a receipt issued so credit may be received from the vendor.
   (L)   Safety and security.
      (1)   Each stand shall be provided with two fire extinguishers, rated
2A10BC or better. Such equipment is to be serviceable and accessible during all
business hours.
      (2)   No smoking is allowed within 50 feet of any booth.
      (3)   "No Smoking" signs shall be placed on all exterior sides of each
booth and one such sign shall be posted within the booth.
      (4)   All weeds and combustible material shall be cleared from the
location of the stand or within 30 feet thereof.
      (5)   No person shall light or cause to be lit any fireworks or other
combustible article within 200 feet thereof.
   (M)   Permit revocation.
      (1)   If, in the judgment of the Fire Chief or his or her agent or the
Building Inspector or his or her agent, the construction of the booth or the
conduct of the operation therein do not conform to the provisions of this
section or if in any way the operation of the stand poses a threat to public
safety, such officers or either of them, may have the permit revoked and/or the
booth immediately closed.
      (2)   No person shall sell, store, hold or possess any fireworks
classified as dangerous, including fire crackers, rockets or the like, from or
within any booth. If such is discovered, the permit will be revoked and the
booth immediately closed.
      (3)   Failure to remove all traces of the booth and/or any debris
resulting from the operation thereof within 48 hours of the close of business
on July 6, shall result in the loss of the cleanup security deposit.
      (4)   On the second Tuesday of May of each year, at 6:00 p.m., there
shall be a meeting of all fireworks permittees and the Fire Marshal, at 800
South Blackstone in the city. Any organization failing to have a representative
at this meeting will suffer loss of their permit.
(Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022; Ord. 16-12, passed 11-1-2016; Ord. 18-06,
passed 10-2-2018)
§ 3.08.090   Appeals.
   Whenever the Fire Marshal disapproves an application or refuses to grant a
permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do
not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been
misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal the decision of
the Fire Marshal to the Board of Appeals within 30 days from the date of the
decision appealed.
(1995 Code, § 3.08.090) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022; Ord. 2021-05, passed
12-21-2021; Ord. 03-1919, passed - -2003; Ord. 99-1850, passed - -1999)
§ 3.08.100   Penalties.
   (A)   Except as specified below, any person who violates any of the
provisions of this code or standards hereby adopted or fails to comply
therewith, or who violates or fails to comply with any order made thereunder,
or who builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans
submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued
thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply
with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city or by a court of
competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each
and every such violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not
exceeding six months or by both the fine and imprisonment. The imposition of
one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to
continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such
violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise
specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall
constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   (1)   In addition to any other remedies, penalties, or punishments
stated herein, and to the fullest extent permitted by law, any person who
violates any of the provisions of this code or standards shall also be
responsible for all costs associated with the safe disposal of all confiscated
fireworks as well as all expenses, costs, fees and fines associated with the
investigation of the charges.
      (2)   The city shall provide cost reimbursement to the State Fire Marshal
if required pursuant to regulations to be adopted by the State Fire Marshal
addressing the State Fire Marshal's cost for the transportation and disposal of
dangerous and illegal fireworks seized by the city, which costs will be part of
any administrative fine imposed. However, such cost reimbursement shall not be
required unless and until the State Fire Marshal provides services for the
disposal of dangerous and illegal fireworks.
      (3)   If the administrative fee, costs, or the cost of removal are
charged against either 1) the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to this
section; or 2) the person cited pursuant to §
3.08.040 who is also the property owner where the citation was given, and said
fees, costs, or costs of removal are not paid within 30 days of the date of the
order, or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs may be
assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 38773.5 and
may be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. Said assessment shall
have the same priority as other city taxes.
   (C)   The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
(1995 Code, § 3.08.100) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022; Ord. 2021-05, passed
12-21-2021; Ord. 03-1919, passed - -2003; Ord. 99-1850, passed - -1999)
§ 3.08.110   Repeal of conflicting ordinances.
   All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of
this chapter are hereby repealed.
(1995 Code, § 3.08.110) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022; Ord. 16-12, passed
11-1-2016; Ord. 13-07, passed 12-3-2013; Ord. 03-1919, passed - -2003; Ord. 99-
1850, passed - -1999)
CHAPTER 3.12: OUTDOOR BURNING
Section
   
3.12.010   Outdoor burning regulations..
   
3.12.020   Air Pollution Control District.
§ 3.12.010   Outdoor burning regulations.
   Outdoor fireplaces and other approved devices are allowed if they comply
with the following conditions:
   (A)   Fuel is to be clean, dry wood and/or charcoal without coatings or
preservatives. No debris, trash, garbage, demolition materials or yard waste
shall be burned.
   (B)   The fire is contained in a fire bowl, fire pit, chiminea or outdoor
fireplace that has a fire area not larger than three feet in diameter.
   (C)   A homemade fire bowl or pit is permitted if the fire area is not
larger than three feet in diameter and one foot in height, and constructed of
noncombustible material that contains the fire and its embers.
   (D)   An outdoor fireplace shall not be operated within ten feet of a
structure or combustible material. Exception: Outdoor fireplaces used at one
and two-family dwellings.
   (E)   Conditions such as dry weeds or other hazards that are nearby, or may
cause a fire to spread from the outdoor fireplace, shall be eliminated prior to
ignition.
   (F)   All fires shall be constantly attended by a responsible, non-impaired
adult.
(Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022)
§ 3.12.020   Air Pollution Control District.
   Nothing in this code shall authorize or permit any act or condition which is
prohibited by the San Joaquin Valley Unified Air Pollution Control District
Regulations or the rules or regulations of any air pollution control district
established pursuant thereto.
(Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022)
CHAPTER 3.16: HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Section
   
3.16.010   Purpose.
   
3.16.020   Definitions.
   
3.16.030   Management of hazardous materials on properties.
   
3.16.040   Management of hazardous materials on streets.
   
3.16.050   Control of mitigation measures.
   
3.16.060   Notification of release of hazardous materials.
   
3.16.070   Costs subject to recovery.
   
3.16.080   Recovery of costs.
   
3.16.090   Appeals.
   
3.16.100   Billing.
§ 3.16.010   Purpose.
   In the event of a hazardous material release into or upon any land, water or
air within the city, responsibility for scene management shall be the most
appropriate agency or responsible party, as set forth in this chapter. The
costs incurred by the city in cleaning up (mitigating) the effects of such a
release shall be reimbursed by the person, firm or corporation found to be the
responsible party for causing the release: Costs subject to reimbursement shall
include those of the city for emergency response.
(1995 Code, § 3.16.010) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022; Ord. 16-12, passed
11-1-2016)
§ 3.16.020   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall apply.
   CITY. The City of Tulare.
   EMERGENCY. A sudden, unexpected occurrence which poses an unreasonable and
imminent risk to life, health or safety of person, property or to the
ecological balance of the environment and requires immediate action by
emergency response personnel.
   EMERGENCY RESPONSE PERSONNEL. Any person employed with either the Fire or
Police Department of the City of Tulare or any other emergency-related
governmental agency having jurisdiction within the City of Tulare.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. A substance or combination of substances, of any kind
whatsoever, which, because of quantity, concentration, physical, chemical or
infectious characteristics, may result in the following conditions:
   (A)   May cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality, an
increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; and/or
   (B)   May pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or
safety of persons, property or to the ecological balance of the environment
when improperly released, treated, stored, transported, disposed of or
otherwise managed.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code §
25501 of Chapter 6.95, Division 20.
   NONEMERGENCY. An occurrence that is not a life-threatening situation and,
therefore, does not require the deployment of emergency response personnel.
   PERSON. An individual, or any business entity, including but not limited to
a trust, firm, corporation, joint stock company, partnership, association or
the employer of the person.
   RELEASE or HAZARDOUS MATERIALS RELEASE. The accidental or intentional
spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, burning, emitting, employing or dumping of
hazardous materials into or upon any land, water or air which is unauthorized
by federal, state or local governing agencies or statutes.
   SCENE MANAGEMENT. The coordination and direction of personnel and equipment
involved in the containment and cleanup activities of an incident.
(1995 Code, § 3.16.020) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022; Ord. 16-12, passed
11-1-2016)
§ 3.16.030   Management of hazardous materials on properties.
   In the event of an emergency release of a hazardous material on public or
private property, excluding street rights-of-way, within the limits of the City
of Tulare, the Fire Department shall be responsible for scene management. In
the event of a nonemergency release of hazardous material, the Fire Department
may designate another more appropriate agency to manage the incident.
(1995 Code, § 3.16.030) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022; Ord. 16-12, passed
11-1-2016)
§ 3.16.040   Management of hazardous materials on streets.
   In the event of an emergency or nonemergency release of a hazardous material
on street rights-of-way contained within the limits of the city, the Fire
Department shall have responsibility for scene management on all locally owned
rights-of-way. Scene management of all state owned and maintained rights-of-
way, including Freeway 99, shall be the responsibility of the California
Highway Patrol.
(1995 Code, § 3.16.040) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022; Ord. 16-12, passed
11-1-2016)
§ 3.16.050   Control of mitigation measures.
   An emergency situation created by a hazardous material release which poses
an imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons, property or to the
ecological balance of the environment shall be mitigated in the manner
prescribed and pursuant to the direction of the Fire Department.
(1995 Code, § 3.16.050) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022; Ord. 16-12, passed
11-1-2016)
§ 3.16.060   Notification of release of hazardous materials.
   In the event of any hazardous material release of any kind, or threat
thereof, the Fire Department shall be notified immediately of the location,
nature of release and any proposed course of action to mitigate the effects of
the release or to prevent the release from occurring. Notification is necessary
for the purpose of maintaining records of incidents and exposures occurring
within the city.
(1995 Code, § 3.16.060) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022; Ord. 16-12, passed
11-1-2016)
§ 3.16.070   Costs subject to recovery.
   The costs for services incurred by the city resulting from a hazardous
material release shall include, but not be limited to, the following: actual
labor costs of city personnel, including all fringe benefits costs; temporary
or permanent disability and/or medical expenses; administrative overhead; costs
of equipment operation, repair or replacement; costs of material obtained
directly by the city; cost of any contract labor; and any other reasonably
related cost expended to mitigate the release.
(1995 Code, § 3.16.070) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022; Ord. 16-12, passed
11-1-2016)
§ 3.16.080   Recovery of costs.
   The expense of an emergency response may be charged against the person
liable for expenses under this chapter. The charge constitutes a debt of that
person and is collectible by the city or other public obligation under a
contract, expressed or implied.
(1995 Code, § 3.16.080) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022; Ord. 16-12, passed
11-1-2016)
§ 3.16.090   Appeals.
   In exceptional situations where it is difficult or impossible to comply with
the strict letter of this chapter, any person, firm or corporation shall have
the option to apply for an exemption from any provision of this chapter to the
City Manager or designee. The City Manager/designee shall exercise those powers
in such a way that the public welfare is secured. If an appeal has been
initiated, the billing process will continue until the appeal is resolved.
Appeal applications must be submitted within 90 days after the billing date.
(1995 Code, § 3.16.090) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022; Ord. 16-12, passed
11-1-2016)
§ 3.16.100   Billing.
   The city's Finance Department shall issue an invoice for the costs incurred
in mitigating or causing the mitigation of the effects of a release. Payment
shall be due and payable within 15 days after the billing date. Failure to pay
after 60 days from the billing date shall result in an additional ten percent
late charge. Unpaid bills may be referred to a collection agency after 90-days'
delinquency or be assessed against the parcel of land involved in the incident
pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 38773.5 and shall thereafter be transmitted to
the Tax Collector for collection.
(1995 Code, § 3.16.100) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022; Ord. 16-12, passed
11-1-2016)
CHAPTER 3.20: DISASTER MANAGEMENT
Section
   
3.20.010   Purpose.
   
3.20.020   Definitions.
   
3.20.030   Duties of the Director.
   
3.20.040   Unlawful acts.
   
3.20.050   Misdemeanor.
§ 3.20.010   Purpose.
   This chapter is constructed to serve the following purpose:
   (A)   To empower the City Manager or his or her designee to prepare a plan
of operation for the management of disasters and other catastrophic events.
This plan is to be developed in accordance with state and federal guidelines
using National Incident Management;
   (B)   To provide for the protection of persons and property within the City
of Tulare in the event of such disasters;
   (C)   To provide for the coordination of the emergency operational functions
of the city with all other affected agencies; and
   (D)   To sanction expenditures made in connection with such disasters,
including mutual aid activities, as conclusively required for the direct
protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property in the city.
(1995 Code, § 3.20.010) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022; Ord. 16-12, passed
11-1-2016; Ord. 05-2001, passed 1-3-2006; Ord. 96-1793, passed - -1996)
§ 3.20.020   Definitions.
   Except where the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall
govern the construction of this chapter.
   DISASTER. Actual or threatened enemy attack, sabotage, extraordinary fire,
flood, storm, epidemic, riot, earthquake or other public calamity. It shall not
include, nor does any provision of this chapter apply to, any condition
relating to a labor controversy.
   EMERGENCY OPERATING CENTER (EOC). The physical location designated and used
to conduct centralized management of the disaster situation.
   EMERGENCY SERVICES. The preparation for management of disaster relief
functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily
responsible, and to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting
from disasters. It shall not include, nor does any provision apply to, any
condition relating to a labor controversy.
   LOCAL DISASTER COUNCIL. The city officials identified in the Emergency
Operations Plan who are responsible for its preparation and execution.
   NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (NIMS). The management process utilized
by the management personnel operating in the EOC.
   TULARE OPERATIONAL AREA (TOA). The unincorporated areas and the incorporated
cities within the boundaries of Tulare County.
(1995 Code, § 3.20.020) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022; Ord. 16-12, passed
11-1-2016; Ord. 05-2001, passed 1-3-2006; Ord. 96-1793, passed - -1996)
§ 3.20.030   Duties of the Director.
   In the event an emergency situation overwhelms or threatens to overwhelm
local resources, or the proclamation of a state of disaster by the Governor, or
in the event of a war-caused state of extreme emergency, the official
performing the duties of the Director of the Emergency Operations Center (EOC),
as authorized in the city's Emergency Operation Plan, is hereby empowered to
perform the following acts:
   (A)   Activate the Tulare EOC and provide necessary staffing;
   (B)   Make a declaration of a local state of emergency, the declaration to
be ratified by the City Council at its next regular meeting;
   (C)   Cause the dissemination of appropriate warning signals and issue
suitable advisory information to the Emergency Council and the public;
   (D)   Advise the Tulare Operational Area EOC of the situation and activation
of the city's local EOC; and
   (E)   Request mutual aid through the California Office of Emergency Services
if local deficiencies of personnel and/or equipment are indicated by the
service chiefs.
(1995 Code, § 3.20.030) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022; Ord. 16-12, passed
11-1-2016; Ord. 05-2001, passed 1-3-2006; Ord. 96-1793, passed - -1996
 
§ 3.20.040   Unlawful acts.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any of the following acts
during a disaster:
   (A)   Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the Emergency
Service Organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued
pursuant to this chapter or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or
her by virtue of this chapter;
   (B)   To do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued
pursuant to this chapter, if the act is of such a nature as to give, or be
likely to give, assistance to the enemy, or to imperil the lives or property of
inhabitants of the city, or to prevent or delay the defense or protection
thereof; and/or
   (C)   To wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of
identification specified by the civil defense and disaster agency of the
federal government or the State of California.
(1995 Code, § 3.20.040) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022; Ord. 16-12, passed
11-1-2016; Ord. 05-2001, passed 1-3-2006; Ord. 96-1793, passed - -1996)
§ 3.20.050   Misdemeanor.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a
fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for not more
than six months, or both fine and imprisonment.
(1995 Code, § 3.20.050) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022; Ord. 16-12, passed
11-1-2016; Ord. 05-2001, passed 1-3-2006; Ord. 96-1793, passed - -1996)
CHAPTER 3.22: HAZARD/WEED ABATEMENT
Section
   
3.22.010   Purpose.
   
3.22.020   Abatement procedure.
§ 3.22.010 Purpose.
   It is unlawful, and declared a nuisance, when any person owning, leasing, or
charged with the management of any undeveloped property, over one acre in size,
is maintained in such a way that it constitutes a fire hazard as per the
following condition:
   (A)   To maintain a property, including sidewalks and parkways adjacent
thereto, containing dry or dead weeds, grasses, trees, shrubs, tumbleweeds or
any other dry vegetation in a manner of growth to constitute a fire hazard.
(Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022)
§ 3.22.020 Abatement procedure.
   In an effort to maintain consistency and efficiency, the abatement process
shall be followed as per the following sections of this code: §§ 7.28.150,
7.28.170, 7.28.180, 7.28.190, 7.28.200, 7.28.240 and 7.28.260, or any other
procedure allowed by law.
(Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022)
CHAPTER 3.24: [REPEALED BY ORD. 2022-17]
CHAPTER 3.25: ADMINISTRATIVE FINES
Section
   
3.25.010   Administrative Fine Schedule.
§ 3.25.010 Administrative Fine Schedule.
   The City Council of the City of Tulare in an effort to more efficiently
administer all fines, as referenced within each chapter of the Tulare Municipal
Code and associated with its administrative citation process hereby sets forth
an Administrative Fine Schedule to be established and adopted by resolution.
(Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022; Ord. 16-12, passed 11-1-2016; Ord. 10-15,
passed 4-20-2010)
TITLE 4: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter
   
4.04.   CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODES
   
4.08.   [REPEALED BY ORD. 10-21]
   
4.12.   [REPEALED BY ORD. 10-21]
   
4.16.   [REPEALED BY ORD. 10-21]
   
4.20.   HOUSING CODE
   
4.24.   [REPEALED BY ORD. 10-21]
   
4.28.   [REPEALED BY ORD. 10-21]
   
4.32.   RELOCATION OF BUILDINGS
   
4.36.   REPEALED BY ORD. 2024-01]
   
4.40.   UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
   
4.44.   ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
   
4.48.   [REPEALED BY ORD. 10-21]
   
4.52.   [REPEALED BY ORD. 10-21]
   
4.56.   [REPEALED BY ORD. 10-21]
   
4.60.   [REPEALED BY ORD. 10-21]
   
4.70.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
   
4.80.   RESIDENTIAL RENTAL INSPECTION
   
4.90.   ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY REGISTRATION
   
4.95.   ADMINISTRATIVE FINES
   
4.96.   SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
CHAPTER 4.04: CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODES
Section
   
4.04.010   California Administrative Code.
   
4.04.020   California Building Code.
   
4.04.030   California Residential Code.
   
4.04.040   California Electrical Code.
   
4.04.050   California Mechanical Code.
   
4.04.060   California Plumbing Code.
   
4.04.070   California Energy Code.
   
4.04.080   California Green Building Standards Code.
   
4.04.090   California Referenced Standards Code.
   
4.04.100   California Historical Building Code.
   
4.04.110   California Existing Building Code.
§ 4.04.010 California Administrative Code.
   2022 California Administrative Code, Title 24, part 1 is hereby adopted as
though set forth in full.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 1-17-2023; Ord. 16-14, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 13-07,
passed 12-3-2013; Ord. 10-21, passed 12-7-2010)
§ 4.04.020 California Building Code.
   2022 California Building Code, Title 24, Part 2, Volume 1 and 2, is hereby
adopted as though set forth in full, including Appendix P Emergency Housing.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 1-17-2023; Ord. 16-14, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 13-07,
passed 12-3-2013; Ord. 10-21, passed 12-7-2010)
§ 4.04.030 California Residential Code.
   2022 California Residential Code, Title 24, Part 2.5 is hereby adopted as
though set forth in full, including Appendix Z Emergency Housing.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 1-17-2023; Ord. 16-14, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 13-07,
passed 12-3-2013; Ord. 10-21, passed 12-7-2010)
§ 4.04.040 California Electrical Code.
   2022 California Electrical Code, Title 24, Part 3 is hereby adopted as
though set forth in full.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 1-17-2023; Ord. 16-14, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 13-07,
passed 12-3-2013; Ord. 10-21, passed 12-7-2010)
§ 4.04.050 California Mechanical Code.
   2022 California Mechanical Code, Title 24, Part 4 is hereby adopted as
though set forth in full.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 1-17-2023; Ord. 16-14, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 13-07,
passed 12-3-2013; Ord. 10-21, passed 12-7-2010)
§ 4.04.060 California Plumbing Code.
   2022 California Plumbing Code, Title 24, Part 5 is hereby adopted as though
set forth in full.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 1-17-2023; Ord. 16-14, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 13-07,
passed 12-3-2013; Ord. 10-21, passed 12-7-2010)
§ 4.04.070 California Energy Code.
   2022 California Energy Code, Title 24, Part 6 is hereby adopted as though
set forth in full.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 1-17-2023; Ord. 16-14, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 13-07,
passed 12-3-2013; Ord. 10-21, passed 12-7-2010)
§ 4.04.080 California Green Building Standards Code.
   2022 California Green Building Code, Title 24, Part 11 is hereby adopted as
though set forth in full.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 1-17-2023; Ord. 16-14, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 13-07,
passed 12-3-2013; Ord. 11-09, passed 9-20-2011; Ord. 10-21, passed 12-7-2010)
§ 4.04.090 California Referenced Standards Code.
   2022 California Referenced Standards Code, Title 24, Part 12 is hereby
adopted as though set forth in full.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 1-17-2023; Ord. 16-14, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 13-07,
passed 12-3-2013; Ord. 10-21, passed 12-7-2010)
§ 4.04.100 California Historical Building Code.
   2022 California Historical Building Code, Title 24, Part 8 is hereby adopted
as though set forth in full.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 1-17-2023; Ord. 16-14, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 13-07,
passed 12-3-2013)
§ 4.04.110 California Existing Building Code.
   2022 California Existing Building Code, Title 24, Part 10 is hereby adopted
as though set forth in full.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 1-17-2023; Ord. 16-14, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 13-07,
passed 12-3-2013)
CHAPTER 4.08: [REPEALED BY ORD. 10-21]
CHAPTER 4.12: [REPEALED BY ORD. 10-21]
CHAPTER 4.16: [REPEALED BY ORD. 10-21]
CHAPTER 4.20: HOUSING CODE
Section
   
4.20.010   Adoption of Housing Code.
   
4.20.020   Recovery of costs incurred prior to giving notice of nuisance
abatement actions.
   
4.20.030   Substandard buildings.
   
4.20.040   Persons authorized to take action.
   
4.20.050   Action to be taken.
   
4.20.060   Costs recoverable.
   
4.20.070   Accounting for expenses incurred.
§ 4.20.010   Adoption of Housing Code.
   That certain document, in book form, known and designated as the Uniform
Housing Code, 1997 Edition, as prepared and published by the International
Conference of Building Officials, hereby adopts Chapter 4 Definitions, Chapter
5 Occupancy, and two sections of Chapter 7.701.2 Electrical and 701.3
Ventilation.
(1995 Code, § 4.20.010) (Ord. 07-29, passed 12-18-2007; Ord. 96-1784, passed --
1996)
§ 4.20.020   Recovery of costs incurred prior to giving notice of nuisance
abatement actions.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish an equitable,
practical and efficient procedure whereby the city can recover costs incurred
in abatement actions prior to giving notice to the property owner of the
abatement actions.
   (B)   Scope. These provisions shall apply to all substandard buildings or
structures which are in existence or which may hereafter become substandard in
this jurisdiction.
   (C)   Authority. Nothing in these sections shall impact the city’s authority
to recover nuisance abatement costs as otherwise prescribed in this code.
(1995 Code, § 4.20.020) (Ord. 96-1780, passed - -1996)
§ 4.20.030   Substandard buildings.
   For the purpose of these provisions, any building or structure which has any
of the conditions or defects described in Chapter 10 of the Uniform Housing
Code shall be deemed to be a substandard building, provided there is a threat
to life, health, property or safety of the public because of the condition.
(1995 Code, § 4.20.030) (Ord. 96-1780, passed - -1996)
§ 4.20.040   Persons authorized to take action.
   The Health Officer, Fire Marshal, Building Official, as these persons are
described in the Uniform Housing Code and any other law enforcement, Fire
Department or city personnel, or his or her designee, shall be authorized to
inspect a building or structure or make entry upon the premises for the purpose
of determining if the building, structure, or premises are safe where
reasonable cause exists that the building or premises is substandard, unsafe or
hazardous.
(1995 Code, § 4.20.040) (Ord. 96-1780, passed - -1996)
§ 4.20.050   Action to be taken.
   (A)   Upon inspection and determination that the building or structure is
substandard, unsafe or that a hazardous condition exists which poses a threat
to the life, health or safety of the public or the building’s occupants, the
above authorized official may take such immediate action necessary to render
the premises safe.
   (B)   Remedial actions may include, but are not to be limited to the
following:
      (1)   Perform visual inspection of building site to ascertain extent of
remedial action to be undertaken;
      (2)   Post building site with “DO NOT ENTER” or “UNSAFE TO OCCUPY” signs;
      (3)   Install barricades or tape perimeter to warn public of danger;
      (4)   Secure the property or building to prevent public entry. Such
action includes:
         (a)   Installation of plywood or other materials to close doorways or
windows; and/or
         (b)   Fencing property to prevent public access.
      (5)   Removal of hazardous or toxic material;
      (6)   Request removal or securing of utilities to lessen hazardous
condition;
      (7)   Research public records to locate owner of property to properly
notify of remedial action taken; and
      (8)   Issue notice to vacate orders to occupants.
(1995 Code, § 4.20.050) (Ord. 96-1780, passed - -1996)
§ 4.20.060   Costs recoverable.
   (A)   Costs incurred in taking remedial actions pursuant to this chapter are
recoverable from the property owner.
   (B)   These costs include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Purchase of materials (e.g. plywood, fencing material);
      (2)   Labor costs (e.g. contractors and city personnel);
      (3)   Replacement costs of equipment and/or clothing damaged in the
remedial action;
      (4)   Dumping and hauling fees;
      (5)   Equipment rental fees;
      (6)   Costs in preparation, posting and serving notice to property owner
of commencement of proceedings to cause the repair, rehabilitation, vacation or
demolition of the building; and
      (7)   Any other cost/expense incurred in taking the remedial actions
identified in §
4.20.050 of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 4.20.060) (Ord. 96-1780, passed - -1996)
§ 4.20.070   Accounting for expenses incurred.
   (A)   The Director of Public Works or his or her designee shall keep an
itemized account of the expenses incurred in taking remedial actions provided
for herein.
   (B)   Upon completion of the remedial action, the Director shall prepare and
file a report with the City Clerk of the City of Tulare specifying:
      (1)   Nature of the work done;
      (2)   Itemized cost of the work;
      (3)   Description of property upon which the work was done; and
      (4)   Names and addresses of the owners of record. The Clerk shall
include these costs in its presentation to the City Council in recovering costs
pursuant to §
4.20.010 of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 4.20.070) (Ord. 96-1780, passed - -1996)
CHAPTER 4.24: [REPEALED BY ORD. 10-21]
CHAPTER 4.28: [REPEALED BY ORD. 10-21]
CHAPTER 4.32: RELOCATION OF BUILDINGS
Section
   
4.32.010   Definitions.
   
4.32.020   Relocation permit required.
   
4.32.030   Denial of relocation permit.
   
4.32.040   Repair of building—Issuance or denial of permit.
   
4.32.050   Investigation of application.
   
4.32.060   Conditions of permit.
   
4.32.070   Security.
   
4.32.080   Exceptions.
   
4.32.090   Conditions of security.
   
4.32.100   Notice of default—Completion of work.
   
4.32.110   Demolition of building.
   
4.32.120   Release of security.
   
4.32.130   Access to premises.
   
4.32.140   Permit fees.
   
4.32.150   Violations.
§ 4.32.010   Definitions.
   Whenever any of the following terms are used in this chapter, such terms
shall have the following meanings.
   BOARD OF APPEALS. The Board of Appeals created pursuant to the provisions of
the Uniform Building Code.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The city’s Building Official and any assistant or
employee in his or her office designated as his or her representative.
   INSTRUMENT OF CREDIT. An instrument from a financial institution which is
subject to regulation by the state or federal government pledging that the
funds necessary to meet the performance are on deposit and guaranteed for
payment and agreeing that the funds designated by the instrument shall become
trust funds for the purposes set forth in the instrument.
   NEGOTIABLE BONDS. Negotiable bonds of the kind approved for securing
deposits of public money.
(1995 Code, § 4.32.010)
§ 4.32.020   Relocation permit required.
   No building or structure may be relocated on or moved onto any real property
in the City of Tulare until a valid relocation permit has been secured from the
Building Official.
(1995 Code, § 4.32.020)
§ 4.32.030   Denial of relocation permit.
   Except as otherwise provided in §
4.32.040, the Building Official shall not issue a relocation permit for any
building or structure which is included within one or more of the following
categories:
   (A)   Is so constructed or is in such condition as to constitute a danger of
injury or death through collapse of the building, fire, defects in electrical
wiring or any other substantial hazard to the persons who will occupy or enter
the building after relocation;
   (B)   Is infested with rats or other vermin or the wood members of the
building are infested with rot, decay or termites;
   (C)   Is so unsanitary or filthy that it would constitute a hazard to the
health of the persons who will occupy the building after relocation or, if not
intended for occupancy by human beings, would make it unsuitable for its
intended use;
   (D)   Is so dilapidated, unsightly or in such a condition of deterioration
or disrepair that placing the building at the proposed relocation site would
substantially diminish the value of other property or improvements within a
radius of 1,000 feet from the proposed relocation site;
   (E)   If the proposed use of the building is prohibited at the proposed
relocation site under any zoning ordinance or other land use ordinance of the
city; and/or
   (F)   If the structure does not conform to all applicable provisions of Cal.
Health and Safety Code Part 1.5 (commencing with § 17910) of Division 13, and
the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, or does not conform to all
applicable provisions of the Uniform Building Code or any other law or
ordinance.
(1995 Code, § 4.32.030)
§ 4.32.040   Repair of building—Issuance or denial of permit.
   If the building or structure to be moved fails to meet any of the standards
set forth in §
4.32.030, but it appears possible and practical for such defect to be
corrected, the Building Official shall issue the relocation permit upon
conditions as hereinafter provided. If the building or structure to be moved
fails to meet any of the standards set forth in §
4.32.030, and it does not appear possible or practical for the defects to be
corrected, the Building Official shall deny the relocation permit.
(1995 Code, § 4.32.040)
§ 4.32.050   Investigation of application.
   In order to determine any of the matters presented by the application, the
Building Official may cause any investigation to be made which he or she
believes necessary or helpful, and he or she may refer the matter to the Board
of Appeals for further investigation. If the Board of Appeals deems it
necessary or expedient so to do, it may set any application for hearing before
a member of the Board of Appeals or representative thereof, and cause the
notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing to be given as the Board
of Appeals may deem appropriate. Thereafter, the findings of the hearing shall
be reported to the Board of Appeals for its consideration along with any other
information before it.
(1995 Code, § 4.32.050)
§ 4.32.060   Conditions of permit.
   The Building Official, in granting a relocation permit, may impose thereon
such terms and conditions as he or she may deem reasonable and proper,
including, but not limited to, the requirement of changes, alterations,
additions or repairs to be made to or upon the building or structure, so that
the relocation of the building or structure will not be materially detrimental
or injurious to the public safety or welfare or to the property or improvements
in the district to which it is to be moved. The terms and conditions upon which
each permit is granted shall be written upon the application or appended
thereto in writing.
(1995 Code, § 4.32.060)
§ 4.32.070   Security.
   The Building Official shall not issue a relocation permit, subject to terms
and conditions, until the applicant posts or deposits security with the
Building Official. The security shall be in the form of a surety bond, a cash
deposit, an instrument of credit or negotiable bonds. If a surety bond is
furnished, it shall be executed by the applicant, as principal, and by a surety
company authorized to do business in this state, as surety. The surety bond
shall be joint and several in form and shall name the city as obligee. The
security furnished by the applicant, regardless of the form of the security,
shall be in an amount equal to the estimated cost, plus 10% of the work
required to be done in order to comply with all of the terms and conditions of
the permit, the estimate to be made by the Building Official.
(1995 Code, § 4.32.070)
§ 4.32.080   Exceptions.
   No security need be posted or deposited if the Building Official finds that
the only relocation involved is that of moving a building temporarily to the
regularly occupied business premises of a housemover.
(1995 Code, § 4.32.080)
§ 4.32.090   Conditions of security.
   All security posted or deposited pursuant to this chapter shall secure the
performance of the following duties by the permittee:
   (A)   That all of the terms and conditions of the relocation permit shall be
complied with to the satisfaction of the Building Official; and
   (B)   That all of the work required to be done pursuant to the conditions of
the relocation permit shall be fully performed and completed within the time
limit specified in the relocation permit. If no time limit is specified in the
permit, the work shall be completed within 90 days after the date of the
issuance of the permit. The time limit herein specified and the time limit
specified in any permit issued may be extended for good and sufficient cause,
either before or after the time period has expired, by a written order of the
Building Official.
(1995 Code, § 4.32.090)
§ 4.32.100   Notice of default—Completion of work.
   Whenever the Building Official determines that a default has occurred in the
performance of any term or condition of a relocation permit, he or she shall
give written notice of the default to the permittee, and to the surety, if a
surety bond has been posted, and to the financial institution issuing the
instrument of credit if an instrument of credit has been posted. The notice of
default shall state the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof and the
period of time determined by the Building Official to be reasonably necessary
for the completion of the work. If a surety bond has been pushed, the surety
shall cause the required work to be performed within the time specified in the
notice and, if the work is not performed, the Building Official shall cause the
required work to be done by contract or otherwise, in his or her discretion,
and the City Attorney shall commence the necessary legal proceedings to recover
the cost of performing the work plus 10%. If the security is in the form of a
cash deposit, an instrument of credit or negotiable bonds, and the permittee
does not perform the required work within the time specified in the notice of
default, the Building Official shall use the funds available from the security
and cause the required work to be done by contract or otherwise, in his or her
discretion. Upon completion of the work, the balance, if any, of the cash
deposit or monies made available pursuant to an instrument of credit or
negotiable bonds, after deducting therefrom the cost of performing the work,
plus 10%, shall be returned to the permittee or his or her successors or
assigns.
(1995 Code, § 4.32.100)
§ 4.32.110   Demolition of building.
   In lieu of performing the work required in a relocation permit, a permittee
may demolish the building, which is subject to the permit, and clean up the
site to the satisfaction of the Building Official and, if there has been a
default by the permittee, the surety shall have the same option.
(1995 Code, § 4.32.110)
§ 4.32.120   Release of security.
   Any surety bond or instrument of credit posted as security pursuant to this
chapter shall remain in effect until the Building Official gives written notice
to the interested parties that all of the terms and conditions of the
relocation permit have been complied with. If security in the form of cash or
negotiable bonds has been deposited, the Building Official shall return such
security to the depositor or to his or her successors or assigns when all of
the terms and conditions of the relocation permit have been complied with,
except any portion of the security that has been used or deducted pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 4.32.120)
§ 4.32.130   Access to premises.
   The Building Official, the surety and the duly authorized representatives of
either, shall have access to the premises described in the relocation permit
for the purpose of inspecting the progress of the work. In the event of any
default in the performance of any term or condition of the relocation permit,
the surety or any person employed or engaged in behalf of the surety, or the
Building Official or any person employed or engaged on his or her behalf, may
go upon the premises to complete the required work or to remove or demolish the
building or structure. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or
obstruct the ingress or egress to or from any such premises of any authorized
representative or agent of any surety of the City of Tulare who is engaged in
the work of completing, demolishing or removing any building or structure for
which a relocation permit has been issued, after a default has occurred in the
performance of the terms or conditions of the permit.
(1995 Code, § 4.32.130)
§ 4.32.140   Permit fees.
   The applicant for a relocation permit shall pay to the Building Official a
fee established from time to time by resolution of the City Council for the
inspection of each building located within the city that is to be relocated. If
the building or buildings to be relocated are situated outside of the city at
the time of the inspection, the applicant shall pay to the Building Official a
fee for the inspection of one building, and an additional fee for each
additional building owned by the applicant which is inspected on the same day
that the first building is inspected.
(1995 Code, § 4.32.140)
§ 4.32.150   Violations.
   Any person violating, or causing or permitting to be violated, any of the
provisions of this chapter, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each
such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every
day, or portion thereof, during which any violation of any provision of this
chapter is committed, continued or permitted.
(1995 Code, § 4.32.150)
CHAPTER 4.36: REPEALED BY ORD. 2024-01]
CHAPTER 4.40: UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
Section
   
4.40.010   Definitions.
   
4.40.020   Public hearing by Council.
   
4.40.030   Report of Director of Public Works.
   
4.40.040   Council may designate underground utility districts by resolution.
   
4.40.050   Unlawful acts.
   
4.40.060   Exception, emergency or unusual circumstances.
   
4.40.070   Other exceptions.
   
4.40.080   Notice to property owners and utility companies.
   
4.40.090   Responsibility of utility companies.
   
4.40.100   Responsibility of property owners.
   
4.40.110   Responsibility of city.
   
4.40.120   Extension of time.
§ 4.40.010   Definitions.
   Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases hereinafter in this section
defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in
the following definitions.
   COMMISSION. The Public Utilities Commission of the State of California.
   PERSON. Individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships and their agents and
employees.
   POLES, OVERHEAD WIRES AND ASSOCIATED OVERHEAD STRUCTURES. Poles, towers,
supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces,
transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits,
appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a district
and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or
associated service.
   UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT or DISTRICT. That area in the city within which
poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such
area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of §
4.40.040 of this chapter.
   UTILITY. All persons or entities supplying electric, communication or
similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices.
(1995 Code, § 4.40.010)
§ 4.40.020   Public hearing by Council.
   The Council may, from time to time, call public hearings to ascertain
whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of
poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated
areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for
supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. The City
Clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized
assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of the
hearings at least ten days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall
be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such
hearing, all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The
decision of the Council shall be final and conclusive.
(1995 Code, § 4.40.020)
§ 4.40.030   Report of Director of Public Works.
   Prior to holding the public hearing, the Director of Public Works shall
consult with all affected utilities and shall prepare a report for the hearing
by the City Council containing, among other information, the extent of the
utilities’ participation and estimates of the total costs to the city and
affected property owners. The report shall also contain an estimate of the time
required to complete the underground installation and removal of the overhead
facilities.
(1995 Code, § 4.40.030)
§ 4.40.040   Council may designate underground utility districts by resolution.
   If, after any such public hearing, the Council finds that the public
necessity, health, safety or welfare requires removal and underground
installation within a designated area, the Council shall, by resolution,
declare the designated area an Underground Utility District and order the
removal and underground installation. The resolution shall include a
description of the area comprising the district and shall fix the time within
which the removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within
which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A
reasonable time shall be allowed for the removal and underground installation,
having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment
necessary for the removal and for the installation of the underground
facilities as may be occasioned thereby.
(1995 Code, § 4.40.040)
§ 4.40.050   Unlawful acts.
   Whenever the Council creates an Underground Utility District and orders the
removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as
provided in §
4.40.040 hereof, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect,
construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead
wires and associated overhead structures in the District after the date when
the overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or
occupant of property prior to the performance by the owner or occupant of the
underground work necessary for the owner or occupant to continue to receive
utility service as provided in §
4.40.100 hereof, and for such reasonable time required to remove the facilities
after the work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this
chapter.
(1995 Code, § 4.40.050)
§ 4.40.060   Exception, emergency or unusual circumstances.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be
installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed 60 days, without authority
of the Director of Public Works in order to provide emergency service. The
Director of Public Works may grant special permission, on such terms as the
Director of Public Works may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual
circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect,
construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and
associated overhead structures.
(1995 Code, § 4.40.060)
§ 4.40.070   Other exceptions.
   This chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to §
4.40.040 hereof shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply
to the following types of facilities:
   (A)   Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision
and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer;
   (B)   Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;
   (C)   Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any
portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or
connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when the wires
originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead
structures are not prohibited;
   (D)   Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the
transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500 volts;
   (E)   Overhead wire attached to the exterior surface of a building by means
of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building
to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without
crossing any public street;
   (F)   Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a
utility for furnishing communications services;
   (G)   Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-
mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets and
concealed ducts; and
   (H)   Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures
used in providing power or communications to construction projects.
(1995 Code, § 4.40.070)
§ 4.40.080   Notice to property owners and utility companies.
   Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to
§
4.40.040 hereof, the City Clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all
persons owning real property within the district created by the resolution of
the adoption thereof. The City Clerk shall further notify the affected property
owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying the property
desire to continue to receive electric, communication or similar or associated
service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on
their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying
utility or utilities at a new location subject to the applicable rules,
regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the
Commission. Notification by the City Clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of
the resolution adopted pursuant to §
4.40.040 together with a copy of this chapter to affected property owners as
such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected
utilities.
(1995 Code, § 4.40.080)
§ 4.40.090   Responsibility of utility companies.
   If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a
district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to §
4.40.040 hereof, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the
conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it
under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the
Commission.
(1995 Code, § 4.40.090)
§ 4.40.100   Responsibility of property owners.
   (A)   Every person owning, operating, occupying or renting a building or
structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the
service connection on his or her property between the facilities referred to in
§
4.40.090 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure
being served, all in accordance with the applicable rules, regulations and
tariffs on the respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission. If
the above is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for in the
resolution enacted pursuant to §
4.40.040 hereof, the Director of Public Works shall give notice in writing to
the person in possession of the premises, and a notice in writing to the owner
thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required
underground facilities within ten days after receipt of the notice.
   (B)   The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given
either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mall on either of
such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States Mail in a
sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of
such premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner
thereof as the owner’s name appears, and must be addressed to the owner’s last
known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll, and
when no address appears, to General Delivery, City of Tulare. If notice is
given by mail, the notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person
to whom it has been sent within 48 hours after the mailing thereof. If notice
is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of the premises, the Director
of Public Works shall, within 48 hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy
thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten inches in size, to
be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises.
   (C)   The notice given by the Director of Public Works to provide the
required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is
required to be done, and shall state that if the work is not completed within
30 days after receipt of the notice, the Director of Public Works will provide
the required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof
will be assessed against the property benefitted and become a lien upon the
property.
   (D)   If upon the expiration of the 30-day period, the required underground
facilities have not been provided, the Director of Public Works shall forthwith
proceed to do the work; provided, however, if the premises are unoccupied and
no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the
Director of Public Works shall in lieu of providing the required underground
facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any
and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility
service to the property. Upon completion of the work by the Director of Public
Works, he or she shall file a written report with the City Council setting
forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and
the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against
which the cost is to be assessed. The Council shall thereupon fix a time and
place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of the work upon
the premises, which time shall not be less than ten days thereafter.
   (E)   The Director of Public Works shall forthwith, upon the time for
hearing the protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person
in possession of the premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner
thereof, in the manner hereinabove provided for the giving of the notice to
provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the
Council will pass upon the report and will hear protests against the
assessment. The notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed
assessment.
   (F)   Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the Council
shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any, and then
proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment.
   (G)   If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation
by the Council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the
property against which the assessment is made by the Director of Public Works,
and the Director of Public Works is directed to turn over to the Assessor and
Tax Collector a notice of lien on each of the properties on which the
assessment has not been paid, and the Assessor and Tax Collector shall add the
amount of said assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the
premises upon which the assessment was not paid. The assessment shall be due
and payable at the same time as the property taxes are due and payable, and if
not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six percent
per annum.
(1995 Code, § 4.40.100)
§ 4.40.110   Responsibility of city.
   City shall remove, at its own expense, all city-owned equipment from all
poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or
user of the poles to remove the same within the time specified in the
resolution enacted pursuant to §
4.40.040 hereof.
(1995 Code, § 4.40.110)
§ 4.40.120   Extension of time.
   In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution
adopted pursuant to §
4.40.040 hereof cannot be performed within the time provided on account of
shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor
disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control
of the actor, then the time within which the act will be accomplished shall be
extended for a period equivalent to the time of the limitations.
(1995 Code, § 4.40.120)
CHAPTER 4.44: ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
Section
   
4.44.010   Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings.
   
4.44.020   Recovery of costs incurred prior to giving notice of nuisance
abatement actions.
   
4.44.030   Dangerous buildings.
   
4.44.040   Persons authorized to take action.
   
4.44.050   Action to be taken.
   
4.44.060   Cost recoverable.
   
4.44.070   Accounting for expenses incurred.
§ 4.44.010   Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings.
   The 1997 Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is hereby
adopted as though set forth in full.
(1995 Code, § 4.44.010) (Ord. 13-07, passed 12-3-2013; Ord. 96-1784, passed - -
1996)
§ 4.44.020   Recovery of costs incurred prior to giving notice of nuisance
abatement actions.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish an equitable,
practical and efficient procedure whereby the city can recover costs incurred
in abatement actions prior to giving notice to the property owner of the
abatement actions.
   (B)   Scope. These provisions shall apply to all dangerous buildings or
structures which are in existence or which may hereafter become dangerous in
this jurisdiction.
   (C)   Authority. Nothing in these sections shall impact the city’s authority
to recover nuisance abatement costs as otherwise prescribed in this code.
(1995 Code, § 4.44.020) (Ord. 96-1777, passed - -1996)
§ 4.44.030   Dangerous buildings.
   (A)   For the purpose of these provisions any building or structure which
has any of the conditions or defects described in § 3 of the Uniform Code for
the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings shall be deemed to be a dangerous
building, provided there is a threat to life, health, property or safety of the
public because of the condition.
(1995 Code, § 4.44.030) (Ord. 96-1777, passed - -1996)
§ 4.44.040   Persons authorized to take action.
   The Health Officer, Fire Marshal, Building Official, as these persons are
described in the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, and any
other law enforcement, fire department or city personnel or his or her designee
shall be authorized to inspect a building or structure or make entry upon the
premises for the purpose of determining if the building, structure or premises
are safe where reasonable cause exists that the building or premises is unsafe,
dangerous or hazardous.
(1995 Code, § 4.44.040) (Ord. 96-1777, passed - -1996)
§ 4.44.050   Action to be taken.
   (A)   Upon inspection and determination that the building or structure is
unsafe or that a dangerous or hazardous condition exists which poses a threat
to the life, health or safety of the public or the buildings occupants, the
above authorized official may take such immediate action necessary to render
the premises safe.
   (B)   The remedial actions may include, but are not to be limited to the
following:
      (1)   Perform visual inspection of building site to ascertain extent of
remedial action to be undertaken;
      (2)   Post building site with “DO NOT ENTER” or “UNSAFE TO OCCUPY” signs;
      (3)   Install barricades or tape perimeter to warn public of danger;
      (4)   Secure the property or building to prevent public entry. Such
action includes:
         (a)   Installation of plywood or other materials to close doorways or
windows; and/or
         (b)   Fencing property to prevent public access.
      (5)   Removal of hazardous or toxic material;
      (6)   Request removal or securing of utilities to lessen hazardous
condition; and
      (7)   Research public records to locate owner of property to properly
notify of remedial action taken.
(1995 Code, § 4.44.050) (Ord. 96-1777, passed - -1996)
§ 4.44.060   Cost recoverable.
   (A)   Costs incurred in taking remedial actions pursuant to this chapter are
recoverable from the property owner.
   (B)   These costs include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Purchase of materials (e.g. plywood, fencing material);
      (2)   Labor costs (e.g. contractors and city personnel);
      (3)   Replacement costs of equipment and/or clothing damaged in the
remedial action;
      (4)   Dumping and hauling fees;
      (5)   Equipment rental fees;
      (6)   Costs in preparation, posting and serving notice to property owner
of commencement of abatement action; and
      (7)   Any other cost/expense incurred in taking the remedial actions
identified in §
4.44.050 of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 4.44.060) (Ord. 96-1777, passed - -1996)
§ 4.44.070   Accounting for expenses incurred.
   (A)   The Director of Public Works or his or her designee shall keep an
itemized account of the expenses incurred in taking remedial actions provided
for herein.
   (B)   Upon completion of the remedial action, the Director shall prepare and
file a report with the City Clerk of the city specifying:
      (1)   Nature of the work done;
      (2)   Itemized cost of the work;
      (3)   Description of property upon which the work was done; and
      (4)   Names and addresses of the owners of record. The Clerk shall
include these costs in its presentation to the City Council in recovering costs
pursuant to §
4.44.010 of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 4.44.070) (Ord. 96-1777, passed - -1996)
CHAPTER 4.48: [REPEALED BY ORD. 10-21]
CHAPTER 4.52: [REPEALED BY ORD. 10-21]
CHAPTER 4.56: [REPEALED BY ORD. 10-21]
CHAPTER 4.60: [REPEALED BY ORD. 10-21]
CHAPTER 4.70: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
   
4.70.010   Scope of permit.
   
4.70.020   Definitions.
   4.70.030   Permit exemption for utility companies.
   
4.70.040   Fees for special inspections or information.
   
4.70.050   Interference.
   
4.70.060   Completion of structure, improvements or other requirements prior to
occupation or connection of utilities.
   
4.70.070   Toilet facilities on construction projects.
   
4.70.080   Completion of construction.
   
4.70.090   Maintenance of property during construction.
   
4.70.100   Enforcement of building standards
§ 4.70.010   Scope of permit.
   A permit shall authorize only that work specified in the application
therefore.
(1995 Code, § 4.70.010) (Ord. 02-1910, passed 11-19-2002)
§ 4.70.020   Definitions.
   In the use and enforcement of these codes whenever any of the following
names or terms are used they shall be deemed and construed as follows.
   ALL-WEATHER DRIVING SURFACE. A concrete or asphalt covering over base
material and a roadbed compacted to 90% and of sufficient thickness to support
the imposed loads of fire apparatus or that approved by the Fire Chief.
   ASSISTANTS. Any police officer, inspector or other employee appointed or
designated by the City Manager or the Planning and Building Director of the
City of Tulare to carry out the functions of this chapter of the Code of the
City of Tulare.
   ATTORNEY. The City Attorney for the City of Tulare.
   AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION. The Building Division of the City of Tulare.
   AUTOMATIC FIRE DETECTION SYSTEM. An approved system, which automatically
detects a fire condition and actuates a fire alarm system device.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL and/or ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY. As used in these codes,
the Planning and Building Director and his or her duly appointed deputies or
designated representatives.
   CITY. The City of Tulare.
   DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE. The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous
Buildings as adopted in
Chapter 4.44 of the Code of the City of Tulare.
   FIRE PREVENTION BUREAU. The City of Tulare Fire Department.
   FIRE PREVENTION ENGINEER, FIRE MARSHAL or FIRE PREVENTION OFFICER. That
chief officer designated by the Fire Chief as being in charge of the Fire
Safety Division.
   MUNICIPALITY. The City of Tulare.
   PORTABLE HOT TUB OR SPA. A non-permanent structure intended for recreational
bathing, in which all control, water-heating and water- circulating equipment
is an integral part of the product, located entirely under the spa or hot tub
skirt, and is cord connected rather than permanently electrically wired.
   SPA OR HOT TUB LISTED SAFETY COVER. A locking safety cover that complies
with the American Society for Testing Materials (ASTM) specifications and/or
standards.
   SWIMMING POOL. Any body of water within a structure constructed for the
purposes of swimming and contains water over 18 inches deep. This includes
without limitation all portable, moveable, collapsible, storable and permanent
in-ground, above-ground and on-ground swimming pools, garden ponds, spas, hot
tubs and wading pools.
   TECHNICAL CODES. Codes of the City of Tulare and any other code(s) that may
be adopted by resolution of the City Council.
   THE BUILDING DEPARTMENT. The Building Division of the Planning and Building
Department of the City of Tulare.
(1995 Code, § 4.70.020) (Ord. 02-1910, passed 11-19-2002)
§ 4.70.030 Permit exemption for utility companies.
   No permit shall be required under this chapter for any recognized public
utility company for the installation, alteration or repair of service lines or
pipes for the use by such company in the distribution, generation, transmission
and metering of gas, electricity or water, or for testing of the equipment.
(1995 Code, § 4.70.030) (Ord. 02-1910, passed 11-19-2002)
§ 4.70.040   Fees for special inspections or information.
   In addition to the fees adopted by this chapter, fees shall be charged when
special inspection or information is requested by any person other than that
covered by the code, and for other such inspections and items as may be
determined by resolution of the City Council.
(1995 Code, § 4.70.040) (Ord. 02-1910, passed 11-19-2002)
§ 4.70.050   Interference.
   (A)   Any person, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise,
interfering, obstructing or preventing, or causing the interference, of the
enforcement or performance of any of the provisions of this chapter or the
provisions of any code adopted by this chapter, by the Building Official or
other authorized persons, and any person violating any of the provision of this
chapter, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment not
exceeding six months or by fine not exceeding $1,000, or by both fine and
imprisonment. Notwithstanding the classification of a violation of this chapter
as a misdemeanor, at the time an action is commenced to enforce the provisions
of this chapter, the trial court, upon recommendation of the City Attorney, may
reduce the charged offense from misdemeanor to an infraction.
   (B)   Any person convicted of an infraction under this chapter shall be
punished by:
      (1)   A fine not exceeding $100 for a first violation;
      (2)   A fine not exceeding $200 for the second violation of this chapter
within one year; and
      (3)   A fine not exceeding $500 for each additional violation of this
chapter within one year.
   (C)   Any person found guilty of violating this chapter shall comply with
provisions which he or she has been convicted of violating and shall abate and
correct the illegal conditions which he or she has brought about by the
erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, improvement or
conversion of which he or she has been convicted. The conviction and punishment
of any violation shall not relieve such person of liability to be compelled in
appropriate civil or criminal proceedings to correct prohibited conditions or
remove prohibited structures.
   (D)   Each day that a violation continues shall be regarded as a new and
separate offense.
(1995 Code, § 4.70.050) (Ord. 02-1910, passed 11-19-2002)
§ 4.70.060   Completion of structure, improvements or other requirements prior
to occupation or connection of utilities.
   Any structure shall be substantially complete and pass a final inspection,
as set forth in the California Building Code, and any improvements required by
conditions of approval or California Building Code or zoning ordinance or any
Engineering Department requirements shall be completed or bonded or a deposit
submitted to the city, prior to occupancy or permanent connection of utilities.
All projects for which a building permit is required shall receive the required
final inspection upon completion of the project. It shall be the duty of the
permit applicant to call for a final inspection. Building permits shall expire
by limitation under the provisions of the California Building Code.
(1995 Code, § 4.70.060) (Ord. 12-09, passed 8-21-2012; Ord. 02-1910, passed 11-
19-2002)
§ 4.70.070   Toilet facilities on construction projects.
   On all construction projects, there shall be provided adequate toilet
facilities for all employees. The Building Official shall approve all toilet
facilities.
(1995 Code, § 4.70.070) (Ord. 02-1910, passed 11-19-2002)
§ 4.70.080   Completion of construction.
   (A)   Expiration. Notwithstanding the requirements of the individual codes
adopted by this chapter, and subject to the exceptions provided below, every
permit issued by the Building Official, under the provisions of this chapter,
shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or work
authorized by the permit is not completed by the owner, owner’s agent, or the
permittee and approved by the city within the following time limits commencing
on the date of the permit issuance.
   (B)   Re-issuance. After completion of all permit entitlements under the
Uniform Building Code, the following time units shall apply for re-issuance of
the permit:
Residential
Residential
Room additions and interior/exterior remodeling and/or repair       12 months
Pools/spas                                                          12 months
Patio covers, balconies, decks                                      6 months
Re-roofing                                                          6 months
Fireplaces                                                          6 months
Commercial/Industrial Tenant Improvements
Interior and exterior remodeling (including small additions)        12 months
New Building Construction
Commercial/industrial                                               24 months
Residential                                                         24 months
Grading                                                             12 months
Plumbing, mechanical, electrical and solar (not associated with any 6 months
of the above items)
Demolition                                                          6 months
Plan check                                                          6 months
Other                                                               6 months
 
   (C)   Exception.
      (1)   Upon written request of the owner or permittee, the Building
Official may extend the period for completion of construction for a period not
to exceed six months. The written request must be submitted to the Building
Official prior to the date of expiration of the permit in question and shall
demonstrate that:
         (a)   Due to circumstances beyond the owner or permittee’s control,
construction could not be completed in the above specified construction time
period;
         (b)   That reasonable progress has been made;
         (c)   That the condition of the property presents no health or safety
hazard; and
         (d)   That the continuing delay will not create any unreasonable
visual or physical detriment to the neighborhood.
      (2)   No permit shall be extended more than once.
   (D)   Note.
      (1)   REASONABLE PROGRESS. A demonstration that all means reasonably
available to the permitee to complete the work within the prescribed time have
been exhausted.
      (2)   REMODELING. Construction of work which constitutes construction,
enlargement, alteration, erection, repair, demolition or improvement, of an
existing building, structure or other improvement located on a piece of
property.
      (3)   Every permit issued by the Building Official, under the provisions
of this chapter, shall expire by limitation and become null and void. At which
time the city will declare the unfinished project a public nuisance and seek
abatement according to the code.
(1995 Code, § 4.70.080) (Ord. 02-1910, passed 11-19-2002)
§ 4.70.090   Maintenance of property during construction.
   (A)   During repair, enlargement, construction, remodel, improvement or
alteration, all property shall be maintained in a reasonably clean and well-
kept manner.
   (B)   All lumber and building materials shall be neatly piled or stacked in
a safe manner. All lumber and materials used in conjunction with a residential
addition, remodel or repair shall be stored in the rear yard of the residential
property or inside the building construction perimeter.
   (C)   Exception: Building materials may be stored in a front yard, as long
as a safety hazard is not created, for a period not to exceed 30 days.
   (D)   The exterior walls and roofs of buildings or structures in connection
with a residential addition, remodel or repair shall be covered with finished
materials, in accordance with city-approved plans and the Building Code within
six months from the commencement of construction. A waiver of this requirement
may be obtained from the Building Official or his or her designated
representative if the construction is screened from view from adjacent private
occupied property, public property or public right-of-way with fencing
materials approved by the Planning and Building Director.
(1995 Code, § 4.70.090) (Ord. 02-1910, passed 11-19-2002)
§ 4.70.100   Enforcement of building standards.
   The responsibility for enforcement of building standards adopted by the
State Fire Marshal and published in the California Building Standards Code
relating to fire and panic safety as they relate to Group R. Division 3
dwellings, as described in Section 310.1 of Part 2 of the California Building
Standards Code shall be the Fire Marshal of the City of Tulare.
(Ord. 07-29, passed 12-18-2007)
CHAPTER 4.80: RESIDENTIAL RENTAL INSPECTION
Section
   
4.80.010   Title.
   
4.80.020   Purpose.
   
4.80.030   Scope.
   
4.80.040   Definitions.
   
4.80.050   General responsibilities.
   
4.80.060   Fees/penalty charges.
   
4.80.070   Recovery of fees/penalty charges.
§ 4.80.010   Title.
   These regulations shall be known as the Residential Rental Inspection
Ordinance of the City of Tulare, may be cited as such, and will be referred
herein as "this code."
(Ord. 07-26, passed 12-18-2007)
§ 4.80.020   Purpose.
   The purpose of this code is to safeguard the stock of decent, safe, and
sanitary rental housing units within the city and to protect persons entering,
including property owners residing or owning rental units by providing for
inspection of rental housing units and the common areas when certain indicators
as set forth in §
4.80.050(C), show that violations of the city Housing and Building Codes and
Zoning Ordinance may exist in a unit pursuant to a systemic city-wide
inspection program.
(Ord. 07-26, passed 12-18-2007)
§ 4.80.030   Scope.
   The provisions of this code shall apply to all rental housing units and to
all hotel and motel units as herein defined.
(Ord. 07-26, passed 12-18-2007)
§ 4.80.040   Definitions.
   General. For the purpose of this code, certain words, phrases and terms, and
their derivatives shall be construed as specified herein. Words, phrases and
terms used in this code, but not specifically defined herein, shall have the
meanings stated therefor in the Building Code and Housing Code of the City of
Tulare with the Building Code controlling should there be a conflict. Where not
defined in this code or in the Building or Housing Codes of the City of Tulare,
such words, phrases and terms shall have the meaning generally prescribed by
dictionary definition.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. The Building Official or his/her designee authorized
to administer the provisions of this code.
   HEARING OFFICER. The City Manager or his/her designee authorized to conduct
hearings pursuant to this code.
   HOTEL AND MOTEL. A hotel or motel of common ownership on a single parcel is
any structure or group of attached or detached structures containing six or
more guest rooms intended or designed to be used, or which are used, rented or
leased to be occupied, or which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests.
For the purpose of this definition, COMMON OWNERSHIP shall be deemed to exist
whenever a single individual or entity has any kind of ownership interest
whether as an individual, partner, joint venturer, stock owner, or some other
capacity.
   IMMINENT HAZARD. All buildings or portions thereof which are determined
after inspection by the Building Official to be unsafe, substandard, or
dangerous as defined in the most currently adopted building and accessory code,
including the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, are hereby
declared to be public nuisances and shall be  abated by repair, rehabilitation,
demolition, or removal as specified in the building abatement ordinance.
   RENTAL HOUSING UNIT. 
      (1)   Any residential dwelling in a single structure, or in a group of
attached or detached structures containing one or more such dwelling units on
the same parcel of land under common ownership that:
         (a)   Contains one or more rooms with a single kitchen designed for
living and sleeping purposes as an independent housekeeping unit, and
         (b)   Is occupied or intended to be occupied on a rental basis. For
the purposes of this section, the following types of dwelling units or
facilities are not considered rental housing units:
            1.    Accommodations in any hospital, extended care facility,
convalescent home, nonprofit home for the aged, or dormitory that is owned and
operated by an educational institution.
            2.   Accommodations in a non- profit cooperative that is owned,
occupied, and controlled by a majority of the residents.
      (2)   For purpose of this section, common ownership shall be deemed to
exist whenever a single individual or entity has any kind of ownership interest
whether as an individual, partner, joint venturer, stock owner, or some other
capacity.
   OWNER.  Any person owning rental property as shown on the last equalized
assessment roll for city taxes or his/her designee.
(Ord. 07-26, passed 12-18-2007)
§ 4.80.050   General responsibilities.
   (A)   Administration. The Building Official, or his/her designee,
hereinafter known as the Enforcement Official, is authorized to administer the
provisions of this code.
   (B)   Mandatory inspection program.
      (1)   The city hereby institutes a systemic code enforcement program that
will ensure that residential rental units, hotels, and motels are inspected
over time. The program will include mandatory inspection of all units in the
city.
      (2)   The mandatory inspection program is part of the city’s overall
effort to encourage conservation of existing rental housing units, motels and
hotels and insure that any prior conditions of approval from the Planning
Commission or City Council are being maintained. Owners of these types of
structures will be required to maintain these units to current Housing and
Building Code standards. Owners and managers shall allow for the inspection of
these units. If an owner or manager refuses to permit an inspection, the
Enforcement Official is authorized to procure an inspection warrant.
      (3)   Owners and managers are required to maintain rental units as
approved by the Planning Commission through a design review or conditional use
permit entitlement. All conditions or approval are to be maintained as approved
by the Planning Commission unless otherwise changed by the Planning Commission.
      (4)   Inspection services will not be provided if eviction proceedings
have been initiated.
   (C)   Cause for inspections. A rental housing unit, motel, or hotel shall be
inspected for violations of the Building and Housing Codes or the zoning
ordinance of the city as part of the mandatory inspection program or whenever
information from the following sources indicates that a pertinent code
violation may exist therein:
      (1)   Complaints from the occupant of a rental housing, motel or hotel
unit that a code violation may exist;
      (2)   Records maintained by the Enforcement Official which were
established during previous apartment inspection programs and which reflect the
prior existence of code violations and/or the absence of correction of such
violations;
      (3)   Direct referrals for inspection from other city officials with code
enforcement responsibility or from officials of a federal, state, or local
agency, or from officials with a public or private utility; or
      (4)   Reports that the exterior condition of rental housing, motel, or
hotel unit reflects the existence of code violations.
   (D)   Notice to tenants. Owners of rental units covered under the provisions
of this code shall be required to provide notice of the availability of the
residential rental inspection program and its complaint procedures to each
tenant upon execution of a lease or rental agreement. Such notice shall be in a
form set forth by the city and made available to each owner of rental housing
by the city.
   (E)   Retaliation. No landlord may retaliate against a tenant for exercising
his or her right under this code to file a complaint with the city that a code
violation may exist. In any action by or against the tenant, evidence of the
exercise by the tenant of his/her right under of Cal. Civil Code § 1942.5
occurring within six months of the alleged retaliation shall create a
presumption that the landlord's conduct was in retaliation for the tenant's
exercise of rights under this code.
   (F)   Entry. 
      (1)   Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Enforcement Official,
after having obtained the consent of the owner or occupant, may enter any
rental housing or motel or hotel unit at reasonable times during daylight hours
to perform any inspection required by this code.
      (2)   Except in emergency situations the Enforcement Official shall not
enter any rental housing, motel or hotel unit without the consent of the owner
or occupant thereof unless an inspection warrant therefore has been obtained
and issued in the manner provided by the Code of Civil Procedure of the State
of California.
   (G)   Correction notice. Whenever the Enforcement Official determines that a
rental property is being maintained in violation of one or more of the
provisions of the Housing or Building Code, the Enforcement Official shall give
written notice to the owner of said property stating the section(s) being
violated. The notice shall set forth a reasonable time limit for the owner to
correct the condition, which except in emergency situations, shall be no less
than ten calendar days from the date of the notice, and which may also set
forth suggested methods of correcting the violation(s). The notice shall direct
the property owner either to correct the violation(s) or request an
Administrative Hearing to show cause why the condition(s) does not constitute a
violation(s).
   (H)   Administrative hearing.  Any owner may file a written request with the
Enforcement Official for an administrative hearing within the time limit set
forth in correction notice. The purpose of an administrative hearing is to
allow the owner to dispute the factual findings of the violation(s). If a
hearing is requested it shall be at the time fixed for the administrative
hearing, the Hearing Officer shall hear and consider all relevant evidence,
objections, or protests offered on behalf of the owner which show why the
condition should not be corrected. The Hearing Officer may also consider
rebuttal evidence offered by the city. If, at the conclusion of the hearing,
based upon the record, the Hearing Officer is satisfied that the violation
exists and concludes that it should be corrected, he/she shall issue a written
decision setting forth his/her finding and shall cause the same to be served
upon the owner and/or the owner's representative attending the hearing. All
hearings pursuant to this section, shall provide written notice to the property
owner five days in advance of any such hearing. In addition, written notice may
be given to any tenant by regular mail or posting at the subject site. Any
notice shall give the date, time, place and reason for such a hearing.
   (I)   Enforcement; report to Franchise Tax Board. The Enforcement Official
shall take appropriate action to cause the correction, repair, or abatement of
violations that are found as a result of any inspection required by this code.
In addition to employing the applicable enforcement measures that are or may
hereafter be provided by law, including but not limited to the enforcement
provisions of the Building Code of the city, the Housing Code of the city, and
Chapter 4.44 (Abatement of Dangerous Buildings) of the Municipal Code, the
Enforcement Official shall comply with the provisions of Cal. Revenue and
Taxation Code §§ 17274 and 24436.5(c).
   (J)   Notices. The first notice informing a property owner of a mandatory
inspection or the date and time of an administrative hearing shall be by
certified mail, return receipt requested. All other notices shall be by first
class mail or certified mail. Service will be made to the owner's address as it
appears on the last equalized assessment roll or as known to the Enforcement
Official. Service shall be deemed complete at the time notice is personally
served, transmitted or deposited in the mail. The failure of any person to
receive notice properly given shall not affect the validity of any proceedings
hereunder.
(Ord. 07-26, passed 12-18-2007)
§ 4.80.060   Fees/penalty charges.
   The annual fees and penalty charges for any inspection or re-inspection
performed pursuant to the provisions of this code shall be established from
time to time by resolution of the City Council. Payment of such fees shall be
made by owner of the rental housing, hotel or motel unit upon demand by the
city.
(Ord. 07-26, passed 12-18-2007)
§ 4.80.070   Recovery of fees/penalty charges.
   (A)   Report on fees/penalty charges. The Enforcement Official shall keep an
itemized account of the fees and penalty charges incurred in administering the
provisions of this code and submit a billing therefor to the owner of the
rental housing, motel, or hotel unit as the owner's name and address appear on
the last equalized assessment roll of Tulare County or as is known to the
Enforcement Official. Once a year the Enforcement Official shall prepare and
file with the City Clerk, a report specifying the date and nature of the
inspections performed, the amount of unpaid program and other fees and penalty
charges imposed in the prior year, and the names and addresses of the owner of
the rental housing , hotel or motel unit, and any mortgagee or beneficiary
under a deed of trust to the property, as such names and addresses appear on
the last equalized assessment roll of Tulare County or as known to the
Enforcement Official.
   (B)   Notice of hearing on report. Upon receipt of the report of the
Enforcement Official the City Clerk shall fix a time, date, and place for
hearing the report and any protests or objections thereto. The City Clerk shall
cause notice of the hearing to be published once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city, and served by mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the
owner of the property as the owner's name and address appear on the last
equalized assessment roll of Tulare County, if such so appear, or as known to
the City Clerk. Notice shall also be given by mail to any other person noted in
the report as the name and address of such person appears on the last equalized
assessment roll of Tulare County, if such so appear or as known to the City
Clerk. Such notice shall be given at least ten days prior to the date set for
hearing and shall specify the day, hour, and place when the City Council will
hear and pass upon the Enforcement Official's report, together with any
objections or protests which may be filed by any person interested in or
affected by the proposed fee.
   (C)   Hearing on report. At the time and place of said hearing, the City
Council shall hear and pass upon the report of the Enforcement Official
together with any objections or protests hereto. The Council may make such
revision, correction, or modification in the report or the fees charged as it
may deem just; and when the Council is satisfied with the correctness of the
fees charged, the report (as submitted or as revised, corrected, or modified)
together with the fees charged shall be confirmed or rejected. The decision of
the City Council on the report and the fees charged, and on all protests or
objections, shall be final and conclusive.
   (D)   Collection on tax roll.  
      (1)   After confirmation of the fees charged, the same shall become a
special assessment against the property affected.
      (2)   A copy of the assessment shall be given to the City Finance
Director, who may receive payment thereon until a list of unpaid assessments
shall have been sent annually to the County Auditor for effecting collection on
the tax roll at the time and in the manner of ordinary municipal taxes. The
descriptions of the property reported shall be those used for the same property
on the County Assessor's map books for the current year. All laws and
ordinances applicable to the levy, collection, and enforcement of city taxes
are hereby made applicable to the assessment hereby imposed, and the lien of
said assessment shall have priority of the taxes with which it is collected.
   (E)   Annual report of enforcement official. The Enforcement Official shall
prepare a report each year concerning the administration of this code. The
annual report shall describe the number of units inspected, whether the
inspection was mandatory or complaint generated, the nature of violations
observed, enforcement measures taken, and the status of all billings for fees
that have been made. The Enforcement Official shall submit the annual report to
the City Manager each calendar year at such a time that it may be submitted to
the City Council with the proposed city budget for the following fiscal year.
(Ord. 07-26, passed 12-18-2007)
CHAPTER 4.90: ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY REGISTRATION
Section
   
4.90.010   Purpose.
   
4.90.020   Definitions.
   
4.90.030   Recordation of transfer of loan/deed of trust/assignment of rents.
   
4.90.040   Registration.
   
4.90.050   Maintenance requirements.
   
4.90.060   Security requirements.
   
4.90.070   Additional authority.
   
4.90.080   Fees.
   
4.90.090   Enforcement.
   
4.90.100   Appeals.
   
4.90.110   Violation/penalty.
   
4.90.120   Severability.
§ 4.90.010 Purpose.
   It is the purpose an intent of the Tulare City Council, through the adoption
of this chapter, to establish an abandoned residential property registration
program as a mechanism to protect residential neighborhoods from becoming
blighted through the lack of adequate maintenance and security of abandoned
properties.
(Ord. 09-07, passed - -2009)
§ 4.90.020 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases used in this
chapter are defined as follows:
   ABANDONED. A property that is vacant and is under a current Notice of
Default and/or Notice of Trustee's Sale, pending Tax Assessors Lien Sale and/or
properties that have been the subject of foreclosure sale where the title was
retained by the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the  foreclosure and
any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale.
   ACCESSIBLE PROPERTY. A property that is accessible through a compromise/
breached gate, fence, wall, and the like.
   ACCESSIBLE STRUCTURE. A structure/ building that is unsecured and/or
breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior space by unauthorized
persons.
   AGREEMENT. Any agreement or written instrument which provides that title to
residential property shall be transferred or conveyed from one owner to another
owner after the sale, trade, transfer or exchange.
   ASSIGNMENT OF RENTS. An instrument that transfers the beneficial interest
under a deed of trust from one lender/entity to another.
   BENEFICIARY. A lender under a note secured by a deed of trust,
   BUYER. Any person, co-partnership, association, corporation, or fiduciary
who agrees to transfer anything of value in consideration for property
described in an agreement of sale, as defined in this division.
   DANGEROUS BUILDING. Any building/ structure that is violation of any
condition referenced in
Chapter 4.44, Abatement of Dangerous Buildings.
   DAYS. Consecutive calendar days.
   DEED IN LIEU OF FORECLOSURE/SALE. A recorded document that transfers
ownership of a property from the trustor to the holder of a deed of trust upon
consent of the beneficiary of the deed of trust.
   DEED OF TRUST. An instrument by which title to real estate is transferred to
a third party trustee as security for a real estate loan. Used in California
instead of a mortgage. This definition applies to any  and all subsequent deeds
of trust i.e. second trust deed, third deed, and the like.
   DEFAULT. The failure to fulfill a contractual obligation, monetary or
conditional.
   DISTRESSED. A property that is under a current Notice of Default and/or
Notice of Trustee's Sale and/or pending Tax Assessor's Lien Sale or has been
foreclosed upon by the trustee or has been conveyed to the beneficiary/trustee
via a Deed in lieu of Foreclosure/sale.
   EVIDENCE OF VACANCY. Any condition that, on its own, or combined with other
conditions present would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property
is vacant. Such conditions include but are not limited to, overgrown and/or
dead vegetation, accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers and/or mail,
past due utility notices and/or disconnected utilities, accumulation of trash,
junk and/or debris, the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds
and/or shutters, the absence of furnishings and/or personal items consistent
with residential habitation, statements by neighbors, passerby, delivery
agents, government employees that the property is vacant.
   FORECLOSURE. The process by which a property, placed as security for a real
estate loan, is sold at auction to satisfy the debt if the trustor (borrower)
defaults.
   LOCAL. Within 40 road/driving miles distance of the subject property.
   NEIGHBORHOOD STANDARDS. Those conditions that are present on a simple
majority of properties within a 300-foot radius of an individual property. A
property that is the subject of a neighborhood standard comparison, or any
other abandoned property within the 300-foot radius, shall not be counted
toward the simple majority.
   NOTICE OF DEFAULT. A recorded notice that a default has occurred under a
deed of trust and that the beneficiary intends to proceed with a trustee's
sale.
   OUT OF AREA. Means in excess of 40 road/driving miles distance of the
subject property.
   OWNER. Any person, co-partnership, association, corporation, or fiduciary
having a legal or equitable title or any interest in any real property.
   OWNER OF RECORD. The person having recorded title to the property at any
given point in time the record is provided by the Tulare County Recorders
Office.
   PROPERTY. Any unimproved or improved real property, or portion thereof,
situated in the city and includes the buildings or structures located on the
property, regardless of condition.
   RESIDENTIAL BUILDING. Any improved real property, or portion thereof,
situated in the city, designed or permitted to be used for dwelling purposes,
and shall include the buildings and structures located on such improved real
property. This includes any real property being offered for sale, trade,
transfer, or exchanges as "residential" whether or not it is legally permitted
and/or zoned for such use.
   SECURING. Such measures as may be directed by the Director of Planning and
Building or his or her designee that assist in rendering the property
inaccessible to unauthorized persons, including but not limited to the
repairing of fences and walls, chaining/pad locking of gates, the repair or
boarding of door, window and/or other openings. Boarding shall be completed to
a minimum of the current HUD securing standards at the time the boarding is
completed or required.
   TRUSTEE. The person, firm or corporation holding a Deed of Trust on a
property.
   TRUSTOR. A borrower under a deed of trust, who deeds property to a trustee
as security for the payment of a debt.
   VACANT. A building/structure that is not legally occupied.
(Ord. 09-07, passed - -2009)
§ 4.90.030 Recordation of transfer of loan/deed of trust/assignment of rents.
   Within ten days of the purchase and/or transfer of a loan/deed of trust
secured by residential property the new beneficiary/trustee shall record, with
the Tulare County Recorders Office, an assignment of rents, or similar
document, that lists the name of the corporation, and/or individual, the
mailing address and contact phone number of the new beneficiary/ trustee
responsible for receiving payments associated with the loan/deed of trust.
(Ord. 09-07, passed - -2009)
§ 4.90.040 Registration.
   (A)   Any beneficiary/trustee, who holds a deed of trust on a property
located within the City, shall perform an inspection of the property that is
the security for the deed of trust, upon default by the trustor, prior to
recording a Notice of Default with the Tulare County Recorders Office. If the
property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, it is, by this
chapter, deemed abandoned and the beneficiary/trustee shall, within ten days of
the inspection, register the property with the Director of Planning and
Building or his or her designee on forms provided by the city.
   (B)   If the property is occupied but remains in default it shall be
inspected by the beneficiary/trustee, or his designee, monthly until (1) The
trustor other or party remedies the default; or (2) It is found to be vacant or
shows evidence of vacancy, at which time it is deemed abandoned, and the
trustee shall, within ten days of that inspection, register the property with
the Director of Planning and Building or his or her designee on forms provided
by the city.
   (C)   In either case, the registration shall contain the name of the
beneficiary/trustee (corporation or individual), the direct street/office
mailing address of the beneficiary/trustee (no P.O. boxes), a direct contact
name and phone number for the beneficiary/ trustee and, in the case of a
corporation or out of area beneficiary/trustee, the local property management
company responsible for the security, maintenance and marketing of the
property. Registration fees will not be prorated.
   (D)   An annual registration fee shall accompany the registration form. The
fee and registration shall be valid for the calendar year, or remaining portion
of the calendar year in which the registration was initially required.
Subsequent registrations and fees are due January 1 of each year and must be
received no later than January 31 of the year due.
   (E)   This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject
of a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a
deed of trust involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under
a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale.
   (F)   Properties subject to this chapter shall remain under the annual
registration requirement, security and maintenance standards of this section as
long as they remain vacant.
   (G)   Any person, firm or corporation that has registered a property under
this chapter must report any change of information contained in the
registration within ten days of the change.
(Ord. 09-07, passed - -2009)
§ 4.90.050 Maintenance requirements.
   (A)   Properties subject to this section shall be, in comparison to the
neighborhood standard, kept free of weeds, dry bush, dead vegetation, trash,
junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars,
flyers, notices, accept those required by federal, state or local law,
discarded personal items including but not limited to, furniture, clothing,
large and small appliances, printed material or any other items that give the
appearance that the property is abandoned.
   (B)   The property shall be maintained free of graffiti, tagging or similar
markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches
the color of the exterior of the structure.
   (C)   Visible front and side yards shall be landscaped and maintained to the
neighborhood standard at the time registration was required.
   (D)   LANDSCAPE includes, but is not limited to, grass, ground covers,
bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or
artificial turf/sod designed especially for residential installation. LANDSCAPE
does not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt, decomposed granite,
plastic sheeting, mulch, indoor-outdoor carpet or any similar material.
   (E)   MAINTENANCE includes, but is not limited to regular watering,
irrigation, cutting, pruning and mowing of required landscaped and removal of
all trimmings.
   (F)   Pools and spas shall be kept in working order so the water remains
clear and free of pollutants and debris or drained and kept dry. In either case
properties with pools and/or spas must comply with the minimum security fencing
requirements of the State of California.
   (G)   Adherence to this section does not relieve the beneficiary/trustee or
property owner of any obligations set forth in any Covenants Conditions and
Restrictions and/or Homeowners Association rules and regulations which may
apply to the property.
(Ord. 09-07, passed - -2009)
§ 4.90.060 Security requirements.
   (A)   Properties subject to this section shall be maintained in a secure
manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons.
   (B)   SECURE MANNER includes but is not limited to the closure and locking
of windows, doors (walkthrough, sliding and garage) gates and any other opening
of such size that it may allow a child to access the interior of the property
and or structure(s). In the case of broken windows SECURING means the reglazing
or boarding of the window.
   (C)   If the property is owned by a corporation and/or out of area
beneficiary/trustee/owner, a local property management company shall be
contracted to perform weekly inspections to verify that the requirements of
this section, and any other applicable laws, are being met.
   (D)   The property shall be posted with name and a 24-hour contact phone
number of the local property management company. The posting shall be no less
than 18 inches by 24 inches and shall be of font that is legible from a
distance of 45 feet and shall contain along with the name and 24-hour contact
number the words "THIS PROPERTY MANAGED BY" and "TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS
CALL". The posting shall be placed on the interior of a window facing the
street to the front of the property so it is visible from the street, or
secured to the exterior of the building/structure facing the street to the
front of the property so it is visible from the street, or if no such area
exists, on a stake of sufficient size to support the posting in a location that
is visual from the street to the front of the property but not readily
accessible to vandals. Exterior postings must be constructed of and printed
with weather resistant materials.
   (E)   The local property management company shall inspect the property on a
weekly basis to determine if the property is in compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 09-07, passed - -2009)
§ 4.90.070 Additional authority.
   In addition to the enforcement remedies established in Chapters
1.12,
1.61 and
7.28, the Director of Planning and Building or his or her designee shall have
the authority to require the beneficiary/trustee/owner and/or owner of record
of any property affected by this section, to implement additional maintenance
and/or security measures including but not limited to, securing any/all door,
window or other openings, installing additional security lighting, increasing
on-site inspection frequency, employment of on-site security guard or other
measures as may be reasonably required to arrest the decline of the property.
(Ord. 09-07, passed - -2009)
§ 4.90.080 Fees.
   The fee for registering an abandoned residential property shall be set by
resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 09-07, passed - -2009)
§ 4.90.090 Enforcement.
   Violations of this chapter may be enforced in any combination as allowed in
Chapters
1.12,
1.61 and
7.28.
(Ord. 09-07, passed - -2009)
§ 4.90.100 Appeals.
   Any person aggrieved by any of the requirements of this chapter may appeal
insofar as such appeal is allowed under Sections
1.61.080 or
7.28.180.
(Ord. 09-07, passed - -2009)
§ 4.90.110 Violation/penalty.
   Violations of this chapter shall be treated as a strict liability offense
regardless of intent. Any person, firm and/or corporation that violates any
portion of this section shall be subject to prosecution and/or administrative
enforcement under Chapters
1.12 and
1.61.
(Ord. 09-07, passed - -2009)
§ 4.90.120 Severability.
   Should any provision, section, paragraph, sentence or word of this chapter
be determined or declared invalid by any final court action in a court of
competent jurisdiction or by reason of any preemptive legislation, the
remaining provisions, sections, paragraphs, sentences or words of this chapter
shall remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. 09-07, passed - -2009)
CHAPTER 4.95: ADMINISTRATIVE FINES
Section
   
4.95.010   Administrative Fine Schedule.
§ 4.95.010 Administrative Fine Schedule.
   The City Council of the City of Tulare in an effort to more efficiently
administer all fines, as referenced within each chapter of the Tulare Municipal
Code and associated with its administrative citation process hereby sets forth
an Administrative Fine Schedule to be established and adopted by resolution.
(Ord. 10-15, passed 4-20-2010)
CHAPTER 4.96: SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
Section
   
4.96.010   Purpose.
   
4.96.020   Definitions.
   
4.96.030   Small residential rooftop solar energy system review process.
§ 4.96.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to adopt an expedited, streamlined solar
permitting process that complies with Cal. Gov't Code § 65850.5, to achieve
timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar
energy systems. The chapter encourages the use of solar systems by establishing
prescriptive guidelines, minimizing costs to property owners and the City of
Tulare, and expanding the ability of property owners to install solar energy
systems.
(Ord. 15-08, passed 10-6-2015)
§ 4.96.020 Definitions.
   The following words and phrases as used in this section are defined as
follows:
   ELECTRONIC SUBMITTAL. The utilization of one or more of the following:
      (1)   E-mail;
      (2)   The internet;
      (3)   Facsimile.
   SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. All of the following:
      (1)   A solar energy system that is no larger than 10 kilowatts
alternating current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal.
      (2)   A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire,
structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the
city and Cal. Civil Code § 714(c)(iii), as such section or subdivision may be
amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time.
      (3)   A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex
family dwelling.
      (4)   A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum
legal building height as defined by the authority having jurisdiction.
      (5)   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM has the same meaning set forth in Cal. Civil
Code § 801.5(a) (1) and (2), as such section or subdivision may be amended,
renumbered, or redesignated from time to time.
(Ord. 15-08, passed 10-6-2015)
§ 4.96.030 Small residential rooftop solar energy system review process.
   (A)   Cal. Gov't Code § 65850.5 provides that, on or before September 30,
2015, every city, county, or city and county shall adopt an ordinance that
creates an expedited, streamlined permitting process for small residential
rooftop solar energy systems.
   (B)   Cal. Gov't Code § 65850.5 provides that in developing an expedited
permitting process, the city, county, or city and county shall adopt a
checklist of all requirements with which small rooftop solar energy systems
shall comply to be eligible for expedited review.
   (C)   The checklist shall be published on the city's internet website. The
applicant may submit the permit application and associated documentation to the
city's building division by personal, mailed, or electronic submittal together
with any required permit processing and inspection fees. In the case of
electronic submittal, the electronic signature of the applicant on all forms,
applications and other documentation may be used in lieu of a wet signature.
   (D)   Prior to submitting an application, the applicant shall:
      (1)   Verify to the applicant's reasonable satisfaction through the use
of standard engineering evaluation techniques that the support structure for
the small residential rooftop solar energy system is stable and adequate to
transfer all wind, seismic, and dead and live loads associated with the system
to the building foundation; and
      (2)   At the applicant's cost, verify to the applicant's reasonable
satisfaction using standard electrical inspection techniques that the existing
electrical system including existing line, load, ground and bonding wiring as
well as main panel and subpanel sizes are adequately sized, based on the
existing electrical system's current use, to carry all new photovoltaic
electrical loads.
   (E)   For a small residential rooftop solar energy system eligible for
expedited review, only one inspection shall be required, which shall be done in
a timely manner and may include a consolidated inspection by the Building
Official and Fire Chief. If a small residential rooftop solar energy system
fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized; however the subsequent
inspection need not conform to the requirements of this subsection.
   (F)   An application that satisfies the information requirements in the
checklist, as determined by the Building Official, shall be deemed complete.
Upon receipt of an incomplete application, the Building Official shall issue a
written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any
additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance.
   (G)   Upon confirmation by the Building Official of the application and
supporting documentation being complete and meeting the requirements of the
checklist, the Building Official shall administratively approve the application
and issue all required permits or authorizations. Such approval does not
authorize an applicant to connect the small residential rooftop energy system
to the local utility provider's electricity grid. The applicant is responsible
for obtaining such approval or permission from the local utility provider.
(Ord. 15-08, passed 10-6-2015)
TITLE 5: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter
   
5.04.   GENERAL LICENSE
   
5.08.   UNIFORM LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX
   
5.12.   AUTO CAMPS
   
5.16.   SECONDHAND DEALERS
   
5.20.   PAWNBROKERS
   
5.24.   PEDDLERS; SOLICITORS
   
5.28.   BILLIARD ROOMS; CARDROOMS
   
5.32.   AMUSEMENT MACHINES
   
5.36.   TAXICABS/MOTOR VEHICLES FOR HIRE
   
5.40.   HANDBILL REGULATIONS
   
5.44.   AMUSEMENT CONCESSIONS
   
5.48.   DANCE HALLS
   
5.52.   HYPNOTISTS
   
5.56.   SAND PITS
   
5.60.   BUILDING CONTRACTORS
   5.62.   DISQUALIFICATION OF CONTRACTORS FOR PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS
   
5.64.   PRIVATE PATROLS
   
5.68.   TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
   
5.72.   DOCUMENTARY STAMP TAX
   
5.74.   COMMUNICATION USER’S TAX
   
5.76.   UTILITIES TAX
   
5.78.   TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX FOR GENERAL PURPOSES
   
5.80.   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
   
5.84.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; WARNING SIGNS
   
5.88.   LICENSING AND REGULATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
   
5.92.   MOBILE VENDING
   
5.96.   COMMERCIAL CANNABIS BUSINESSES
   5.98.   CANNABIS BUSINESS TAX
   
5.100.   ADMINISTRATIVE FINES
   
5.104.   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND SERVICES
CHAPTER 5.04: GENERAL LICENSE
Section
   
5.04.010   Definitions.
   
5.04.020   Revenue measure.
   
5.04.030   Effect on other regulations.
   
5.04.040   Effect on prior actions and obligations.
   
5.04.050   Unexpired licenses heretofore issued.
   
5.04.060   Transfer of license.
   
5.04.070   License required.
   
5.04.080   Branch establishments.
   
5.04.090   Warehouses.
   
5.04.100   Constitutional, statutory exemptions.
   
5.04.110   Eleemosynary institutions.
   
5.04.120   Need for permit.
   
5.04.130   Official sales.
   
5.04.140   Sale of own products.
   
5.04.150   Periodicals, ice, dairy products.
   
5.04.160   Senior citizens—Disability exemptions.
   
5.04.161   Minor/juvenile business license for the sale of non-alcoholic
beverages.
   
5.04.170   Claim for exemption.
   
5.04.180   Issuance of license.
   
5.04.190   Revocation.
   
5.04.200   Application for license.
   
5.04.210   Affidavit for first license.
   
5.04.220   Estimate of gross receipts.
   
5.04.230   Use of estimate.
   
5.04.240   Subsequent adjustment of tax.
   
5.04.250   Future licenses to applicant.
   
5.04.260   Affidavit for renewal license.
   
5.04.270   Statement not conclusive.
   
5.04.280   Audit—Verification.
   
5.04.290   Access to books.
   
5.04.300   Secrecy.
   
5.04.310   Failure to file statement.
   
5.04.320   Notice of amount assessed.
   
5.04.330   Application for hearing.
   
5.04.340   Setting for hearing—Notice.
   
5.04.350   Hearing—Findings.
   
5.04.360   Contents of license.
   
5.04.370   Appeal—Notice of appeal.
   
5.04.380   Duplicate license.
   
5.04.390   Due date.
   
5.04.400   Delinquency in payment.
   
5.04.410   Duties of collector—Police.
   
5.04.420   Inspection of business places.
   
5.04.430   Extensions—Compromises.
   
5.04.440   Posting of licenses.
   
5.04.450   License as debt—Court action.
   
5.04.460   Criminal, civil actions.
   
5.04.470   Receipts from sales; services.
   
5.04.480   Flat rates.
   
5.04.490   Violations—Penalties.
   
5.04.500   Compliance with applicable provisions of the ordinance code and all
other applicable laws.
§ 5.04.010   Definitions.
   The following words and terms when used in this chapter shall have the
meanings herein ascribed to them.
   AMUSEMENT MACHINE. Any mechanical or electronic machine, apparatus,
contrivance, appliance or device which may be operated or played upon the
placing or depositing therein of any coin, check, slug, ball, or any other
article or device, or by paying therefor either in advance of or after use,
involving in its use either skill or chance, including but not limited to, a
tape machine, a card machine, a pinball machine, a bowling game machine, a
horse racing machine, a basketball game machine, a baseball game machine, a
football game machine, an electronic video game or any other similar machine or
device except for a billiard or pool table, a music machine or a merchandise
vending machine.
   AMUSEMENT MACHINE OWNER. The person or entity which owns or leases on a long
term basis one or more amusement machines as defined in this chapter, which are
placed in business establishments located in the city. This definition shall
not include the owner or operator of a business establishment which has
amusement machines on the premises, unless the specific machines are owned or
long-term leased by the business owner or operator.
   APARTMENT HOUSE, ROOMING HOUSE, MOBILE HOME PARKS and TRAILER COURTS. Any
dwelling having five or more rental dwelling units situated upon a single lot,
or parcel of land, or subdivision, owned by the same party, or contiguous to
each other on one or more parcels of land, with construction, whether original
or altered, so planned as to indicate operation as a single enterprise.
   AUTO WRECKERS. Any person who buys any motor vehicle for the purpose of
dismantling or disassembling or who dismantles or disassembles any such motor
vehicle whether for the purpose of dealing in any of the parts thereof, or
using the same for the purpose of reconditioning any other vehicles, or for the
purpose of selling or otherwise dealing in materials of such motor vehicles.
   BUSINESS. Professions, trades and occupations and every kind of calling
carried on for profit or livelihood.
   EXCLUDED SUMS. The sums excluded from “gross receipts” as follows:
      (A)   DISCOUNTS. Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales.
      (B)   OTHER TAXES. Any tax required by law to be included in or added to
the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser.
      (C)   RETURNED GOODS. The part of the sale price of property returned by
purchasers upon rescission of the contract of sale as is refunded either in
cash or by credit.
   GARAGE OR YARD SALE. The sale from the residence or residential lot of a
vendor of personal property which was not purchased or solicited by the vendor
(s) for purpose of resale, and when the  personal property has been used in the
home of the vendor and, or, in the home of not to exceed five other vendors.
The length of sale shall not exceed three consecutive days. Any person
conducting more than one such sale at the same location within six months shall
be presumed to be engaged in a business other than a garage or yard sale.
   GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALE. A sale held in such a manner as to reasonably
cause the public to believe that upon the disposal of the stock of goods on
hand, the business will cease or be discontinued. The types of sales to be
indicative, but not limited to, of a going out of business sale are: adjusters;
adjustments; alteration; benefit of administrators; benefit of creditors;
benefit of trustees; building coming down; closing; creditors committee;
creditors; end; executors, final days; forced out; forced out of business;
insolvent; last days; lease expires; liquidation; loss of lease; mortgage sale;
receives; trustees; quitting business; going out of business.
   GROSS RECEIPTS. The total amount of the sale price of all sales and the
total amount charged or received for the performance of any act, service or
employment of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit
allowed, whether or not the service, act or employment is done as a part of or
in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares or merchandise.
   JUNK COLLECTORS. A person not having a fixed place of business in the city
and going from house to house or from place to place gathering, collecting,
buying, selling or otherwise dealing in junk (rags, bottles, paper, cans, metal
and other articles commonly classified as junk).
   JUNK DEALER. A person not having a fixed place of business in the city and
conducting or managing the business of buying or selling at wholesale or retail
or otherwise dealing in junk (rags, bottles, paper, cans, metal and other
articles commonly classified as junk). Any junk dealer’s license issued
pursuant to provisions of this section shall include the right to collect junk
with one vehicle.
   REMOVAL OF BUSINESS SALE. A sale held in such a manner as to reasonably
cause the public to believe that the person (business) conducting the sale will
cease and discontinue business at the place of sale upon disposal of the stock
on goods on hand, and then  will remove to and resume business at a new
location in the city, or will continue business from other existing locations
in the city.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.010)
§ 5.04.020   Revenue measure.
   The provisions of this chapter are not enacted solely to raise revenue from
municipal purposes and are intended for regulation.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.020) (Ord. 14-02, passed 3-18-2014)
§ 5.04.030   Effect on other regulations.
   Any person required to pay a license tax for transacting and carrying on any
business under this chapter shall be relieved from the payment of any license
tax for the privilege of doing such business which has been required under any
other regulation of the city, but shall remain subject to the regulatory
provisions of such other regulations. This section shall not apply to
inspection fees.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.030)
§ 5.04.040   Effect on prior actions and obligations.
   Neither the adoption of the provisions of this chapter nor their superseding
of any portion of any other provision of this code shall in any manner be
construed to affect prosecution for violation of any ordinance committed prior
to the effective date of the provisions, nor be construed as a waiver of any
license or any penal provision applicable to any such violation, nor be
construed to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit required by any
ordinance to be posted, filed or deposited; and all rights and obligations
thereunto appertaining shall continue in full force and effect.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.040)
§ 5.04.050   Unexpired licenses heretofore issued.
   Where a license for revenue purposes has been issued to any business by the
city and the tax paid therefor under the provisions of any ordinance heretofore
enacted and the term of the license has not expired, then the license tax
prescribed for the business by the provisions of this chapter shall not be
payable until the expiration of the term of the unexpired license.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.050)
§ 5.04.060   Transfer of license.
   No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable. Where,
however, a license is issued authorizing a person to transact and carry on a
business at a particular place, the licensee may upon application therefor and
paying a fee of $1, have the license amended to authorize the transacting and
carrying on of the business under the license at some other location to which
the business is to be moved.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.060)
Editor’s note:
   For the most recent fee, please see the Rates and Fees Resolution passed by
the city and on file in the city offices.
§ 5.04.070   License required.
   There are hereby imposed upon the businesses, trades, professions, callings
and occupations specified in this chapter license taxes in the amounts
hereinafter prescribed; and it shall be unlawful for any person to transact and
carry on any business, trade, profession, calling or occupation in the city
without first having procured a license form the city so to do or without
complying with all applicable provisions of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.070)
§ 5.04.080   Branch establishments.
   (A)   A separate license must be obtained for each branch, establishment or
location of the business transacted and carried on and for each separate type
of business at the same location; and each license shall authorize the licensee
to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the location or
in the manner designed in the license.
   (B)   A vendor at any special event(s) and/or trade show(s) within the city
who can provide proof of a current city business licensed thereby at the
location or in the manner designated in the license.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.080) (Ord. 95-1770, passed - -1995)
§ 5.04.090   Warehouses.
   Warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to
a business licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to
be separate places of business or branch establishments.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.090)
§ 5.04.100   Constitutional, statutory exemptions.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person
transacting and carrying on any business exempt by virtue of the Constitution
or applicable statutes of the United States or of the state from the payment to
municipal corporations of the taxes, as are herein prescribed.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.100)
§ 5.04.110   Eleemosynary institutions.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to require
the payment of a license tax to conduct, manage or carry on any business,
occupation or activity from any institution or organization which is conducted,
managed or carried on wholly for the benefit of charitable purposes or from
which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly by any person, nor
shall any license tax be required for the conducting of any entertainment,
dance, concert, exhibition or lecture on scientific, historical, literary,
religious or moral subjects within the city, whenever the receipts of any such
entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture are to be appropriated to any
church or school or to any religious or benevolent purpose, nor shall any
license tax be required for the conducting of any entertainment, dance,
concert, exhibition or lecture by any religious, charitable, fraternal,
educational, military, state, county or municipal organization or association,
whenever the receipts of any such entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or
lecture are to be appropriated for the purpose and objects for which the
organization or association was formed, and from which profit is not derived,
either directly or indirectly by any person.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.110)
§ 5.04.120   Need for permit.
   Nothing in this chapter, however, shall be deemed to exempt any organization
or association from complying with the provisions of this code requiring a
permit from the Council or any commission or officer to conduct, manager or
carry on any profession trade, call or occupation.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.120)
§ 5.04.130   Official sales.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to require
the payment of a license tax to conduct, manager or carry on any public auction
for the sale of any goods belonging to the United States, the state or county
or for the sale of property by virtue of any process issued by any court or for
the sale of property by virtue of any deed of trust or for the bonafide sale of
household goods at the domicile of the owner thereof; or for the sale at
auction or otherwise of merchandise, salvaged from any fire, wreck or other
calamity occurring in the city, for the purpose of adjusting the loss sustained
by reason of the fire, wreck or other calamity; or for the sale at auction or
otherwise of any stock of goods by any assignee for the benefit of creditors,
receiver in bankruptcy or his or her assignee, for the purpose of liquidating
and adjusting the debts and liabilities of any person having a permanent place
of business in the city.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.130)
§ 5.04.140   Sale of own products.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to require
the payment of a license tax by any natural person soliciting or peddling
anything which the person has personally manufactured or produced, or to any
farmer, poultryman or horticulturist soliciting or peddling his or her own
produce, excepting that this exemption shall not apply to farmers,
poultrypersons or horticulturalists who buy goods for resale as well as selling
their own produce; or to any person so soliciting. These exemptions shall apply
only to natural persons.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.140)
§ 5.04.150   Periodicals, ice, dairy products.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to require
the payment of a license tax by persons peddling or soliciting newspapers,
periodicals, ice, milk, cream, butter, eggs or cottage cheese.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.150)
§ 5.04.160   Senior citizens—Disability exemptions.
   Any individual 62 years or older or those individuals receiving Social
Security disability payments shall be exempted from payment of the prescribed
license tax for a garage or yard sale once in every calendar year provided,
however, that the exempted garage or yard sale meets the definition of garage
or yard sale as enumerated in §
5.04.010, except that the personal property to be sold must belong to the
vendor exclusively.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.160)
§ 5.04.161 Minor/juvenile business license for the sale of non-alcoholic
beverages.
   Sales of non-alcoholic beverages by minors under the age of 16 years shall
be exempt from the business license fee provisions of this chapter and any
vendor stand permit fees set forth in Chapter 10.58 but will be required to
obtain a business license unless such sales occurs on the custodial parent's
property and shall be subject to the following provisions:
   (A)   All minors are under the age of 16 years;
   (B)   All minors are residents of the City of Tulare;
   (C)   All minors must be the sole owner, except in the case of recognized
non-profits such Scouts, Little League and schools, etc.;
   (D)   All minors must be present and all sales shall be limited to non-
alcoholic beverages;
   (E)   All minors who are working for a for-profit business (vending company,
local store, etc.) are subject to all business license fees as set forth in
this chapter;
   (F)   Sales by minors can only operate on school holidays, Friday after
school, Saturday and Sunday or during times when school is not in session
(summer, spring, winter break, etc.) so not to interfere with school activities
or homework. School times shall follow the traditional school calendar. A
request for exemption can be made by the parent of the minor vendor;
   (G)   The parents of any minor must present to the city a release of
liability waiver signed by the custodial parent;
   (H)   All minors engaged in the sale of non-alcoholic beverages must comply
with all existing Tulare Municipal Code sections, including but not limited to:
10.58 (Vendor Stands),
8.16 (Sidewalk Obstructions),
5.92 (Mobile Vending),
8.36 (City Parks) and must comply with all city, county, and state health
ordinances.
   (I)   A minor conducting a sale on private property must have permission of
the property owner signed on a city issued form;
   (J)   All minor/juvenile business licenses issued for the sale of non-
alcoholic beverages will expire 60 days from date of issuance.
(Ord. 09-13, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 5.04.170   Claim for exemption.
   Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this chapter shall file a
verified statement with the License Tax Collector stating the facts upon which
exemption is claimed.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.170)
§ 5.04.180   Issuance of license.
   The License Tax Collector shall, upon a proper showing contained in the
verified statement, issue a license to the person claiming exemption under the
foregoing provisions of this chapter without payment to the city of the license
tax required herein.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.180)
§ 5.04.190   Revocation.
   The License Tax Collector may revoke any license granted pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter upon information that the licensee is not entitled
to the exemption as provided herein.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.190)
§ 5.04.200   Application for license.
   Every person required to have a license under the provisions of this chapter
shall make application for the same to the License Tax Collector.
   (A)   Issuance. Every person(s) desiring to hold a going out of business or
a removal of business sale must apply for a license with the License Tax
Collector. After all requirements of §
5.04.070 are met, the license may be issued. The license shall authorize the
sale described in the application for a period of not more than 45 consecutive
days following the issuance thereof.
   (B)   Application for license. (Going Out of or Removal of Business Sale.)
      (1)   A license shall be obtained by any person(s) before selling or
offering to sell goods at a going out of business or removal of business sale.
The person(s) desiring to receive said license must submit, prior to the
issuance of the license, a written application to the License Tax Collector
setting forth and containing the following information:
         (a)   The true name and address of the owner of the goods to be
subject of the sale;
         (b)   The true name and address of the person(s) from whom the goods
to be sold, where purchased and their price, and if not purchased the manner of
the acquisition;
         (c)   A description of the place where such sale is to be held;
         (d)   The nature of occupancy, whether by lease or sublease and the
effective dates of termination of the occupancy;
         (e)   The dates of the period of time in which the sale is to be
conducted;
         (f)   A full and complete statement of facts in regard to the sale,
including the reason(s) for the urgent and expeditious disposal of goods
thereby, and the manner in which the sale will be conducted;
         (g)   The means to be employed in advertising the sale, with the
proposed context of any advertising;
         (h)   A complete and detailed inventory of the goods to be sold at the
sale, as disclosed by the applicant’s records, the inventory shall be attached
to and become part of the required applications; and
         (i)   All goods included in the inventory shall have been purchased by
the applicant for resale on bonafide orders, without cancellation privileges
and shall not comprise goods purchased on consignment.
      (2)   The inventory shall not include goods ordered in contemplation of
conducting a going out of business or removal of business sale. Any unusual
purchase or additions to the stock of goods of the business hereby effected
within 60 days before the filing of an application shall be deemed to be of the
character.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.200)
§ 5.04.210   Affidavit for first license.
   Upon a person making application for the first license to be issued
hereunder or for a newly established business, in all cases where the amount of
license tax to be paid is based upon gross receipts, or average number or
persons employed, or number of vehicles used, the person shall furnish to the
License Tax Collector for his or her guidance in ascertaining the amount of
license tax to be paid by the applicant, a written statement, upon a form
provided by the License Tax Collector, sworn to before a person authorized to
administer oaths, setting forth such information as may be there required and
as may be necessary properly to determine the amount of the license tax to be
paid by the applicant.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.210)
§ 5.04.220   Estimate of gross receipts.
   If the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant is based upon
the gross receipts, or average number of persons employed, or number of
vehicles used in his or her business, he or she shall estimate the gross
receipts.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.220)
§ 5.04.230   Use of estimate.
   The estimate, if accepted by the License Tax Collector as reasonable, shall
be used in determining the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.230)
§ 5.04.240   Subsequent adjustment of tax.
   The amount of the license tax so determined shall be tentative only, and
such person shall, within 30 days after the expiration of the period for which
the license was issued, furnish the License Tax Collector with a sworn
statement upon a form furnished by the License Tax Collector, showing the gross
receipts, or average number of persons employed, or number of vehicles used in
the business, during the period of the license, and the license tax for the
period shall be finally ascertained and paid in the a manner provided by this
chapter for the ascertaining and paying of renewal license taxes for other
businesses, after deducting from the payment found to be due, the amount paid
at the time the first license was issued.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.240)
§ 5.04.250   Future licenses to applicant.
   The License Tax Collector shall not issue to any person any other license
for the same or any other business, until the person shall have furnished to
him or her the written statement and paid the license tax, as herein required.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.250)
§ 5.04.260   Affidavit for renewal license.
   (A)   General. In all cases, the applicant for the renewal of a license
shall submit to the License Tax Collector for his or her guidance in
ascertaining the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant, a
written statement, upon a form to be provided by the License Tax Collector,
sworn to before a person authorized to administer oaths, setting forth such
information concerning the applicant’s business during the preceding year as
may be required by the License Tax Collector to enable him or her to ascertain
the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   License renewal. The License Tax Collector shall renew a going out of
business or a removal of business license for one period of time only for not
more than 45 consecutive days in addition to the time permitted in the original
license, when he or she ascertains:
      (1)   The facts existing justify the renewal;
      (2)   That the licensee has filed an application for renewal; and
      (3)   That the licensee has submitted with the application for renewal a
revised inventory showing the items on the original inventory which remain
unsold, and not listing any goods not included in the original application and
inventory.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.260)
§ 5.04.270   Statement not conslusive.
   No statement shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor
shall the filing of the same preclude the city from collecting, by appropriate
action, such sum as is actually due and payable hereunder.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.270)
§ 5.04.280   Audit—Verification.
   The statement and each of the several items therein contained shall be
subject to audit and verification by the License Tax Collector, his or her
deputies, or authorized to examine, audit and inspect the books and records of
any licensee or applicant for license, as may be necessary in their judgement
to verify or ascertain the amount of license fee due.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.280)
§ 5.04.290   Access to books.
   All licensees, applicants for license and persons engaged in business in the
city are hereby required to permit an examination of the books and records for
the purposes aforesaid.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.290)
§ 5.04.300   Secrecy.
   The information furnished or secured pursuant to the preceding sections of
this chapter shall be confidential. Any unwarranted disclosure or use of such
information by any officer or employee of the city shall constitute a
misdemeanor, and such officer or employee shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of this code.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.300)
§ 5.04.310   Failure to file statement.
   If any person fails to file any required statement within the time
prescribed or if after demand therefor made by the License Tax Collector, he or
she fails to file a corrected statement, the License Tax Collector may
determine the amount of license tax due from the person by means of the
information as he or she may be able to obtain.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.310)
§ 5.04.320   Notice of amount assessed.
   In case such a determination is made, the License Tax Collector shall give a
notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it
in the United States Post Office at Tulare, California, postage prepaid,
addressed to the person so assessed at his or her last known address.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.320)
§ 5.04.330   Application for hearing.
   The person may within ten days after the mailing or serving of such notice,
make application in writing to the License Tax Collector for a hearing on the
amount of the license tax.
(Prior Code, § 5.04.330)
§ 5.04.340   Setting for hearing—Notice.
   If the application is made, or if application is not made within the time
prescribed, the License Tax Collector must cause the matter to be set for
hearing within 15 days before the Council. The License Tax Collector shall give
at least ten-days’ notice to the person of the time and place of hearing in the
manner prescribed for the service of notice of assessment.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.340)
§ 5.04.350 Hearing—Findings.
   The Council shall consider all evidence produced, and written notice of its
findings thereon, which findings shall be final, shall be served upon the
applicant in a manner prescribed herein for service of notice of assessment.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.350)
§ 5.04.360   Contents of license.
   Upon the payment of the prescribed tax, the License Tax Collector shall
issue to the applicant a license which shall contain:
   (A)   Name of licensee. The name of the person to whom the license is
issued;
   (B)   Business. The business licensed;
   (C)   Location. The place where the business is to be transacted and carried
on;
   (D)   Expiration date. The date of expiration of the license; and
   (E)   Other information. Such other information as may be necessary for the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.360)
§ 5.04.370   Appeal—Notice of appeal.
   Any person aggrieved by any decision of an administrative officer or agency,
with respect to the issuance or refusal to issue the license, may appeal to the
Council by filing a notice of appeal with the Clerk of the Council. The Council
shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing the appeal. The Clerk of the
Council shall give notice to the person of the time and place of hearing by
serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office at
this city, postage prepaid, addressed to the person at his or her last known
address.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.370)
§ 5.04.380   Duplicate license.
   A duplicate license may be issued by the License Tax Collector to replace
any license previously issued hereunder which has been lost or destroyed, upon
the licensee filing an affidavit attesting to the fact, and at the time of
filing the affidavit paying to the License Tax Collector a duplicate license
fee of $1.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.380)
Editor’s mote:
   For the most recent fee, please see the Rates and Fees Resolution passed by
the city and on file in the city offices.
§ 5.04.390   Due date.
   Unless otherwise specifically provided, all annual license taxes, under the
provisions of this chapter shall be due and payable in advance on July 1 each
year. Except as otherwise provided, license taxes, other than annual licenses
required hereunder shall be due and payable as follows:
   (A)   Semiannual license. Semiannual license taxes on January 1 and July 1
of each year;
   (B)   Quarterly license. Quarterly license taxes, on January 1, April 1,
July 1 and October 1 of each year;
   (C)   Monthly license. Monthly license taxes, on the first day of each and
every month;
   (D)   Weekly license. Weekly license taxes, on Monday of each week in
advance; and
   (E)   Daily license. Daily license taxes, each day in advance.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.390)
§ 5.04.400   Delinquency in payment.
   (A)   For failure to pay a license tax, a penalty fee of 15% shall be added
on the last day of each month after the due dates as set forth in §
5.04.390 of this chapter. The amount of the penalty to be added shall no event
exceed 90% of the license fee due. The penalty fees shall be added if the
license fee is not received by the License Tax Collector prior to:
      (1)   Annual fees. 5:00 p.m. on July 31 of each year;
      (2)   Semiannual fees. 5:00 p.m. on January 31 and July 31 of each year;
      (3)   Quarterly fees. 5:00 p.m. on January 31, April 30, July 31 and
October 31 of each year;
      (4)   Monthly fees. 5:00 p.m. on the last day of each month;
      (5)   Weekly fees. 5:00 p.m., Friday of each week; and
      (6)   Daily. 5:00 p.m. daily.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, payments made through the mail shall
be considered to have been received by 5:00 p.m. on the day they are
postmarked.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.400)
§ 5.04.410   Duties of Collector—Police.
   It is the duty of the License Tax Collector to enforce all of the provisions
of this chapter and the Chief of Police shall render assistance in the
enforcement hereof as may from time to time be required by the License Tax
Collector and/or the Council.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.410)
§ 5.04.420   Inspection of business places.
   The License Tax Collector in the exercise of the duties imposed upon him or
her hereunder, and acting through his or her deputies or duly authorized
assistants, shall examine or cause to be examined all places of business in the
city to ascertain whether the provisions of this chapter have been complied
with.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.420)
§ 5.04.430   Extensions—Compromises.
   In addition to all other powers conferred upon him or her, the License Tax
Collector shall have the power, for good cause shown, to extend the time for
filing any required sworn statement for a period not exceeding 30 days, and in
such case to waive any penalty that would otherwise have accrued, and shall
have the further power, with the consent of the Council, to compromise any
claim as to amount of license tax due.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.430)
§ 5.04.440   Posting of licenses.
   All licenses must be kept and posted in the following manner:
   (A)   Posting. Any licensee transacting and carrying on business at a fixed
place of business in the city shall keep the license posted in a conspicuous
place upon the premises where the business is carried on.
   (B)   Carrying of license. Any licensee transacting and carrying on business
but not operating at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the
license upon his or her person at all times while transacting and carrying on
the business.
   (C)   Entry, demand. The License Tax Collector and each of his or her
assistants and any police officer shall have the power and authority to enter,
free of charge, and at any reasonable time, any place of business required to
be licensed herein, and demand an exhibition of its license certificate.
   (D)   Failure to exhibit license. Any person having the license certificate
theretofore issued, in his or her possession or under his or her control, who
wilfully fails to exhibit the same on demand, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (E)   Duty to prosecute. It shall be the duty of the License Tax Collector
and each of his or her assistants to cause a complaint to be filed against any
persons found to be violating any of the provisions.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.440)
§ 5.04.450   License as debt—Court action.
   The amount of any license tax and penalty imposed by the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city; and any person carrying on any
business without first having procured a license from the city so to do shall
be liable to an action in the name of the city in any court of competent
jurisdiction, for the amount of license tax and penalties imposed on the
business.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.450)
§ 5.04.460   Criminal, civil actions.
   The conviction of any person for engaging in any business without first
obtaining a license to conduct the business, nor shall the payment of any
license tax prevent a criminal prosecution for the violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.460)
§ 5.04.470   Receipts from sales; services.
   (A)   Every person transacting and carrying on any business other than those
businesses enumerated in §
5.04.480 shall pay a semiannual license tax based upon the average semiannually
license tax based upon the average semiannually gross receipts as follows:
Average Gross Receipts License Fee
Semiannually Semiannually
Average Gross Receipts License Fee
Semiannually    Semiannually
0—3,000       $12.50
3,001—6,000   $25.00
6,001—15,000  $37.50
15,001—30,000 $47.50
30,001—45,000 $62.50
45,001—60,000 $75.00
60,001—90,000 $87.50
90,001—120,000$100.00
120,001—180,00$125.00
180,001—240,00$150.00
240,001—288,00$175.00
288,001—360,00$195.00
 
Average Gross Receipts License Fee
Semiannually Semiannually
Average Gross Receipts License Fee
Semiannually     Semiannually
360,001 —432,00$232.50
432,001—504,000$270.00
504,001—612,000$325.00
612,001—720,000$387.50
720,001—828,000$432.50
828,001—936,000$475.00
936,001—up     $500.00
 
   (B)   Wholesale and telephone service: 50% of sales and services; $25
minimum. Contractors: minimum annual fee of $92.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.470)
§ 5.04.480   Flat rates.
   (A)   Professions. Accountant, architecture, appraiser, attorney at law,
bacteriologist, bookkeeper, brokerage not otherwise listed, business or
financial counselor, brokers in securities and commodities, chiropractor,
chiropodist, certified public accountant, chemist dentistry, dental laboratory,
detective agency, drafting, doctor, engineering (civil, mechanical, electrical,
mining), geologist, insurance adjuster, landscape architect, medicine, medical
laboratory, masseur, masseuse, optometry, optician, oculist, osteopath,
physician and surgeon, psychiatrist, psychologist, public accountancy, public
stenography, real estate broker (out of city), radiologist, surgery, surveyor,
tax consultant, veterinarian; for each person duly licensed to practice said
profession or vocation, whether a partner, employee or associate and including
on assistant; such as a stenographer, secretary, clerk, nurse, real estate
salesperson or other assistant $60 per semiannum, plus $9 per semiannum for
each additional employee.
   (B)   Other business and vocations. Every person transacting or carrying on
the business and vocations herein enumerated shall pay a license tax as
follows:
Business/Vocation License Tax
Business/Vocation                                         License Tax
Amusement machine owner or vender, in addition to the     $20.00 semiannually
license tax imposed on gross receipts as set forth in §  for each machine
5.04.470
Amusement performance, transient                          $31.25 per semiannual
Animal show                                               $7.50 per day
                                                          $43.75 annually for
Apartment houses and rooming houses                       first five units plus
                                                          $3.75 for each
                                                          additional unit
Auctioneer                                                $75.00 per semiannual
Auctioneer, itinerant vendor                              $50.00 per day
Auto wrecker                                              $156.25 per
                                                          semiannual
Automobiles for hire                                      $25.00 per semiannual
Barber shop (per chair)                                   $11.25 per semiannual
Beauty shop (per chair)                                   $11.25 per semiannual
Billboard advertising                                     $75.00 per semiannual
Billiard or pool tables (per table)                       $12.50 per semiannual
Bowling alleys (per alley)                                $12.50 per semiannual
Building and loan association or savings and loan         $100.00 per
association                                               semiannual
Carnival                                                  $250.00 per day
Carnival operator, including concession                   $250.00 per day
Circus                                                    $250.00 per day
Circus parade                                             $125.00 per day
Collection agency and credit bureau                       $75.00 per semiannual
Concessionaire, itinerant vendor (per concession)         $12.50 per week
Delivery or providing services by vehicle not otherwise   $37.50 per semiannual
licensed hereunder
Finance companies                                         $100.00 per
                                                          semiannual
Football                                                  $37.50 per semiannual
Garage or yard sale                                       $6.25 per sale
                                                          $62.50 for initial
Going-out-of-business sale                                sale
                                                          $125.00 additional
                                                          45-day sale period
 
Business/Vocation License Tax
Business/Vocation                       License Tax
House moving                            $62.50 per semiannual
Junk collector                          $31.25 per vehicle semiannual
Junk dealer                             $93.75 per senuannual
Manufacturing, processing or assembling $60.00 per semiannual+$1.25 per
of products and produce                 employee
Merry-go-round, each                    $12.50 per day
Music machines, each                    $24.00 per semiannual
Newspaper, distributor                  $12.50 per semiannual
Newspaper, publication and distribution $100.00 per semiannual
Pawnbroker                              $125.00 per semiannual
Peddler                                 $125.00 per semiannual
Photographer, itinerant                 $250.00 per semiannual
Public dances                           $18.75 per day
                                        $62.50 initial sale
Removal-of-business sale                $125.00 for additional 45-day sale
                                        period
Sales, assigned goods                   $500.00 per semiannual
Sales, bankrupt goods                   $500.00 per semiannual
Sales, damaged goods                    $500.00 per semiannual
Shoe shine parlor                       $3.75 per semiannual
Skating rink                            $60.00 per semiannual
Solicitor                               $125.00 per semiannual
Solicitor employee (per employee)       $62.60 per semiannual
 
   (C)   The fees are set forth in division (B) of this §
5.04.480 shall not be prorated, and shall be due and payable for all of any
portion of the period specified. Licenses for semiannual periods shall expire
or June 30 or December 31 immediately following their issuance.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.480)
Editor’s note:
   For the most recent fee, please see the Rates and Fees Resolution passed by
the city and on file in the city offices.
§ 5.04.490   Violations—Penalties.
   Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as a
misdemeanor. Upon recommendation of the prosecuting attorney and city agency,
the misdemeanor may be reduced to an infraction.
   (A)   Misdemeanor. Any person guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction
thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500 and/or imprisonment
in the County Jail for not more than 30 days.
   (B)   Infraction. Any person guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction
thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $50 for the first offense,
$100 or the second offense and $250 for each subsequent offense.
   (C)   Violation; perjury. Any person who knowingly or intentionally
misrepresents to any officer or employee of the city any material fact herein
required to be provided is in violation of this chapter. Additionally, any
individual who on a sworn statement states as a true a material fact which he
or she knows to be false, is guilty of perjury.
   (D)   Fraud. Any person who, with the intent to defraud the city or evade
his or her business tax obligation misrepresents in any business tax form which
the person files, any fact material to the determination of a correct amount of
business tax due, shall be assessed a penalty of 100% of the amount of business
tax due plus one percent interest per month, or a portion thereof, on the
unpaid amount from the date the tax was due until the date of payment.
   (E)   Exhibition. Any person who has a business certificate issued under
this chapter and has the certification in his or her control and who fails to
exhibit the same upon request is in violation of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.490) (Ord. 96-1789, passed - -1996)
§ 5.04.500   Compliance with applicable provisions of the ordinance code and
all other applicable laws.
   The payment of a license tax, and its acceptance by the city, and the
issuance of the license, shall not entitle the holder thereof to carry on any
business unless he or she has complied with all the requirements of this code
and all other applicable laws, nor to carry on any business in any building or
on any premises designated in the license in the event that the building or
premises are situated in a zone or lacality in which the conduct of the
business as in violation of any law. The License Tax Collector may refuse to
issue a business license until and unless the applicant can satisfactorily
establish that he or she has complied with all the requirements of this code
and all other applicable laws and has obtained all necessary approvals from
appropriate city departments.
(1995 Code, § 5.04.500)
CHAPTER 5.08: UNIFORM LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX
Section
   
5.08.010   Short title.
   
5.08.020   Rate.
   
5.08.030   Operative date.
   
5.08.040   Purpose.
   
5.08.050   Contract with state.
   
5.08.060   Sales tax.
   
5.08.070   Place of sale.
   
5.08.080   Use tax.
   
5.08.090   Adoption of provisions of state law.
   
5.08.100   Limitations on adoption of state law.
   
5.08.110   Permit not required.
   
5.08.120   Exclusions and exemptions.
   
5.08.130   Exclusions and exemptions.
   
5.08.140   Application of provisions relating to exclusions and exemptions.
   
5.08.150   Amendments.
   
5.08.160   Enjoining collection forbidden.
   
5.08.170   Existing sales and use tax ordinance suspended.
§ 5.08.010   Short title.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax
Chapter”.
(1995 Code, § 5.08.010)
§ 5.08.020   Rate.
   The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by the chapter shall be 0.95%.
(1995 Code, § 5.08.020)
§ 5.08.030   Operative date.
   This chapter shall be operative on January 1, 1974.
(1995 Code, § 5.08.030)
§ 5.08.040   Purpose.
   The City Council hereby declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the
following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be
interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:
   (A)   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the
requirements and limitations contained in Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code Part
1.5 of Division 2;
   (B)   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions
identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax of the State of California insofar
as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations
contained in Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code Part 1.5 of Division 2;
   (C)   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and
provides a measure therfor that can be administered and collected by the
state’s Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as
practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing
statutory and administrative procedures followed by the state’s Board of
Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use
Taxes; and
   (D)   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a
manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Cal.
Revenue and Taxation Code Part 1.5 of Division 2, minimize the cost of
collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of
record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this
chapter.
(1995 Code, § 5.08.040)
§ 5.08.050   Contract with state.
   Prior to the operative date, this city shall contract with the state’s Board
of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and
operation of the Sales and Use Tax Ordinance; provided, that if the city shall
not have contracted with the state’s Board of Equalization prior to the
operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the
operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following
the execution of such a contract rather that the first day of the first
calendar quarter following the adoption of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 5.08.050)
§ 5.08.060   Sales tax.
   For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is
hereby imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in §
5.08.020 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible
personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date.
(1995 Code, § 5.08.060)
§ 5.08.070   Place of sale.
   For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the
place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is
delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out of state destination or
to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross
receipts from the sales shall include delivery charges, when the charges are
subject to the state’s Sales and Use Tax, regardless of the place to which
delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in
the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which
the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rule and regulations
to be prescribed and adopted by the state’s Board of Equalization.
(1995 Code, § 5.08.070)
§ 5.08.080   Use tax.
   An exercise tax is hereby imposed in the storage, use or other consumption
in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and
after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in the city at
the rate stated in §
5.08.020 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include
delivery charge when the charges are subject to state’s Sales or Use Tax
regardless of the place to which delivery is made.
(1995 Code, § 5.08.080)
§ 5.08.090 Adoption of provisions of state law.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though
fully set forth herein.
(Prior Code, § 5.08.090)
§ 5.08.100   Limitations on adoption of state law.
   In adopting the provisions of Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code Part 1 of
Division 2, wherever the State of California is named of referred to as the
taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. The
substitution, however, shall not be made when the word “state” is used as part
of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the state’s Board of
Control, the state’s Board of Equalization, the State Treasury or the
Constitution of the State of California; the substitution shall not be made
when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or
against the city, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the state’s
Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the
administrative or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made
in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections
referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the
result of the substitution would be be to provide an exemption from this tax
with respect to certain sales, storage, use of other consumption of tangible
personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while the
sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which
would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Cal. Revenue
and Taxation Code Part 1 of Division 2, or to impose this tax with respect to
certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property
which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provisions of
that code; the substitution shall not be made in Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code
§§ 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or
6828; and the substitution shall not be made for the word “state” in the phrase
“retailer engaged in business in this state” in Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code
§ 6203 or in the definition of the phrase in Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code §
6203.
(1995 Code, § 5.08.100)
§ 5.08.110   Permit not required.
   If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Cal. Revenue and
Taxation Code § 6067, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by
this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 5.08.110)
§ 5.08.120   Exclusions and exemptions.
   There shall be excluded from the measure of tax:
   (A)   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State of California
upon a retailer or consumer;
   (B)   The storage, use or the consumption of tangible personal property, the
gross receipts from the sale of which has been subject to sales tax under a
sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Cal. Revenue and
Taxation Code Part 1.5 of Division 2 by any city and county, county or city in
this state;
   (C)   The gross receipts from sales to, and the storage, use or other
consumption of property purchased by, operators of common carriers and
waterborne vessels to be used or consumed in the operation of the common
carriers or waterborne vessels, principally outside this city; and
   (D)   The storage or use of tangible personal property in the transportation
or transmission of persons, property or communications, or in the generation,
transmission or distribution of electricity or in the manufacture, transmission
or distribution of gas in intrastate, interstate or foreign commerce by public
utilities which are regulated by the Public Utilities Commission of the State
of California.
(1995 Code, § 5.08.120)
§ 5.08.130   Exclusions and exemptions.
   (A)   Aircraft.
      (1)   The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax
imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer.
      (2)   The storage use or other consumption of tangible personal property,
the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a
sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Cal. Revenue and
Taxation Code Part 1.5 of Division 2 by any city and county, county or city, in
this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.
      (3)   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales
tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators
of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the
sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common
carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of the state,
the United States or any foreign government.
      (4)   In addition to the exemptions provided in Cal. Revenue and Taxation
Code §§ 6366 and 6366.1, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible
personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and use or consumed by
such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common
carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of
public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the
United States or any foreign government is exempted for the use tax.
   (B)   Waterborne vessels.
      (1)   The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax
imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer.
      (2)   The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal
property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax
under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Cal. Revenue and
Taxation Code Part 1.5 of Division 2 by any city and county, county or city, in
this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.
      (3)   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales
tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators
of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in
which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons
or property in such vessels for commercial purposes.
      (4)   The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property
purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by the
operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of
the vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax.
      (5)   There are exempted form the computation of the amount of the sales
tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators
of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the
sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of the aircraft as common
carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state,
the United States or any foreign government.
      (6)   In addition to the exemptions provided in Cal. Revenue and Taxation
Code §§ 6366 and 6366.1, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible
personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by
the operators directly and exclusively in the use of the aircraft as common
carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of
public convenience and necessity issue pursuant to the laws of this state, the
United States or any foreign government is exempt from the use tax.
(1995 Code, § 5.08.130)
Editor’s note:
   Section
5.08.130(A)(4) shall be operative January 1, 1984.
   Section
5.08.130 shall be operative on the operative date of any act of Legislature of
the State of California which amends Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code § 7202 or
which repeals and reenacts Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code § 7202 to provide an
exemption from city sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels in
the same, or substantially the same, language as the existing in subdivisions
(i)(7) and (i)(8) § 7202 of those subdivisions read on October 1, 1983.
§ 5.08.140   Application of provisions relating to exclusions and exemptions.
   (A)   Section
5.08.130 of this chapter shall become operative on January 1 of the year
following the year in which the state’s Board of Equalization adopts an
assessment ratio for state assessed property which is identical to the ratio
which is required for local assessments by Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code §
401, at which time §
5.08.120 of this chapter shall became inoperative.
   (B)   In the event that §
5.08.130 of this chapter becomes operative and the state’s Board of
Equalization subsequently adopts an assessment ratio for the state-assessed
property which is higher than the ratio which is required for local assessments
by Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code § 401, §
5.08.120 of this chapter shall become operative on the first day of the month
next following the month in which the higher ratio is adopted, at which time §
5.08.130 of this chapter shall be inoperative until the first day of the month
following the month in which the Board again adopts an assessment ratio for
state-assessed property which is identical to the ratio required for local
assessments by Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code § 401, at which time §
5.08.130 shall again become operative and §
5.08.120 shall become inoperative.
(1995 Code, § 5.08.140)
§ 5.08.150   Amendments.
   All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to
the Sales and Use Tax and which are not inconsistent with Cal. Revenue and
Taxation Code Part 1.5 of Division 2 shall automatically become a part of this
chapter.
(1995 Code, § 5.08.150)
§ 5.08.160   Enjoining collection forbidden.
   No injuction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action on proceeding in any court against the state or this
city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin
the collection under this chapter, or Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code Part 1.5
of Division 2, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected.
(1995 Code, § 5.08.160)
§ 5.08.170   Existing sales and use tax ordinance suspended.
   On the operative date of Ord. 1095, of the City of Tulare, the date being
January 1, 1974, the provisions of Ord. 540, shall be suspended and shall not
again be of any force or effect until and unless for any reason the state’s
Board of Equalization ceases to perform the functions incident to the
administration and operation of the Sales and Use Tax imposed by Ord. 1095.
Provided, however, that if for any reason it is determined that the City of
Tulare is without power to adopt Ord. 1095, or that the state’s Board of
Equalization is without power to perform the functions incident to the
administration and operation of the taxes imposed by Ord. 540 shall not be
deemed to have been suspended, but shall not be deemed to have been in full
force and effect at the rate of 1% continuously from and after April 1, 1956.
Upon the ceasing of the state’s Board of Equalization to perform the functions
incident to the administration and operation of the taxed imposed by Ord. 540,
shall again be in full force and effect at the rate of 1%. Nothing in this
chapter shall be construed as relieving any person of the obligation to pay the
City of Tulare any of the sales and use taxes accrued and owing by the reason
of the provisions of Ord. 540 in force and effect prior to and including March
31, 1956.
(1995 Code, § 5.08.170)
CHAPTER 5.12: AUTO CAMPS
Section
   
5.12.010   Definitions.
   
5.12.020   Approval of location—Procedure.
   
5.12.030   Hearing—Notice.
   
5.12.040   Hearing before Inspector.
   
5.12.050   Reference to Council.
   
5.12.060   Application for permit to occupy.
   
5.12.070   Filing of application—Inspection fee.
   
5.12.080   Inspection—Issuance, posting of permit.
   
5.12.090   Expiration—Renewal—Fee.
   
5.12.100   Preexisting camps.
   
5.12.110   Revocation.
   
5.12.120   Transfer of permit.
   
5.12.130   Drainage of grounds.
   
5.12.140   Sanitation—Repair.
   
5.12.150   Lights.
   
5.12.160   Dogs.
   
5.12.170   Location of units.
   
5.12.180   Driveways.
   
5.12.190   Immobilizing of units.
   
5.12.200   Applicability of building regulations.
   
5.12.210   Water.
   
5.12.220   Water closets.
   
5.12.230   Bathtubs—Showers.
   
5.12.240   Exemptions authorized.
   
5.12.250   Floors—Sanitation.
   
5.12.260   Refuse containers.
   
5.12.270   Slop sinks.
   
5.12.280   Waste water.
   
5.12.290   Sewer connections.
   
5.12.300   Enforcement—Inspection.
   
5.12.310   Violations.
Statutory reference:
   Statute provisions concerning trailer parks, see Cal. Health and Sanitation
Code §§ 18000 et seq.
§ 5.12.010   Definitions.
   The following words and terms when used in this chapter shall have the
meanings herein ascribed to them unless the content makes such meaning
repugnant thereto.
   CAMP CAR and/or TRAILER. Any unit used for living or sleeping purposes and
which is equipped with wheels or similar devices used for the purpose of
transporting it from place to place, whether by motive power or other means;
and the unit, so equipped, shall be capable of being safely operated at a speed
limit of 45 mph.
   CAMP GROUND. Any place, area or tract of land upon which is located any camp
car and/or trailer, used for residential purposes.
   IMMOBILE UNIT. Any vehicle that is incapable of such safe operation is
hereby declared to be a dwelling, as defined in the state’s Housing Act.
   TENT SPACE. Any place, area of tract of land upon which is located any tent
used for living or sleeping purposes.
(1995 Code, § 5.12.010)
Statutory reference:
   State Housing Act, see Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 15000 et seq.
§ 5.12.020   Approval of location—Procedure.
   No campground or tent space hereafter established shall be located within
the city until the location thereof is approved by the Building Inspector in
the following manner:
   (A)   Application; filing. The person desiring to locate and operate a
campground or tent space in the city, under the provisions of the chapter,
shall file and application therefor with the Building Inspector.
   (B)   Description of property. The application shall include a true legal
description of the property upon which it is proposed to locate the campground
or tent space.
   (C)   Filing fee. The application shall be accompanied with a filing fee of
$10.
(1995 Code, § 5.12.020)
Editor’s note:
   For the most recent fee, please see the Rates and Fees Resolution passed by
the city and on file in the city offices.
§ 5.12.030   Hearing—Notice.
   Upon receipts of the application, the Building Inspector shall fix a time
and place for the holding of a public hearing thereon.
   (A)   Notice of hearing; publication; posting. Notice of the hearing shall
be given by at least one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in
the city, and by causing a notice thereof to be posted at no more that 150 feet
in distance apart along both sides of each street upon which the property
involved in the application abuts.
   (B)   Manner of posting. The posting shall extend along the streets a
distance of not less that 300 feet from the exterior limits of the property
involved in the application.
   (C)   Time of hearing. The notice shall state the time when the petition
will be heard by the Building Inspector, which shall not be less that ten days
for the date of publication and posting.
(1995 Code, § 5.12.030)
§ 5.12.040   Hearing before Inspector.
   At the time of hearing of the application, the Building Inspector may hear
anyone appearing for the purpose of approving or objecting to the granting of
the application, and at the conclusion of the hearing may either approve or
disapprove the application.
(1995 Code, § 5.12.040)
§ 5.12.050   Reference to Council.
   The Building Inspector shall immediately communicate his or her findings and
recommendation in regard to the application to the Council, which shall
consider the matter at its regular meeting next following the date of hearing
before the Building Inspector. The Council shall thereupon publicly hear and
finally and conclusively determine whether or not the application shall be
granted, giving such notice of the hearing upon the application as it deems
proper.
(1995 Code, § 5.12.050)
§ 5.12.060   Application for permit to occupy.
   Upon completion of any campground or tent space, and prior to the use
thereof the owner or renter of the campground or tent space shall make
application to the Building Inspector for a permit to occupy or use the
campground or tent space.
(1995 Code, § 5.12.060)
§ 5.12.070   Filing of application—Inspection fee.
   It shall be filed with the Building Inspector not less that three days
before the campground or tent space is made ready for use; and it shall be
accompanied by an inspection fee of $5.
(1995 Code, § 5.12.070)
Editor’s note:
   For the most recent fee, please see the Rates and Fees Resolution passed by
the city and on file in the city offices.
§ 5.12.080   Inspection—Issuance, posting of permit.
   The Building Inspector shall thereupon make an inspection of the campground
or tent space referred to in the application; and, it is found to be in
conformity with this chapter and all other provisions of this code and the laws
of the state, the Building Inspector shall issue to the owner or operator
thereof a written permit to occupy, which permit shall at all times be posted
at a conspicuous place in the campground or tent space.
(1995 Code, § 5.12.080)
§ 5.12.090   Expiration—Renewal—Fee.
   The permit to occupy shall expire one calendar year from the date of issue
and may be renewed upon written application accompanied by an inspection fee of
$5 to the Building Inspector.
(1995 Code, § 5.12.090)
Editor’s note:
   For the most recent fee, please see the Rates and Fees Resolution passed by
the city and on file in the city offices.
§ 5.12.100   Preexisting camps.
   The owner or operator of every campground or tent space then in existence in
the city, shall upon the effective date of this chapter make application, as
herein provided, to the Building Inspector for a permit to occupy; and it shall
be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain any campground or tent space
within the confines of the city as herein set forth, without first applying for
and receiving from the Building Inspector a permit to occupy and without
complying with all of the provisions of this chapter and the laws of the state.
(1995 Code, § 5.12.100)
§ 5.12.110   Revocation.
   Whenever it is found that any campground or tent space is not being
conducted in conformity with the provisions of this chapter or the laws of the
state, the permit to operate same shall be subject to revocation or suspension
by the Council.
(1995 Code, § 5.12.110)
§ 5.12.120   Transfer of permit.
   A permit to operate or maintain a campground or tent space shall be
transferable upon the written application of the holder of the permit to the
Building Inspector and with the consent of the Building Inspector endorsed
thereon.
(1995 Code, § 5.12.120)
§ 5.12.130   Drainage of grounds.
   Every campground or tent space hereafter established shall be located on a
well-drained area; and the premises of every such campground or tent space, or
any existing campground or tent space, shall be maintained in a sanitary
condition and shall be properly graded so as to prevent the accumulation of
storm or casual waters.
(1995 Code, § 5.12.130)
§ 5.12.140   Sanitation—Repair.
   Every person owning or operating a campground or tent space shall maintain
such campground or tent space, and all permanent equipment in connection
therewith, in a clean and sanitary condition, and shall maintain the equipment
in a state of good repair.
(1995 Code, § 5.12.140)
§ 5.12.150   Lights.
   Every campground or tent space heretofore or hereafter established shall be
provided with means of lighting the same at night; and all public water closets
and bath units shall be provided with sufficient lighting facilities which
shall be kept lighted during the time from one-half hour after sunset until
one-half hour before sunrise, except in case of a blackout.
(1995 Code, § 5.12.150)
§ 5.12.160   Dogs.
   Dogs, at no time, shall be permitted to run at large in any campground or
tent space.
(1995 Code, § 5.12.160)
§ 5.12.170   Location of units.
   No trailer or tent used for living or sleeping purposes in any campground or
tent space now existing or that may hereafter be established, shall be located
with ten feet of any trailer, tent or structure; nor shall any trailer or tent
be located within eight feet of any lot line.
(1995 Code, § 5.12.170)
§ 5.12.180   Driveways.
   Trailers and tents, as aforesaid, shall be arranged in rows abutting or
facing on a driveway or clear unoccupied space or not less than 15 feet in
width, which space shall have unobstructed access to a public street or alley.
(1995 Code, § 5.12.180)
§ 5.12.190   Immobilizing of units.
   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or operating a trailer located in
a campground to remove or cause to have removed the wheels or any similar
transporting devices from the trailer or to otherwise permanetly fix it to the
ground in a manner that would prevent the ready removal of the trailer, or to
alter it in any way so as to make it incapable of being safely operated over
the public thoroughfares of the state at a speed limit of 45 mph without first
obtaining a permit so to do, from the Building Inspector.
(1995 Code, § 5.12.190)
§ 5.12.200   Applicability of building regulations.
   Any alteration to any trailer, as herein set forth, shall be construed as
removing it from the requirements of this chapter and converting it into a
dwelling; and it shall thereupon be subject to the requirements of the Building
Code and the State Housing Act.
(1995 Code, § 5.12.200)
§ 5.12.210   Water.
   An adequate supply of pure water for drinking and domestic purposes shall be
supplied to meet the requirements of the campground or tent space.
(1995 Code, § 5.12.210)
§ 5.12.220   Water closets.
   There shall be provided in every campground or tent space one water closet
for each sex. One of the water closets shall be distinctly marked “For Men” and
one “For Women”. There shall be provided an additional water closet for each
sex for every ten tents or trailers in the campground and/or tent space.
(1995 Code, § 5.12.220)
§ 5.12.230   Bathtubs—Showers.
   There shall be provided in every campground or tent space stationary bathtub
or shower bath equipped with hot and cold running water. The bathtub or shower
bath shall be installed in a separate compartment from any water closet unit,
and there shall be provided an additional bathtub or shower bath for every ten
tents or trailers or fractional part thereof in excess of ten tents or trailers
in the campground and/or tent space.
(1995 Code, § 5.12.230)
§ 5.12.240   Exemptions authorized.
   The Building Inspector may exempt any campground or tent space existing at
the time of the adoption of this chapter from fully complying with the
provisions of §§
5.12.220 and
5.12.230 when, in his or her discretion, the deviation will not be detrimental
to the health of persons occupying the campground or tent space or to proper
sanitation of the premises.
(1995 Code, § 5.12.240)
§ 5.12.250   Floors—Sanitation.
   The floors of every water closet, bathtub or shower bath compartment
hereafter installed shall be a smooth waterproof material; and the interiors of
all water closets, bathtub or shower compartments shall be maintained in a
sanitary condition at all times.
(1995 Code, § 5.12.250)
§ 5.12.260   Refuse containers.
   There shall be provided in every campground or tent space heretofore or
hereafter established the number of metal receptacles with closefitting metal
covers for garbage, refuse, ashes and rubbish as may be deemed necessary by the
Building Inspector; and the receptacles shall, at all times, be maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition.
(1995 Code, § 5.12.260)
§ 5.12.270   Slop sinks.
   There shall be provided in every campground or tent space heretofore or
hereafter established one or more slop sinks properly connected with the sewer
system, the sinks to be conveniently located at no greater distance than 100
feet from any trailer or tent.
(1995 Code, § 5.12.270)
§ 5.12.280   Waste water.
   It is unlawful to deposit any waste water, drainage or material from
plumbing fixtures on the surface of any campground.
(1995 Code, § 5.12.280)
§ 5.12.290   Sewer connections.
   All fixtures, when in use, must be connected to the city sewer system.
(1995 Code, § 5.12.290)
§ 5.12.300   Enforcement—Inspection.
   It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to enforce all of the
provisions of this chapter; and, for the purpose of securing enforcement
thereof, the Building Inspector shall have the right to enter upon the premises
of any campground or tent space to inspect the same and all accommodation
connected therewith.
(1995 Code, § 5.12.300)
§ 5.12.310   Violations.
   It shall be the duty of every person owning, leasing, renting or operating a
campground or tent space in the city to comply with all the provisions of this
chapter; and any such person violating any of the provisions thereof or
disregarding to the campground or tent space, or contributing, in any way, to
the violation of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1995 Code, § 5.12.310)
Statutory reference:
   For statute provisions concerning trailer parks, see Cal. Health and
Sanitation Code, §§ 18000 et seq.
CHAPTER 5.16: SECONDHAND DEALERS
Section
   
5.16.010   Definitions.
   
5.16.020   Daily reports of transactions.
   
5.16.030   Contents of report.
   
5.16.040   Blank forms.
   
5.16.050   Filing of reports—Inspection.
   
5.16.060   Legibility of report.
   
5.16.070   Failure to file proper report.
   
5.16.080   Fictitious names.
   
5.16.090   Holding of goods.
   
5.16.100   Premature sales.
Statutory reference:
   Statue provisions concerning secondhand dealers, see Cal. Business and
Professions Code §§ 21500 et seq.
§ 5.16.010   Definitions.
   In this chapter, unless it is apparent from the context that some other
meaning is intended, the term SECONDHAND DEALER shall mean any person engaged
in buying, receiving, selling or otherwise disposing of, or dealing in
secondhand articles, goods, wares or merchandise of any type or description.
(1995 Code, § 5.16.010)
§ 5.16.020   Daily reports of transactions.
   Every person engaged in the business of secondhand dealer shall, on each
day, before the hour of 6:00 p.m., make out and deliver to the Chief of Police
on a blank form to be obtained by the secondhand dealer from the office of the
Chief of Police for the purpose, a full, true and complete report of all goods,
wares or merchandise received or purchased and showing all transactions
completed, with an accurate description of the same, during the day preceding
the filing of such a report.
(1995 Code, § 5.16.020)
§ 5.16.030   Contents of report.
   The report shall show the hour of the day when the article was received or
purchased, and the true name and address, as nearly as the same is known to, or
can be ascertained by the secondhand dealer or the person by whom the article
was left or said or otherwise acquired, together with the signature of the
person and with the description of the person. The description to be given of
every person shall show the sex, height, age, weight, occupation, complexion,
color of hair, style of dress, color of mustache or beard, or both, where the
same are worn, and if neither is worn, the fact shall be noted. The report
shall show the cost of each article purchased; or, if the article is acquired
on an exchange, the report will set forth the brief description of the article
exchanged for the article received. The report shall show the quantity
purchased, together with a complete description of the same, including the
manufacturer’s trade name or brand, if any, and the size and color; and if the
article has engraved thereon any number, word or initial, or contains any
settings of any kind, the description of the article in the report shall
contain such number, work, or initial, and shall show the kind of settings and
the number of each kind. If the article is delivered or received from a motor
vehicle, the report shall set forth its license number, if any, together with
its type, color and make.
(1995 Code, § 5.16.030)
§ 5.16.040   Blank forms.
   Blanks to be obtained from the office shall bear a caption providing blank
spaces in which shall be written or printed the date of the report, the name
and place of business of the person making the same and the hour of the day
when the report is received at the office of the Chief of Police. The blanks
shall be so printed and subdivided as to contain spaces with the proper
captions for the furnishing of the information required by this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 5.16.040)
§ 5.16.050   Filing of reports—Inspection.
   The Chief of Police shall file, in some secure place in his or her office,
all reports received pursuant to the terms of this chapter; and the same shall
be open to inspection only by members of the Police Department, or upon an
order of the Court.
(1995 Code, § 5.16.050)
§ 5.16.060   Legibility of report.
   Every report required by the terms of this chapter to be kept or filed shall
be written or printed entirely in the English language, in a clear and legible
manner.
(1995 Code, § 5.16.060)
§ 5.16.070   Failure to file proper report.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, refuse or neglect to file any
report in the form, in the manner, at the time and in all respects in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 5.16.070)
§ 5.16.080   Fictitious names.
   It is unlawful for any secondhand dealer to knowingly use a fictitious name
or address in any report.
(1995 Code, § 5.16.080)
§ 5.16.090   Holding of goods.
   Any article or thing of the type of secondhand merchandise received or
purchased by the secondhand dealer shall be retained and held by him or her for
not less than five days after delivering the report concerning the same to the
Chief of Police.
(1995 Code, § 5.16.090)
§ 5.16.100   Premature sales.
   It is unlawful for any secondhand dealer to sell or otherwise dispose of any
article or thing within five days after making a report to the Chief of Police,
as required in this chapter, that the article or this has been purchased by the
secondhand dealer.
(1995 Code, § 5.16.100)
CHAPTER 5.20: PAWNBROKERS
Section
   
5.20.010   Definitions.
   
5.20.020   License required.
   
5.20.030   Issuance of license—Requisites.
   
5.20.040   Fingerprints.
   
5.20.050   Access to fingerprints.
   
5.20.060   Revocation for violation.
   
5.20.070   New license after revocation.
   
5.20.080   Hearing required.
   
5.20.090   Notice of hearing.
   
5.20.100   Service of notice.
   
5.20.110   Daily reports required—Contents.
   
5.20.120   Identifying marks—Settings.
   
5.20.130   Blank forms.
   
5.20.140   Filing of reports—Access.
   
5.20.150   Pawnbroker’s copy—Filing— Access.
   
5.20.160   Form of record.
   
5.20.170   Legibility, time of report.
   
5.20.180   Failure to report—Show goods.
   
5.20.190   Holding before sale—Automobile accessories.
   
5.20.200   Business days—Hours.
§ 5.20.010   Definitions.
   The following terms when used in this chapter shall have the meaning herein
ascribed to them.
   PAWNBROKER. Any person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of
pawnbroking.
   PAWNSHOP. Any room, stare or place in which any such business in engaged in,
carried on or conducted.
(1995 Code, § 5.20.010)
§ 5.20.020   License required.
   No person shall engage in, conduct, manage or carry on the business of
pawnbroker without a valid existing and unrevoked license therefor.
(1995 Code, § 5.20.020)
§ 5.20.030   Issuance of license—Requisites.
   The license shall be issued by the License Collector, upon application
therefor, except that the License Collector shall not issue any such license
without the consent in writing first had and obtained of the Chief of Police
and the presentation of a valid state license.
(1995 Code, § 5.20.030)
§ 5.20.040   Fingerprints.
   Each applicant for a pawnbroker’s license shall consent to the taking of his
or her fingerprints by the Chief of Police as a condition to the issuance of
the license.
(1995 Code, § 5.20.040)
§ 5.20.050   Access to fingerprints.
   The fingerprint record made pursuant to §
5.20.040 shall be secret and confidential and the record shall be open to
inspection only to members of the Police Department of the city, or by others
upon an order of a court of competent jurisdiction made for that purpose.
(1995 Code, § 5.20.050)
§ 5.20.060   Revocation for violation.
   In the event that any person holding a license authorizing him or her to
engage in, conduct, manage or carry on the business of a pawnbroker, or any
agent or employee of any such person shall violate or cause or permit to be
violated any of the provisions of this chapter, the Council shall, in addition
to the other penalties provided by this code, revoke the license.
(1995 Code, § 5.20.060)
§ 5.20.070   New license after revocation.
   If the license of any person shall be revoked, no license shall be granted
to such person to conduct or carry on any such business with six months after
the revocation.
(1995 Code, § 5.20.070)
§ 5.20.080   Hearing required.
   No license shall be revoked until a public hearing shall have been had by
the Council.
(1995 Code, § 5.20.080)
§ 5.20.090   Notice of hearing.
   Notice of hearing shall be given in writing and shall state the ground of
complaint against the licensee and shall also state the time when and place
where the hearing will be had.
(1995 Code, § 5.20.090)
§ 5.20.100   Service of notice.
   The notice shall be served upon the holder of the license, or his or her
manager or agent, at least three days prior to the date of any such hearing by
delivering the same to the licensee, or his or her manager or agent, or to any
person in charge of or employed at the place of business of the licensee, or if
the licensee has no place of business, then at his or her place of residence,
or by leaving the notice at the place of business or residence of the licensee.
(1995 Code, § 5.20.100)
§ 5.20.110   Daily reports required—Contents.
   Every pawnbroker shall, on each day except Sundays and legal holidays,
before the hour of 10:00 a.m. make and deliver to the Chief of Police, in
writing a full true and complete report, in chronological order, of all the
dealings in goods, wares and merchandise or things received upon deposit,
pledges or purchased within the city, during the 24 hours next preceding the
report, together with time of day when received, a complete description of the
same, and a description of the person from whom received, or with whom dealt,
and the license number and description of any vehicle in which the person form
who, received was riding in or upon and also the true name of such person or as
nearly as the same is known to or can be ascertained by the person making the
report.
(1995 Code, § 5.20.110)
§ 5.20.120   Identifying marks—Settings.
   If any such article purchased or received shall have engraved thereon any
number, work or initial or shall contain any setting of any kind, the
description of the article shall contain the number, word or initial, and show
the kind of setting and the number of each kind.
(1995 Code, § 5.20.120)
§ 5.20.130   Blank forms.
   The report required herein shall be made upon a form to be furnished, upon
request, free of charge by the Chief of Police, who shall cause blank forms to
be so printed and subdivided that they shall have space for writing in the
following manner; description of the article purchased or received; amount paid
for or loaned upon the property; name and residence of persons from whom
purchased or received, showing the true name as nearly as known; sex;
complexion, color of hair; style of dress and height of the person from whom
purchased or received; time of day goods purchased or received; license number,
make, type and color of automobile or other vehicle driven or occupied by such
person, date and time or making the report; name and place of business of
pawnbroker making the report.
(1995 Code, § 5.20.130)
§ 5.20.140   Filing of reports—Access.
   The Chief or Police, upon receipt of the report, shall file the same in some
secure place in his or her office and the report shall by open to inspection
only to members of the Police Department of the city, or by others upon on
order of a court of competent jurisdiction made for that purpose.
(1995 Code, § 5.20.140)
§ 5.20.150   Pawnbroker’s copy—Filing—Access.
   Every pawnbroker shall keep at his or her place of business a copy of every
report required by the foregoing provisions of this chapter; and such copies
shall be open at all times during business hours to the inspection of the Chief
of Police, any member of the Police Department of the city or any officer
authorized by law.
(1995 Code, § 5.20.150)
§ 5.20.160   Form of record.
   The report shall be in book form, and each transaction shall be kept in
chronological order.
(1995 Code, § 5.20.160)
§ 5.20.170   Legibility, time of report.
   Every report and record required by the provisions of this chapter to be
filed, kept or made, shall be written or printed entirely in the English
language in a clear and legible manner, and shall be made out at the time the
transaction is made.
(1995 Code, § 5.20.170)
§ 5.20.180   Failure to report—Show goods.
   It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker, or for any agent or employee of a
pawnbroker, to fail refuse, or neglect to file a report, as required herein, in
the manner, form, at the time and in all respects in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter, or to fail, refuse or neglect to exhibit to the
Chief of Police, or to any officer authorized by law, immediately upon demand,
any record or report, or any goods wares and merchandise, including radios, so
purchased or received by the pawnbroker, or by any agent or employee of the
pawnbroker.
(1995 Code, § 5.20.180)
§ 5.20.190   Holding before sale—Automobile accessories.
   All goods, wares and merchandise, including radios for use in or upon
automobiles, purchased or received by any pawnbroker shall be held for a period
of at least 15 days after purchase or receipt before the same shall be sold or
otherwise disposed of, excepting, however all goods, wares and merchandise,
including radios for use in or upon automobiles, upon which any duly licensed
pawnbroker has issued a pawn ticket in accordance with the laws of the state.
During the 15 days, all such property shall be kept separate and apart from all
other goods, wares and merchandise, including radios for use in and upon
automobiles, upon the premises in the possession of the pawnbroker. All such
property shall, during said 15-day period, be kept and exposed for police
inspection during business hours.
(1995 Code, § 5.20.190)
§ 5.20.200   Business days—Hours.
   No person shall engage in, conduct, manage or carry on the business of
pawnbroker on Sundays or legal holidays, or between the hours of 7:00 p.m. of
each day and 8:00 a.m. of the following morning, except that on Saturdays and
days before legal holidays, and during that 24 days next preceding Christmas
Day, each such person may engage in, conduct, manage or carry on such business
until the hour of 9:00 p.m.
(1995 Code, § 5.20.200)
CHAPTER 5.24: PEDDLERS; SOLICITORS
Section
   
5.24.010   Definitions.
   
5.24.020   Compliance required.
   
5.24.030   Registration—Form.
   
5.24.040   Fingerprints.
   
5.24.050   License prerequisite.
   
5.24.060   Annual registration.
   
5.24.070   Issuance—Form of permit.
   
5.24.080   License required.
   
5.24.090   Issuance of license—Prerequisites.
   
5.24.100   Exemptions enumerated.
   
5.24.110   Licenses to employees of exempted employer.
   
5.24.120   Carrying, display of license.
   
5.24.130   Carrying, display of permit.
   
5.24.140   Transfer, misuse of license, permit.
   
5.24.150   Grounds for revocation of license.
   
5.24.160   Notice of hearing.
   
5.24.170   Appeal to Council.
   
5.24.180   New license after revocation.
   
5.24.190   Hours for peddling, soliciting.
   
5.24.200   Peddling, soliciting at posted premises.
   
5.24.210   Misrepresentations.
   
5.24.220   Tag in vehicle.
   
5.24.230   Sales at city parades prohibited.
§ 5.24.010   Definitions.
   The following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them.
   PEDDLE. To sell and make immediate delivery, or offer for sale and immediate
delivery, any goods, wares or merchandise in possession of the seller, at any
place within the city other than from a fixed place of business.
   PEDDLER. Any person who peddles, as herein defined.
   SOLICIT. To sell to take orders or offer for sale or take orders for goods,
wares or merchandise, for future delivery, or for service to be performed, at
any place within the city other that a fixed place of business.
   SOLICITOR. Any person who solicits, as herein defined.
(1995 Code, § 5.24.010)
§ 5.24.020   Compliance required.
   No person shall peddle or solicit without first having complied with the
provisions of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 5.24.020)
§ 5.24.030   Registration—Form.
   Every person who desires to peddle or solicit shall register, in a
registration book provided for that purpose in the Police Department, his or
her name and address, the name and address of the person whom he or she
represents, the names and addresses of at least two references as to his or her
moral character, honest and integrity, a brief description of the nature of the
business in which he or she is engaged, and the kind of goods or property to be
peddled or solicited for, if any.
(1995 Code, § 5.24.030)
§ 5.24.040   Fingerprints.
   The person shall furnish his or her fingerprints and thumbprints, to be
taken by the Police Department.
(1995 Code, § 5.24.040)
§ 5.24.050   License prerequisite.
   No person shall be registered, and no permit shall be issued, except such
person exhibiting a valid license for peddling or soliciting, or a clearance
from the License Collector stating that no license is required.
(1995 Code, § 5.24.050)
§ 5.24.060   Annual registration.
   The registration shall be valid for a period of one year; and the person
must register at the end of each year period.
(1995 Code, § 5.24.060)
§ 5.24.070   Issuance—Form of permit.
   As evidence of compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the Police
Department shall issue to each person who complies a permit which shall show
the name and address of the person, the name of the person he or she represents
or by whom he or she is employed, if any, and the kind of goods or property to
be peddled or solicited for.
(1995 Code, § 5.24.070)
§ 5.24.080   License required.
   No person shall peddle or solicit without having an unrevoked license from
the city so to do valid and in effect at the time.
(1995 Code, § 5.24.080)
§ 5.24.090   Issuance of license—Prerequisites.
   Licenses shall be issued by the License Collector upon the applicant’s
complying with the following provisions:
   (A)   Name, address. Giving his or her name and present address;
   (B)   Kind of business, goods. Giving a brief description of the nature of
the business and the kinds of goods or property to be peddled or solicited;
   (C)   Payment of fee. Paying the license fee required by
Chapter 5.04 of this title for the license; and
   (D)   Employment. Giving the name and address of the licensed employer and
exhibiting credentials showing he or she is an authorized employee or
representative of the licensed employer, in the event the application is for an
employee’s license.
(1995 Code, § 5.24.090)
§ 5.24.100   Exemptions enumerated.
   The license requirements of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
   (A)   Sale by producer. Any person soliciting or peddling anything which the
person has personally manufactured or produced and this exemption shall apply
only to natural persons;
   (B)   Farmer’s sale. Any farmer, poultryperson or horticulturist soliciting
or peddling his or her own produce and, this exemption shall apply only to
natural persons and shall not apply to farmers, poultrymen or horticulturists
who buy goods for resale, as well as selling their own produce;
   (C)   Soliciting for services. Any person soliciting for personal services
to be performed by the person so soliciting and this exemption shall apply only
to natural persons;
   (D)   Papers, dairy products. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply
to peddling or soliciting newspapers, periodicals, ice, milk, cream, ice cream,
butter, eggs, cottage cheese or any dairy product; and
   (E)   Wholesalers, manufactures, public works. The provisions of this
chapter shall not apply to salespersons or agents for wholesale houses or firms
who solicit orders from or sell to retail dealers for resale, or to
manufacturers for manufacturing purposes, or to bidders for public works or
supplies.
(1995 Code, § 5.24.100)
§ 5.24.110   Licenses to employees of exempted employer.
   No employee’s license shall be issued under the provisions of this chapter
to any employee of any solicitor or peddler exempted from the payment of a
license fee by the foregoing provisions of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 5.24.110)
§ 5.24.120   Carrying, display of license.
   Every solicitor or peddler licensed under this chapter shall have his or her
license in his or her immediate possession at all times when peddling of
soliciting, and when so peddling or soliciting shall display the same upon
demand of any police officer of the city and upon demand of any police officer
of the city and upon demand of any person to whom he or she is peddling or
soliciting.
(1995 Code, § 5.24.120)
§ 5.24.130   Carrying, display of permit.
   Every solicitor or peddler at all times while engaged in peddling or
soliciting shall have in his or her immediate possession the permit issued to
him or her under the provisions of §
5.24.070 and when so peddling or soliciting shall display the same upon demand
of any police officer and upon the demand of any person to whom he or she is
peddling or soliciting.
(1995 Code, § 5.24.130)
§ 5.24.140   Transfer, misuse of license, permit.
   Licenses and permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be assigned
of transferred; nor shall they be used by any person other that the person to
whom they were issued, except as herein provided. No person shall transfer,
loan or permit the use of his license or permit by any other person, except as
herein provided. Where a person who is not himself or herself soliciting or
peddling, has taken out a license for bona fide employees, and the licenses are
issued in the name of the employer and the employee, the license may be
transferred subject to the following conditions:
   (A)   Presentation of license, permit. The license and the permit must be
presented to the License Collector;
   (B)   Cancellation of permit. The permit is to be retained by the License
Collector and canceled;
   (C)   Notation on license. A notation must be made upon the license to
indicate its transfer from one employee to another; and
   (D)   Registration by new employee. The new employee must comply with the
provisions of §
5.24.030.
(1995 Code, § 5.24.140)
§ 5.24.150   Grounds for revocation of license.
   Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the Manager,
after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes:
   (A)   False application. Fraud, misrepresentation of any false statement
contained in the application for license;
   (B)   False information. Fraud, misrepresentation, or any false statement
made to the Police Department in furnishing the information required by §
5.24.030;
   (C)   Violation of chapter. Any violation of this chapter;
   (D)   Criminal conviction. Conviction of the licensee of any felony or crime
involving moral turpitude; and
   (E)   Improper peddling, soliciting. Conducting the soliciting or peddling
in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the
peace of to be a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the people
of the city.
(1995 Code, § 5.24.150)
§ 5.24.160   Notice of hearing.
   Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing,
stating the grounds of the complaint and the time and place or hearing. The
notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the license at the address given on
the application for the license, at least five days prior to the date set for
the hearing.
(1995 Code, § 5.24.160)
§ 5.24.170   Appeal to Council.
   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Manager shall have the right to
appeal to the Council. The appeal shall be taken by filing with the Clerk a
written statement of the grounds for the appeal within 14 days after notice of
the decision by the Manager has been given. The Council shall set the time and
place for hearing the appeal, and notice of the time and place shall be given
by the Clerk in the manner hereinbefore provided for notice of hearing of
revocation by the Manager.
(1995 Code, § 5.24.170)
§ 5.24.180   New license after revocation.
   No license shall be issued to any person who has had a license revoked
pursuant to this chapter, except upon the applicant’s applying to the Council
and the Council’s authorizing the issuance of the license.
(1995 Code, § 5.24.180)
§ 5.24.190   Hours for peddling, soliciting.
   No person shall peddle or solicit before the hour of 8:00 a.m. of any day or
after the hour of 7:00 p.m. of any day.
(1995 Code, § 5.24.190)
§ 5.24.200   Peddling, soliciting at posted premises.
   No peddler or solicitor or any person pretending to be a peddler or
solicitor shall, for the purpose of peddling or soliciting or pretending to
peddle or solicit, ring the bell or knock at any building whereon there is
painted affixed or otherwise displayed to the public view any sign containing
any or all of the following words: “No Peddlers”, “No Solicitors” or “No
Agents” or which otherwise purports to prohibit peddling or soliciting on the
premises.
(1995 Code, § 5.24.200)
§ 5.24.210   Misrepresentations.
   No peddler or solicitor shall represent by words, writing or action that he
or she is some other peddler or solicitor, that he or she is a partner,
employee or agent of any peddler or solicitor when in fact he or she is not the
partner, agent or employee of the peddler or solicitor, or that he or she is
the employee, representative, agent or partner or any person when in fact he or
she is not the employee, representative, agent or partner of the person.
(1995 Code, § 5.24.210)
§ 5.24.220   Tag in vehicle.
   Every vehicle used for peddling or soliciting shall have attached thereto on
the outside right-hand side or in plain sight in the driver’s compartment of
the vehicle a metal tag to be furnished by the License Collector.
(1995 Code, § 5.24.220)
§ 5.24.230   Sales at city parades prohibited.
   The city has determined that vending at city-approved parades poses and
constitutes a menace to the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens
of the city in that traffic generated thereby upon city streets and sidewalks
becomes unnecessarily congested due to activities and sales by vendors during
the course of city-approved parades, posing a great health and safety problem.
Accordingly, all sales activities by itinerant vendors is hereby prohibited at
city approved parades. Under this section, ITINERANT VENDOR shall mean and
include all persons, both principal and agent who engage in a temporary or
transient business selling or offering to sell goods, wares or merchandise, or
any other thing of value with the intention of conducting such business during
and upon the course of a parade held in the city.
(1995 Code, § 5.24.230) (Ord. 98-1819, passed 4-7-1998)
CHAPTER 5.28: BILLIARD ROOMS, CARDROOMS
Section
   
5.28.010   Definitions.
   
5.28.020   License—Order of Council required.
   
5.28.030   Application for license.
   
5.28.040   Denial of license—Grounds.
   
5.28.050   Minors—Presence prohibited.
   
5.28.060   Disorderly person prohibited.
   
5.28.070   Hours of operation.
§ 5.28.010   Definitions.
   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning herein
ascribed to them.
   PUBLIC BILLIARD ROOM. Any place open to the public where billiards,
bagatelle or pool table is kept and persons are permitted to play or do play
thereon.
   PUBLIC CARD ROOM. Any place open to the public where any game played with
cards is dealt, played, carried on, opened or caused to be opened or conducted,
or in which persons are permitted to play or do play any game played with
cards.
(1995 Code, § 5.28.010)
§ 5.28.020   License—Order of Council required.
   No license to conduct, manage or carry on a public billiard room or a public
cardroom shall be issued by the License Collector except upon the order of the
Council, written notice of which shall be given the License Collector by the
Clerk or the Council.
(1995 Code, § 5.28.020)
§ 5.28.030   Application for license.
   Any person desiring to obtain such license shall file with the Council a
written application therefor, signed and sworn to by the applicant, or by an
officer thereof if the applicant is corporation, stating the exact location of
the place where the billiard room or cardroom is to be located.
(1995 Code, § 5.28.030)
§ 5.28.040   Denial of license—Grounds.
   The Council shall have discretion to deny the application if it shall appear
to the Council that the applicant is not of good moral character, or is an
unfit person to manage or conduct such establishment, or that by reason of the
place where the establishment is to be located the conducting or carrying on
thereof would be detrimental to the public health, public order or public
morals.
(1995 Code, § 5.28.040)
§ 5.28.050   Minors—Presence prohibited.
   No person under the age of 21 years shall remain in, enter or visit any
public billiard room or public card room wherein alcoholic beverages are sold.
No person in charge of any public billiard room or public card room wherein
alcoholic beverages are sold shall allow or permit any person under the age of
21 years to remain in, enter or visit such place, unless the minor or person is
accompanied by one of his or her parents or his or her guardian.
(1995 Code, § 5.28.050)
§ 5.28.060   Disorderly person prohibited.
   No person in charge of any public billiard room or public cardroom shall
keep the same open or allow or permit the same to be kept open, or allow or
permit any game to be played therein from 12:00 p.m. of any day other than
Saturday until 6:00 a.m. of the following day, or from 1:00 a.m. on any Sunday
until 6:00 a.m. of the same day, or allow or permit any person except the
person in charge of the servants regularly employed in and about the same, to
be or remain therein between the hours aforesaid.
(1995 Code, § 5.28.060)
§ 5.28.070   Hours of operation.
   No person having charge of any public billiard room or public cardroom shall
keep the same open or allow or permit the same to be kept open, or allow or
permit any game to be played therein from 12:00 p.m. of any day other than
Saturday until 6:00 a.m. of the following day, or from 1:00 a.m. on any Sunday
until 6:00 a.m. of the same day, or allow or permit any person except the
person in charge of the servants regularly employed in and about the same, to
be or remain therein between the hours aforesaid.
(1995 Code, § 5.28.070)
CHAPTER 5.32: AMUSEMENT MACHINES
Section
   
5.32.010   Amusement machines defined.
   
5.32.020   Effect upon state prohibitions.
   
5.32.030   Location.
   
5.32.040   Minors.
   
5.32.050   Enforcement.
   
5.32.060   Confiscation of machines.
   
5.32.070   Violations—Penalties.
§ 5.32.010   Amusement machines defined.
   The phrase AMUSEMENT MACHINE shall mean any mechanical or electronic machine
apparatus, contrivance, appliance or device which may be operated or played
upon the placing or depositing thereto of any coin, check, slug, ball or any
other article or device, or by paying therefor either in advance of or after
use, involving in its use either skill or chance, including by not limited to a
tape machine, a card machine, pinball machine, a bowling game machine, a
shuffleboard machine, a marble game machine, a horse racing machine, a
basketball game machine, an electronic video game or any other similar machine
or device except for a billiard or pool table, a music machine or a merchandise
vending machine.
(1995 Code, § 5.32.010)
§ 5.32.020   Effect upon state prohibitions.
   Nothing herein contained is intended nor is to be construed as or permitting
the licensing or keeping of any mechanical or electronic games within the city,
the possession of which is illegal as a gambling device unclean and by virtue
of the laws of the state.
(1995 Code, § 5.32.020)
§ 5.32.030   Location.
   No amusement machine shall be located within 600 feet of a school.
(1995 Code, § 5.32.030)
§ 5.32.040   Minors.
   No person under the age of 18 shall be permitted to play an amusement
machine between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. on days public schools are
in sessions in the city.
(1995 Code, § 5.32.040)
§ 5.32.050   Enforcement.
   It shall be the duty of the License Collector, as well as the Chief of
Police and the agents of each of them, to enforce this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 5.32.050)
§ 5.32.060   Confiscation of machines.
   Any amusement machine as herein defined which is operated contrary to the
provisions of this chapter shall be seized and confiscated.
(1995 Code, § 5.32.060)
§ 5.32.070   Violations—Penalties.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by imprisonment
in the County Jail for mot exceeding 30 days or a fine not exceeding $500 or
both.
(1995 Code, § 5.32.070)
CHAPTER 5.36: TAXICABS/MOTOR VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Section
   
5.36.010   Definitions.
   
5.36.020   Permit required—Compliance herewith.
   
5.36.030   Application for company permit.
   
5.36.040   Time of hearing—Notice.
   
5.36.050   Hearing of application.
   
5.36.060   Business license and insurance policy.
   
5.36.070   Revocation—Notice—Grounds.
   
5.36.080   Limitation upon number—Transfer of permits.
   
5.36.090   Filing of rates and taximeter compliance.
   
5.36.100   Driver’s permit required.
   
5.36.110   Application for driver’s permit.
   
5.36.120   Qualifications as driver.
   
5.36.125   Testing for controlled substances and alcohol.
   
5.36.130   Age requirements.
   
5.36.140   Denial of permit for physical, moral defect.
   
5.36.150   Fingerprints—Photographs.
   
5.36.160   Termination of employment or lease.
   
5.36.170   Transfer of driver’s permit.
   
5.36.180   Revocation of permit—Grounds.
   
5.36.190   Report of suspension or revocation.
   
5.36.200   Appeal by driver.
   
5.36.210   Surrender of revoked permit.
   
5.36.220   Observation of rules.
§ 5.36.010   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases defined in this
section shall be construed in accordance with the following definitions.
   CITY. The City of Tulare.
   COMPANY. Any entity operating taxicabs/motor vehicles for hire business,
including without limitation, a natural person, firm, association,
organization, partnership, business, trust, corporation, or public entity.
   COMPANY PERMIT. A valid permit issued by the city authorizing a company to
operate taxicabs/motor vehicles for hire business.
   DRIVER. A person who drives or controls the movements of taxicabs/motor
vehicles for hire.
   DRIVER'S PERMIT. A valid permit issued by the city authorizing a person to
drive or control the movements of taxicabs/motor vehicles for hire.
   MOTOR VEHICLES FOR HIRE. Every motor vehicle by means of which passengers
are transported for hire upon any public street in the city, and not over a
regular defined route and irrespective of whether the operation extend beyond
the boundary limits of the city or not.
   TAXICABS/MOTOR VEHICLES FOR HIRE. A motor vehicle regularly engaged in the
business of carrying passengers for hire, designed for carrying not more than
eight persons, excluding the driver, upon any public street in the city, and
not over a regular or defined route and irrespective of whether the operations
extend beyond the boundary limits of the city or not, where charge for such
transportation is measured by the distance traveled or by the time required, as
herein defined.
   TAXIMETER. A taximeter is a mechanical or electronic device installed in
public transport motor vehicles or taxicabs that calculates passenger fares
based on a combination of distance travelled and waiting time.
(1995 Code, § 5.36.010) (Ord. 09-10, passed 9-1-2009)
§ 5.36.020   Permit required—Compliance herewith.
   It is unlawful to operate, or cause to be operated, an automobile for hire,
or a taxicab upon any public street within the city, without first having
obtained a permit so to do in accordance with the provision hereof, and without
complying or having complied with all of the provisions of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 5.36.020)
§ 5.36.030   Application for company permit.
   Any person desiring to obtain the permit required by §
5.36.020 shall pay a fee of $25 to the City Clerk, and shall make application
for the permit to the Council, which application shall set forth:
   (A)   Name, address. The name and address of the applicant and if the same
be a corporation, the name of its principal officers, or if the same be a
partnership, association or fictitious company, the names of the partners or
persons comprising the association or company, with the address of each;
   (B)   Class of vehicle. A statement of whether the permit is desired for
motor vehicle for hire or a taxicab;
   (C)   Description of vehicle. A description of every motor vehicle which the
applicant proposes to use giving:
      (1)   Trade name;
      (2)   Motor and serial number;
      (3)   State license number;
      (4)   Seating capacity; and
      (5)   Body style.
   (D)   Location of stands. The street number and exact location of the places
where the applicant proposes to stand each such motor vehicle;
   (E)   Schedule of fares. The proposed schedule of rates or fares to be
charged for carrying passengers in the motor vehicle; and
   (F)   Insignia. The distinctive color scheme, name, monogram or insignia,
which shall be used on the motor vehicle.
   (G)   Inspection certificate. A brake and light inspection certificate for
each motor vehicle set forth in the application shall be attached thereto, a
new certificate will be required for any new or replacement motor vehicle.
   (H)   Insurance. Proof of insurance, as set forth in §
5.36.060, for each motor vehicle set forth in the application shall be attached
thereto.
(1995 Code, § 5.36.030) (Ord. 09-10, passed 9-1-2009)
Editor’s note:
   For the most recent fee, please see the Rates and Fees Resolution passed by
the city and on file in the city offices.
§ 5.36.040   Time of hearing—Notice.
   Upon the receipt of any application referred to in §
5.36.030, the Clerk shall set a time not less than ten or more than 30 days
thereafter, for the hearing of the application before the Council and shall
give notice of the time set at least five days before the date of the hearing
to the applicant, at the address set out in the application.
(1995 Code, § 5.36.040)
§ 5.36.050   Hearing of application.
   (A)   At the time set for the hearing of the application, the Council may
examine the applicant and any other persons interested in the matter set forth
in the application, and shall determine whether or not the public interest,
convenience and necessity require the issuance of the permit applied for.
   (B)   If it be found by the Council that the public interest convenience and
necessity require the issuance of the permit applied for, it shall by
resolution order the Clerk to issue a permit in accordance with the
application, subject to the filing and approval of and undertaking as provided
for in §
5.36.060.
(1995 Code, § 5.36.050)
§ 5.36.060   Business license and insurance policy.
   (A)   Before a permit shall be issued by the City Clerk/City Manager, the
applicant to whom the permit shall have been awarded by the Council as
aforesaid shall deliver to the City Clerk/City Manager proof of the issuance of
a city business license.
   (B)   At the time of application or prior to a permit being issued the
applicant to whom the permit shall have been awarded by the Council as
aforesaid shall deliver to the City Clerk/City Manager a policy of insurance
executed by a company duly authorized under the laws of the state to do an
insurance business by the provisions of which policy the company promises and
undertakes to pay in full all claims for damages to persons or property
resulting from the operation of automobiles referred to in the application;
provided that the maximum amount for which liability shall be assumed for
injury to, or death of, one person in any one accident; and injury to, or death
of, more than one person in any one accident; and the maximum amount for which
liability shall be assumed for injury to or destruction of property in any one
accident, shall be set by resolution of the City Council.
   (C)   Following approval of a company permit to operate a taxicab/motor
vehicle for hire service, a permit holder, thereafter, shall file annually with
the City Clerk/City Manager a current insurance policy for each motor vehicle.
(1995 Code, § 5.36.060) (Ord. 09-10, passed 9-1-2009)
§ 5.36.070   Revocation—Notice—Grounds.
   Any permit granted under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by
the Council either in whole or as to any or either car described therein, after
ten days’ notice to the permit holder, requiring him or her to appear at a
certain time and place to show cause why the permit should not be revoked for
any of the following reasons:
   (A)   No undertaking. That the undertaking provided in §
5.36.060 has not been given or has been withdrawn or lapsed for nonpayment of
premium, or is not in force for any reason;
   (B)   Nonpayment of license. For the nonpayment of any license fee provided
by the provisions of this code;
   (C)   Violation of chapter. For the failure to observe any of the rules and
regulations set out in this chapter;
   (D)   Violation of law. For the violation of any laws of the state or
provisions of this code;
   (E)   Unsatisfactory service. For failure to maintain satisfactory service
to the public; and
   (F)   Other grounds. For any cause which in the opinion of the Council makes
in contrary to the public interest, convenience and necessity for the permit to
be continued.
(1995 Code, § 5.36.070)
§ 5.36.080   Limitation upon number—Transfer of permits.
   No person shall be entitled to hold more than one permit at a time; and no
permit shall be transferable without the permission of the Council having been
first obtained.
(1995 Code, § 5.36.080)
§ 5.36.090   Filing of rates and taximeter compliance.
   (A)   Following approval of a company permit to operate a taxicab service, a
permit holder, thereafter, shall file annually with the City Clerk/City Manager
a current schedule of rates, and shall, at all times, have displayed therein in
a location and manner that are visible to all passengers.
   (B)   Taximeters shall be in compliance with the laws as set forth by the
State of California as a registered Commercial Measuring or Weighing Instrument
and in accordance with the rules and regulations as established by the Tulare
County Agricultural Commissioner-Sealer Weights and Measures Office on an
annual basis. The company shall be responsible for any fees associated
therewith.
(1995 Code, § 5.36.090) (Ord. 09-10, passed 9-1-2009)
§ 5.36.100   Driver’s permit required.
   It shall be unlawful for any driver to operate any taxicab or rent a car in
this city unless there exists a valid driver’s permit to do so as herein
provided.
(1995 Code, § 5.36.100)
§ 5.36.110 Application for driver’s permit.
   The application for a driver’s permit shall be in writing, duly certified
under oath and renewed annually. It, together with a copy thereof, shall be
submitted to the City Clerk/City Manager, who shall file the same. Each such
applicant shall pay a fee of $10 to the City Clerk/City Manager and shall set
forth the name, age and address of the applicant, his or her past experience in
operating vehicle, the name, business and address of each of his or her
employers during the preceding period of three years, whether or not a
chauffeur’s license issued to him or her by the state or any state or
governmental agency has ever been revoked, the name and address of the owner by
whom he is to be employed as a driver, which owner shall endorse the
application, and such additional information as the City Clerk/City Manager or
Police Department may require.
(1995 Code, § 5.36.110) (Ord. 09-10, passed 9-1-2009)
§ 5.36.120   Qualifications as driver.
   Upon application for a driver’s permit and before it shall be issued, the
driver, whether the owner or otherwise, must provide the following information,
and annually thereafter:
   (A)   A valid California driver's license and/or chauffeur's license.
   (B)   A current Department of Motor Vehicles driving history report, cost to
be borne by the company and/or driver.
   (C)   Drivers shall submit to annual testing for controlled substance and
alcohol as set forth in §
5.36.125.
   (D)   Drivers shall submit to fingerprinting as set forth in §
5.36.150.
(1995 Code, § 5.36.120) (Ord. 09-10, passed 9-1-2009)
§ 5.36.125 Testing for controlled substances and alcohol.
   (A)   A driver shall test negative for controlled substances and alcohol as
set forth in Cal. Government Code § 53075.5.
   (B)   In the case of a self-employed independent driver, the test results
shall be reported directly to the city which shall notify the taxicab leasing
company of record, if any, of positive results. Self-employed independent
drivers shall be responsible for compliance with this section, and shall pay
all costs associated with compliance with this section. In all other cases, the
results shall be reported directly to the employing company, who shall notify
the city of positive results.
   (C)   All test results are confidential and shall not be released without
the consent of the driver, except as authorized or required by law.
(Ord. 09-10, passed 9-1-2009)
§ 5.36.130   Age requirements.
   No driver’s permit may be granted to any person under the age of 18 years.
(1995 Code, § 5.36.130)
§ 5.36.140   Denial of permit for physical, moral defect.
   A driver’s permit may be denied upon substantial evidence of facts of either
physical or moral deficiencies of the applicant which, in the sound discretion
of the City Clerk/City Manager, would render the applicant not competent to
operate taxicabs/automobiles for hire.
(1995 Code, § 5.36.140) (Ord. 09-10, passed 9-1-2009)
§ 5.36.150   Fingerprints—Photographs.
   (A)   Prior to issuance of a permit, the driver shall be Live Scan
fingerprinted by, and his or her record filed with, the Police Department. The
driver shall also file with his or her application two recent "passport size"
photographs no larger in size than two inch by two inch, one to be filed with
his or her application and one to be permanently attached to the driver permit
when issued.
   (B)   The permit shall be posted in a place conspicuous from the passenger's
compartment of the taxicabs/automobiles for hire while the driver is operating
same.
   (C)   The company and/or driver shall be responsible for the payment of fees
associated with Live Scan fingerprinting as set forth by the Department of
Justice payable to the Police Department.
(1995 Code, § 5.36.150) (Ord. 09-10, passed 9-1-2009)
§ 5.36.160   Termination of employment or lease.
   Every driver’s permit issued hereafter shall set forth the name of the owner
for whom the driver is authorized to operate taxicabs/automobiles for hire and
shall be valid only so long as he or she continues to lease a vehicle from the
owner. Upon the termination of the employment or lease, the driver shall
forthwith surrender his or her driver’s permit to the City Clerk/City Manager.
Upon the termination of the employment of the driver or of lease of a vehicle,
the owner of the vehicle shall immediately give the City Clerk/City Manager
written notice of the termination.
(1995 Code, § 5.36.160) (Ord. 09-10, passed 9-1-2009)
§ 5.36.170   Transfer of driver’s permit.
   No driver’s permit issued hereunder shall be transferable in any event.
(1995 Code, § 5.36.170)
§ 5.36.180   Revocation of permit—Grounds.
   The Chief of Police shall have the power to suspend or revoke any driver’s
permit issued hereunder for any of the reasons for which an application for
such a permit may be denied or if the holder thereof shall be found guiltily by
any court of reckless driving, or the violation of any other law.
(1995 Code, § 5.36.180)
§ 5.36.190   Report of suspension or revocation.
   The Chief of Police shall, in writing, immediately report any such
suspension or revocation to the City Clerk/City Manager, stating the reasons
for such actions.
(1995 Code, § 5.36.190) (Ord. 09-10, passed 9-1-2009)
§ 5.36.200   Appeal by driver.
   The City Clerk/City Manager may affirm or reverse, in whole or in part, any
such order on a written appeal filed with the City Clerk/City Manager by the
driver within ten days from the date of any such order.
(1995 Code, § 5.36.200) (Ord. 09-10, passed 9-1-2009)
§ 5.36.210   Surrender of revoked permit.
   In the event of the suspension or revocation of a driver’s permit, the
permit shall be, by the holder thereof, immediately surrendered to the City
Clerk/City Manager.
(1995 Code, § 5.36.210) (Ord. 09-10, passed 9-1-2009)
§ 5.36.220   Observation of rules.
   The following rules and regulations shall be observed by all persons
operating taxicabs or automobiles for hire; and it shall be unlawful to operate
the same in violation of any of the following rules:.
   (A)   Standing restricted. No taxicab or automobile for hire shall remain
standing upon any portion of any public street within the city except for
loading and unloading passengers, and then not for a period of more than five
minutes, excepting such stands as may be designated by the Council and
described in the application for a permit.
   (B)   Direct route. The operator of any taxicab, other than one charging a
flat rate, shall carry any passenger engaging the same, safely and
expeditiously to his or her destination by the most direct and accessible
route.
   (C)   Mechanical maintenance. All automobiles for hire and taxicabs shall be
kept in good mechanical condition.
   (D)   Sanitation of passenger compartment. No taxicab or automobile for hire
shall be operated unless the passenger compartment is kept clean and in
sanitary condition.
   (E)   Violation of law. No person shall operate a taxicab or automobile for
hire in violation of any law.
   (F)   Unfair competition; fraud. No owner or operator of any automobile for
hire or taxicab shall indulge in unfair competition with competitors or shall
commit any fraud upon the public; and the Council shall be the sole judge of
what constitute fraud or unfair competition.
   (G)   Designation as “taxi”. No automobile for hire shall be designated by
any word or phrases using the word “taxi” or “taxicab” in any sign or
advertising matter.
   (H)   Excessive charges. No charge shall be made by any operator or owner of
a taxicab or automobile for hire in excess of the rates posted in the passenger
compartment of the car.
   (I)   Posting of rates, regulations. Every taxicab shall have posted in the
passenger’s compartment a schedule of rates and charges and a copy of this
chapter.
(1995 Code, § 5.36.220)
CHAPTER 5.40: HANDBILL REGULATIONS
Section
   
5.40.010   Purpose.
   
5.40.020   Definitions.
   
5.40.030   Distribution in public places.
   
5.40.040   Placing in or upon vehicles.
   
5.40.050   Distribution on uninhabited or vacant premises.
   
5.40.060   Prohibiting distribution where premises are posted.
   
5.40.070   Distribution on inhabited private premises.
   
5.40.080   Hours for distribution.
   
5.40.090   Exemptions.
§ 5.40.010   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the distribution of unsolicited
handbills within the city.
(Ord. 17-01, passed 2-7-2017)
§ 5.40.020   Definitions.
   The following words, terms, and phrases when used in this chapter shall have
the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, any sample or device,
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or
otherwise produced original or copies of any matter of literature:
      (1)   Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or
thing; or
      (2)   Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment or other activity for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interests thereof by sales; or
      (3)   Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition, or event of any kind for which an admission fee is
charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this clause
shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up
for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition, or event of any kind when either of the same is held,
given, or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which
is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public
peace, safety, and good order. Provided, that nothing contained in this clause
shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving, or taking place of any
meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind without a
license where such license is or may be required by any law of this state or
under any laws of this city; or
      (4)   Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising
matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain of any
person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
   NEWSPAPER. Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law,
any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United States
in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and
recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law and in addition
thereto shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly
published with not less than four issues per year and sold to the public.
   NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, any sample or device,
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine,  paper, booklet, or
any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or
literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a commercial handbill
or a newspaper.
   PRIVATE PREMISES. Any dwelling, house, building, or other structure designed
or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether
inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall
include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule, or mailbox
belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building, or other structure.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes, alleys, or
other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, plazas,
grounds, and buildings.
(Ord. 17-01, passed 2-7-2017)
§ 5.40.030   Distribution in public places.
   It is unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, scatter, or
cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any public place
within the city, provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful for any
person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any
commercial or noncommercial handbill in any public place to any person willing
to accept such.
(Ord. 17-01, passed 2-7-2017)
§ 5.40.040   Placing in or upon vehicles.
   It is unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter,
or cast any commercialor noncommercial handbill in or upon any automobile or
other vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit
the handing, transmitting, or distributing of any commercial or noncommercial
handbill to the owner or other occupant of any automobile or other vehicle who
is willing to accept the same.
(Ord. 17-01, passed 2-7-2017)
§ 5.40.050   Distribution on uninhabited or vacant premises.
   It is unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter,
or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any premises which
is uninhabited or vacant.
(Ord. 17-01, passed 2-7-2017)
§ 5.40.060   Prohibiting distribution where premises are posted.
   It is unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter,
or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any premises if requested
by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on said premises in a
conspicuous position near the entrance thereof a sign indicating "No
Trespassing", or "No Soliciting", or similar words indicating that no
solicitation is desired by the occupant.
(Ord. 17-01, passed 2-7-2017)
§ 5.40.070   Distribution on inhabited private premises.
   Where an inhabited private premises is not posted as provided herein, and
unless requested by the occupant of the premises not to do so, a person may
place or deposit any such commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon such
inhabited private premises if such handbill is placed, deposited, and secured
in such a manner so as to prevent such handbill from being blown or scattered
about such premises or elsewhere, except that mailboxes may not be so used for
such purpose.
(Ord. 17-01, passed 2-7-2017)
§ 5.40.080 Hours for distribution.
   No person shall distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill between
the hours of 8:00 p.m. of any day and 8:00 a.m. of the following day.
(Ord. 17-01, passed 2-7-2017)
§ 5.40.090 Exemptions.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to the distribution
of the United States mail, to the distribution of a newspaper as defined
herein, nor to the delivery of any commercial or noncommercial handbill to any
person who has requested the delivery of the same.
(Ord. 17-01, passed 2-7-2017)
CHAPTER 5.44: AMUSEMENT CONCESSIONS
Section
   
5.44.010   Unlicensed amusement business.
   
5.44.020   Permit prerequisite to license.
   
5.44.030   Action by Council.
   
5.44.040   Prior revocation as bar.
   
5.44.050   Scope of permit.
§ 5.44.010   Unlicensed amusement business.
   No person shall keep or maintain for gain, in the city, any circus, side
show, carnival, dog and pony show, merry-go-round, Ferris wheel, swing and
other like riding devices, or theatrical or concert troupe or like performances
without having a license therefor required by the provisions of this code.
(1995 Code, § 5.44.010)
§ 5.44.020   Permit prerequisite to license.
   No license required by any of the provisions of this code shall be issued by
the License Collector to any person owning, operating or managing any circus,
side show, carnival, dog and pony show, merry-go-round, Ferris wheel, swing and
other like riding devices and theatrical or concert troupe and like
performances, engaged in or intending to engage in such business for gain until
after they shall have been granted a permit by the Council as follows: The
applicant shall make written application to the Council to obtain the required
license which application shall state the particular place, lot or building
where the business is to be carried on and shall also contain the agreement of
the applicant to the effect that in consideration of the granting of the permit
and the issuing of the license, the applicant shall conduct the business for
which the license is sought to be obtained in a quiet, orderly and reputable
manner and will not permit any disturbance of the public order or decorum; that
the applicant will not permit any gambling in or about the premises and that
the applicant will abide by all the laws now in force or that may hereafter be
enacted regulating such business.
(1995 Code, § 5.44.020)
§ 5.44.030   Action by Council.
   Upon receipt of the application, the Council may, by resolution, grant or
deny the permit.
(1995 Code, § 5.44.030)
§ 5.44.040   Prior revocation as bar.
   No permit shall be granted to any person who previously has had any such
permit revoked.
(1995 Code, § 5.44.040)
§ 5.44.050   Scope of permit.
   Any permit granted pursuant to this chapter shall be good only for the
person and the particular place of business specified in the permit.
(1995 Code, § 5.44.050)
CHAPTER 5.48: DANCE HALLS
Section
   
5.48.010   Definitions.
   
5.48.020   Permit required.
   
5.48.030   Application for permit.
   
5.48.040   Beverage places—Separation of dance hall.
   
5.48.050   Furnishing of police officers.
Editor’s note:
   Old code §§ 5.48.060, 5.48.070 and 5.48.080 were repealed by Ord. 00-1861,
passed - -2000.
§ 5.48.010   Definitions.
   In this chapter, unless it is apparent from the context hereof that some
other meaning is intended, the term PUBLIC DANCE HALL shall mean any hall,
room, platform, pavilion, building, restaurant or refreshment place or other
place of business which is resorted to by the public at large for the purpose
of engaging in or carrying on the pastime of dancing. Nothing herein contained
shall be construed to require any permit for the maintenance of a bona fide
school of instruction in the pastime of dancing.
(1995 Code, § 5.48.010)
§ 5.48.020   Permit required.
   No person shall establish, maintain or conduct any public dance hall without
first procuring from the Chief of Police a permit so to do.
(1995 Code, § 5.48.020)
§ 5.48.030   Application for permit.
   For the purpose of procuring the permit, the person shall file an
application in writing therefor with the Chief of Police.
(1995 Code, § 5.48.030)
§ 5.48.040   Beverage places—Separation of dance hall.
   No person shall permit a public dance hall to be kept open for dancing, or
keep the same open for dancing to any extent whatever unless the place set
aside for dancing is in a separate room or place from any room or place where
alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed. No person shall permit any dancing in
any public dance hall where alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed in the
same room or place.
(1995 Code, § 5.48.040)
§ 5.48.050   Furnishing of police officers.
   The Chief of Police may require, as a condition to the issuance of any
permit, to hold a dance in a public dance hall that the expense of placing a
police officer of the city in the hall shall be borne by the applicant.
(1995 Code, § 5.48.050)
CHAPTER 5.52: HYPNOTISTS
Section
   
5.52.010   Hypnotism—A display of subject.
   
5.52.020   Driving prohibited.
   
5.52.030   Exceptions.
§ 5.52.010   Hypnotism—A display of subject.
   No person shall place another person in any window, doorway or other place
where the subject is exposed to the gaze of persons passing along any public
street or alley in the city.
(1995 Code, § 5.52.010)
§ 5.52.020   Driving prohibited.
   It is unlawful for any person who voluntarily puts himself or herself under
a hypnotic influence or for any so called “mind reader” to give exhibitions of
his or her powers, as such, by driving or propelling any vehicle over or upon
any of the public streets or alleys of the city.
(1995 Code, § 5.52.020)
§ 5.52.030   Exceptions.
   Nothing in this chapter shall apply to exhibitions in any theater, playhouse
or places of amusement in the city.
(1995 Code, § 5.52.030)
CHAPTER 5.56: SAND PITS
Section
   
5.56.010   License required.
   
5.56.020   Approval by Council.
   
5.56.030   Application for license.
   
5.56.040   Hearing—Notice—Publication.
   
5.56.050   Posting of notice.
   
5.56.060   Hearing—Action by Council.
   
5.56.070   Issuance of license—Fee.
§ 5.56.010   License required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, within the city and adjacent to within
one-half mile distant from any bonafide human habitation, to establish,
maintain or operate any sand, gravel, clay or earth pit, for the manufacture or
production of sand, gravel, adobe blocks, brick, tile or other clay or concrete
products, where the products are manufactured or produced for sale or general
distribution without first obtaining from the License Collector a license to do
so.
(1995 Code, § 5.56.010)
§ 5.56.020   Approval by Council.
   No such license shall be issued, except upon the approval of the Council,
after due notice and hearings, as hereinafter provided.
(1995 Code, § 5.56.020)
§ 5.56.030   Application for license.
   Any person desiring to obtain a license, as herein provided for, shall file
a written application therefor with the Council.
(1995 Code, § 5.56.030)
§ 5.56.040   Hearing—Notice—Publication.
   The Council shall fix a time and place for public hearing on the
application, which time shall be not less than 30 days after the filing. Prior
to the hearing, the Clerk shall furnish to the applicant a copy of a notice of
hearing on the application; and the applicant shall cause the notice to be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The publication,
if made in a daily newspaper, shall be for a period of not less than five
consecutive publications of the newspaper immediately preceding the date of
hearing, and if made in a weekly newspaper, shall be for a period of not less
than two consecutive publications of the newspaper immediately preceding the
date of hearing.
(1995 Code, § 5.56.040)
§ 5.56.050   Posting of notice.
   The applicant shall cause a copy of the notice of hearing to be posted at
points adjacent to two public highways nearest to the proposed location of the
sand or gravel pit or plant or other facility for a period of at least 15 days
prior to the date of hearing and in such manner as would reasonably give notice
to the passerby of the matters contained in the notice.
(1995 Code, § 5.56.050)
§ 5.56.060   Hearing—Action by Council.
   At the time and place fixed for the hearing on the application, the Council
shall hear the same and any protests thereto. Upon such evidence and matters
brought to its attention at the hearing, the Council shall determine whether or
not the establishment or maintenance of the proposed sand, gravel, clay or
earth pit, for the manufacture or production of sand, gravel, adobe blocks,
brick, tile or other clay or concrete products, described in the application,
will be, or be likely to become, a public nuisance, or will be dangerous or
detrimental to the public peace, welfare, health or safety; and the Council,
having so determined, shall in accordance with its finding, grant or withhold
its approval of the license sought by the application.
(1995 Code, § 5.56.060)
§ 5.56.070   Issuance of license—Fee.
   Upon the approval of the Council of any such application, the Clerk of the
Council shall notify the License Collector in writing of the granting of the
approval and thereafter the License Collector shall issue to the applicant such
license upon receipt of the sum of $50, which sum is hereby fixed as the yearly
license fee for each such license provided for herein.
(1995 Code, § 5.56.070)
Editor’s note:
   For the most recent fee, please see the Rates and Fees Resolution passed by
the city and on file in the city offices.
CHAPTER 5.60: BUILDING CONTRACTORS
Section
   
5.60.010   Definitions.
   
5.60.020   License required.
   
5.60.030   State provisions adopted.
   
5.60.040   State license prerequisite to city license.
   
5.60.050   Licenses prerequisite to permits.
§ 5.60.010   Definitions.
   As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings herein ascribed to them.
   CONTRACTOR. Synonymous with BUILDER. Any person, except an owner who
contracts for a project with a licensed contractor or a licensed architect or a
registered civil engineer acting solely in his or her professional capacity,
who in any capacity other than as the employee of another with wages as the
sole compensation, undertakes to or offers to undertake or purports to have the
capacity to undertake or submits a bid to, or does construct, alter, repair,
add to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck, or demolish any building, highway,
road, railroad, excavation or other structure, project, development or
improvement, or do any part thereof, including the erection of scaffolding or
other structures or works in connection therewith.
   GENERAL BUILDING CONTRACTOR. A contractor whose principal contracting
business is in connection with any structure built, being built or to be built
for the support, shelter and enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or movable
property of any kind, requiring in its construction the use of more than two
unrelated building trades, or to do or superintend the whole or any part
thereof.
   GENERAL CONTRACTING. The contracting business also includes GENERAL BUILDING
CONTRACTING  and GENERAL ENGINEERING CONTRACTING.
   GENERAL ENGINEERING CONTRACTOR. A contractor whose principal contracting
business is in connection with fixed works for any or all of the following
divisions or subjects: irrigation, drainage, water power, water supply, flood
control, inland waterways, harbors, railroads, highways, tunnels, airports and
airways, sewage and bridges.
   SPECIALTY CONTRACTOR. A contractor whose operations as such are the
performance of construction work requiring special skill and whose principal
contracting business involves the use of specialized building trades or crafts.
   SUBCONTRACTOR. Included in the meaning of contractor or specialty
contractor, but does not included anyone who merely furnishes materials or
supplies without fabricating them into, or consuming them in the performance of
the work of the contractor.
(1995 Code, § 5.60.010)
§ 5.60.020   License required.
   No person shall engage in the business or act in the capacity of a
contractor within the city without having a city license therefor, unless the
person is particularly exempted from the provisions of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 5.60.020)
§ 5.60.030   State provisions adopted.
   All of the provisions of Cal. Business and Professions Code §§ 7040, 7041,
7042, 7043, 7044, 7045, 7046, 7047, 7048 and 7049, as amended and in force and
effect, applicable to exemptions, are hereby adopted and made a part of this
chapter as though fully set forth herein.
(1995 Code, § 5.60.030)
§ 5.60.040   State license prerequisite to city license.
   No person shall be issued a city license to engage in the business or act in
the capacity of a contractor within the city until he or she has displayed to
the Finance Director/Treasurer a duly issued contractor’s license, issued
pursuant to the laws of the state, showing the person to have been duly
licensed to engage in the business or act in the capacity of a contractor for
the period of time for which the city license is to be issued.
(1995 Code, § 5.60.040)
§ 5.60.050   Licenses prerequisite to permits.
   Before a building permit can be issued to any contractor for any type of
construction, or for any building, structure, project, development or
improvement, or to do any part thereof, or for any alteration or repair, it
will be necessary for him or her to first display to the Building Inspector a
duly issued contractor’s license, issued pursuant to the laws of the state,
showing the person to be duly licensed to engage in the business or act in the
capacity of a contractor, bearing the name of the contractor and the
classification which he or she is classified and the type of the construction
or work in which he or she is qualified to engage, and it will be necessary for
him or her to display to the Building Inspector a city contractor’s license
issued to him or her pursuant to the provisions of this code, showing the
person to be duly licensed to engage in the business or act in the capacity of
a contractor in the city.
(1995 Code, § 5.60.050)
Statutory reference:
   Statute provisions concerning contractors, see Cal. Business and Professions
Code §§ 7000 et seq.
CHAPTER 5.62: DISQUALIFICATION OF CONTRACTORS FOR PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS
Section
   
5.62.010   Application
   
5.62.020   Definitions
   
5.62.030   Disqualification: effect
   
5.62.040   Notice
   
5.62.050   Grounds for disqualification
   
5.62.060   Existence of grounds
   
5.62.070   Scope of disqualification
   
5.62.080   Period of disqualification
   
5.62.090   Disqualification procedures
   
5.62.100   Appeal to City Manager
   
5.62.110   Review of decision
   
5.62.120   Requirement to submit information
   
5.62.130   Doing business with a disqualified person
   
5.62.140   Existing contracts
   
5.62.150   List of disqualified persons
§ 5.62.010 Application.
   This chapter shall apply to all contracts awarded by or entered into by the
city, including, without limitation, purchases, contracts or leases for
supplies, materials or equipment; contracts for professional and
nonprofessional services; contracts for public works or construction projects;
and contracts with insurance or surety companies issuing insurance policies or
bonds for city public works or construction projects, city sponsored events or
privately-sponsored events at city facilities. The provisions of this chapter
are intended to determine in advance of submittal of bids or proposals on city
contracts whether a person has the necessary qualifications, fitness, capacity,
integrity and trustworthiness to perform city contracts. Nothing in this
chapter shall limit the city's ability to determine prior to or at the time of
contract award whether a bid or proposal is responsive to the city's
solicitation for bids or proposals and whether the person submitting the bid or
proposal has the requisite qualifications, fitness, capacity, trustworthiness
and integrity needed to perform the contract.
§ 5.62.020 Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   AFFILIATES. Persons are AFFILIATES if:
      (1)   One person directly or indirectly controls or has the power to
control or influence the decision making of the other;
      (2)   A third person controls or has the power to control or influence
the decision making of both; or
      (3)   The person(s) has the same or overlapping management, ownership or
one or more of the same principals as the other person.
   INDICIA OF CONTROL. Includes, but is not limited to: interlocking management
or ownership, identity of interests among family members, shared facilities and
equipment or common use of employees.
   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager of the city or his or her designee.
   CONTRACT. Includes, but not be limited to, city contracts, leases, licenses,
agreements, purchase orders or lease-purchase agreements for the acquisition
of:
      (1)   Supplies, materials or equipment;
      (2)   Professional or nonprofessional services;
      (3)   Public works or construction projects;
      (4)   Insurance policies or bonds provided in connection with a public
works or construction project, a city-sponsored activity or event or a
privately-sponsored activity or event at a city-owned, operated or controlled
facility; and
      (5)   Other goods and services.
   DISQUALIFICATION. The action taken pursuant to this chapter or by another
local, state or federal agency, to disqualify, suspend, prohibit, debar or
render a person ineligible to bid upon, solicit, be awarded or perform public
contracts or any portion thereof.
   HEARING OFFICER. The person appointed by the City Manager to administer the
disqualification procedures set forth in this chapter. The HEARING OFFICER need
only be a neutral third party and may, but is not required to be, a
professional mediator/arbitrator.
   LOWEST RESPONSIBLE BIDDER. As used in the Charter of the City of Tulare,
LOWEST RESPONSIBLE BIDDER means the lowest bidder, not disqualified, whose
offer best responds in quality, fitness and capacity to the requirements of the
proposed work or usage, as specified. In determining the LOWEST RESPONSIBLE
BIDDER, the following shall be considered, in addition to price:
      (1)   The quality of supplies offered;
      (2)   The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract or to provide the supplies or services required;
      (3)   Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the supplies
or services promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or
interference;
      (4)   The sufficiency of the bidder's financial resources and the effect
thereof on his ability to perform the contract or to provide the supplies or
service;
      (5)   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and
efficiency of the bidder;
      (6)   The quality of the bidder's performance on previous orders or
contracts for the city;
      (7)   Litigation by the bidder on previous orders or contacts with the
city;
      (8)   Previous and existing compliance by the bidder with local laws and
ordinances relating to the subject of the purchase or contact;
      (9)   The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service
where such maintenance and service is essential.
   PERSON. Any person, individual, group, association, firm, corporation,
partnership, joint venture company, sole proprietorship, or other entity.
   PREDECESSOR-IN-INTEREST. A person whose rights, property or assets and/or
debts or obligations are acquired or assumed by another person.
   PRINCIPAL. Any officer, director, owner, partner, joint venturer,
shareholder, responsible managing officer, responsible managing employee or
person with primary management or supervisory  responsibilities, including any
person who has a substantial influence or substantive control over performance
of a contract.
   PUBLIC CONTRACT. Any contract, lease, license, agreement, purchase order or
lease-purchase agreement that is awarded or entered into by anyfederal, state
or local agency, including the city, or any insurance policy or bond provided
in connection with a government public works or construction project,
government- sponsored activity or event or privately-sponsored activity or
event at a government-owned, operated or controlled facility.
   SUCCESSOR-IN-INTEREST. A person who acquires the rights, property or assets
and/or assumes the debts or obligations of another person.
(Ord. 2023-08, passed 9-19-2023)
§ 5.62.030 Disqualification: effect.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code:
   (A)   The Hearing Officer may disqualify or prohibit any person, or any
principal, affiliate or successor-in-interest thereof, from bidding upon,
soliciting, or being awarded any contract with the city or from being a
subcontractor, supplier, insurer or surety at any tier upon such contract, in
accordance with the procedures established by this chapter.
   (B)   During the time period that a disqualification pursuant to this
chapter is in effect for any person, the city shall not accept bids or
proposals from, contract with or allow performance of all or any portion of a
city contract including, but not limited to, subcontracts, supply contracts,
insurance or surety agreements, by any person who has been disqualified in
accordance with this chapter.
   (C)   During the time period that a disqualification of any person by a
local, state or federal agency is in effect, the city shall not accept bids,
solicitations or proposals from, contract with or allow performance of
subcontracts, material or supply contracts, insurance or surety agreements, by
such person, whether or not such person has been disqualified by the city
pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 2023-08, passed 9-19-2023)
§ 5.62.040 Notice.
   Whenever notice is required to be given under this chapter, it shall be
deemed effective on the day such notice is either personally delivered or
deposited in the United States Mail, first class postage prepaid and addressed
to the last known address of the person to be notified.
(Ord. 2023-08, passed 9-19-2023)
§ 5.62.050 Grounds for disqualification.
   Disqualification may be imposed on a person by the Hearing Officer in
accordance with the procedures established by this chapter on one or more of
the following grounds:
   (A)   Commission by such person of any act of:
      (1)   Fraud, bribery, collusion or conspiracy;
      (2)   Bid rigging, price fixing or any other act in violation of any
local, state or federal law in connection with the bidding upon, solicitation,
award or performance of any public contract; or
      (3)   Embezzlement, theft, forgery, falsification or fabrication of
records, moral turpitude or perjury.
   (B)   Commission of any act indicating a lack of integrity or honesty.
   (C)   Submission of a bid, proposal, insurance policy, bond, guarantee or
other document that is known, or should be known, by such person to be false,
misleading or non- meritorious or to contain false information, or is
determined to be a deliberate attempt to circumvent the intent of this chapter.
   (D)   Submission of any false, misleading or non-meritorious claim, demand
or lawsuit against any private party or public agency, including the city.
   (E)   Pending litigation between the person and the city, which could impact
the ability of the parties to work cooperatively with each other.
   (F)   Breach of the terms of a public contract by a willful or material
failure to perform in accordance with the terms thereof.
   (G)   Violation of a local, state or federal law or regulation applicable to
a public contract.
   (H)   Current or past suspension or disqualification from award or
performance of a public contract by any local, state or federal agency.
   (I)   Knowingly doing business with a disqualified third person in
performance of any public contract awarded after disqualification of said third
person.
   (J)   Substandard performance on any public contract, including, without
limitation:
      (1)   A material breach thereof;
      (2)   A demonstrated consistent failure to adhere to contractual terms,
procedures, or performance requirements, but which may not rise to the level of
a material breach;
      (3)   A failure to complete work required thereunder in a timely manner
or within the contractprice when such failure is attributable to the negligent
or wrongful actions or inactions of such person or such person's subcontractors
or suppliers;
      (4)   Substandard quality of work; or
      (5)   Any negligent or wrongful failure to cooperate with the contracting
agency during performance of the public contract.
   (K)   One or more violation during the performance of any public contract of
any labor or safety statutes, regulations or standards including, without
limitation, applicable local, state or federal statutes, regulations or
standards governing prevailing wage, occupational safety and health,
nondiscrimination requirements or other local, state or federal laws.
   (L)   Failure to have or maintain in good standing all necessary licenses,
permits or other approvals required to transact business within the State of
California.
   (M)   One or more violation of any law or regulation governing the handling,
transfer, storage or disposal of hazardous materials or hazardous wastes.
   (N)   One or more violation of any law or regulation governing the handling,
transfer, storage or disposal of solid waste generated during the performance
of such public contract.
   (O)   A violation of any law or regulation governing conflicts of interest.
   (P)   Evidence that the person lacks financial responsibility, such as
unpaid debts, unfulfilled insurance or bond obligations or other evidence of
financial instability or irresponsibility.
   (Q)   Any other ground that the Hearing Officer determines that would impair
the ability of the person to perform a public contract or any part thereof.
(Ord. 2023-08, passed 9-19-2023)
§ 5.62.060 Existence of grounds.
   (A)   Existence of grounds for disqualification as described in this chapter
may be determined to exist by the Hearing Officer by a preponderance of the
evidence if, not more than ten years prior to the date that a written notice of
proposed disqualification is provided to such person pursuant to this chapter:
      (1)   Such person has been convicted of a criminal charge for any act or
omission described in this chapter, whether entered by a verdict or a plea
including a plea of no contest;
      (2)   A civil judgment has been entered against such person for any act
or omission described in this chapter;
      (3)   A penalty or sanction including, without limitation, monetary
penalties, imprisonment and other sanctions, such as disqualification, has been
imposed on such person by a federal, state or local agency for any act or
omission described in this chapter; or
      (4)   Such person has committed one or more acts or omissions described
in this chapter, based on a preponderance of evidence in the record of facts
and information presented to the Hearing Officer.
   (B)   An act or omission described in this chapter may be imputed to a
person who is the subject of a proposed disqualification when such act or
omission is committed for or on behalf of such person, and such person had
actual or constructive knowledge of such act or omission.
   (C)   In determining whether to disqualify a person and the duration of such
disqualification, the Hearing Officer may consider, in addition to any other
relevant factors, one or more of the following:
      (1)   The degree to which the person cooperated with local, state or
federal authorities in any criminal proceeding forming the basis for
disqualification;
      (2)   The degree to which the person provided restitution for any damages
or injury occasioned by the person' s acts or omissions;
      (3)   Whether the person had in place adequate and effective standards of
conduct and internal control systems at the time of such acts or omissions;
      (4)   Whether the person provided timely notice of such acts or omissions
to the appropriate government agency or agencies;
      (5)   Whether the person fully investigated the circumstances surrounding
such acts or omissions and promptly provided the city with the result of the
investigation;
      (6)   Whether the person took appropriate remedial or disciplinary action
against the individuals responsible for such acts or omissions;
      (7)   Whether the person implemented or agreed to implement remedial
measures to prevent a recurrence of such acts or omissions including, without
limitation, new or revised internal controlprocedures and other measures
recommended, identified or prescribed by any government agency; and
      (8)   Whether the person had adequate time to eliminate or mitigate the
circumstances or factors leading to or causing such acts or omissions.
   (D)   The City shall have the initial burden of proof to establish the
grounds for disqualification.
(Ord. 2023-08, passed 9-19-2023)
§ 5.62.070 Scope of disqualification.
   (A)   Disqualification of a person under this chapter constitutes
disqualification of that person from submitting bids or proposals to the city
for the purpose of entering into or in any manner participating in any city
contract, or any part thereof, and shall apply to all individuals, divisions,
subsidiaries, affiliates and parent corporations of that person unless the
decision to qualify is limited by its terms to one or more specifically
identified individuals, divisions, subsidiaries, affiliates, parents or other
organizational elements.
   (B)   The disqualification of a person shall apply to any existing affiliate
of the person where the affiliate is specifically named and given notice of the
proposed disqualification and an opportunity to respond. The disqualification
shall also apply to any successor-in-interest or any affiliate of the
disqualified person formed during or after the disqualification proceedings.
   (C)   Disqualification of any person shall apply to any business entity,
whether or not such business entity was in existence at the time of such
disqualification, for which the disqualified person acts as a principal during
the disqualification period.
   (D)   The Hearing Officer shall determine the length and scope of the
disqualification. The scope of the disqualification may include
disqualification as to certain work, as to general or subcontracting, or any
other limitation.
(Ord. 2023-08, passed 9-19-2023)
§ 5.62.080 Period of disqualification.
   The disqualification period shall be commensurate with the severity of the
person's acts of omissions, as determined by the Hearing Officer. However,
disqualification may include a lifetime disqualification of any person or
entity, including, but not limited to, their subsidiary, affiliate, officer,
shareholder, or other agent.
(Ord. 2023-08, passed 9-19-2023)
§ 5.62.090 Disqualification procedures.
   (A)   Prior to disqualifying any person under this chapter, the Hearing
Officer shall mail or deliver by personal service a written notice of the
proposed disqualification to the person proposed to be disqualified,
hereinafter referred to as "respondent." Such notice shall contain the
following:
      (1)   Notice that a disqualification is being considered;
      (2)   The grounds for the proposed disqualification, in terms sufficient
to put the respondent on notice of the conduct or action(s) upon which it is
based;
      (3)   The intended period of the disqualification;
      (4)   A summary of the disqualification procedures set forth is this
chapter; and
      (5)   The name and address of the Hearing Officer to which the respondent
may submit a written request for a hearing on the proposed disqualification.
   (B)   Within 15 days after personal service or mailing of the notice of the
proposed disqualification, the respondent or the respondent's representative
may submit a written request for a hearing on the proposed disqualification.
Such written request shall specify the name and address of the person to which
all subsequent notices and communications should be mailed. Failure of the
respondent or respondent's representative to submit a written request for a
hearing within the time provided by this division, or failure of respondent or
respondent's representative to appear at the requested hearing, shall be deemed
to be a waiver by respondent of respondent's right to request a hearing on the
proposed disqualification and the Hearing Officer's decision shall be final.
   (C)   If the respondent requests a hearing in accordance with division (B)
of this section, the Hearing Officer shall schedule a hearing at which the
respondent or the respondent's representative shall have an opportunity to
provide relevant information and argument, including the presentation and
questioning of witnesses, to the Hearing Officer. The Hearing Officer shall
provide the respondent with written notice of the time, date, and location of
such hearing, which shall be held no sooner than five days from the date of
such notice.
   (D)   The formal rules of evidence shall not apply during the hearing. The
Hearing Officer may admit into evidence all relevant evidence, including the
affidavits or declarations of witnesses; limit the scope of discovery; shorten
the time to produce records or witnesses; exclude witnesses from the hearing
when not testifying; exclude disorderly or disruptive persons from the hearing;
and make other orders necessary to ensure the fair and orderly conduct of the
hearing. The hearing shall be open to the public.
   (E)   The proceedings at the hearing may be tape-recorded if ordered by the
Hearing Officer or requested by the respondent. A stenographer shall also
transcribe the proceedings if ordered by the Hearing Officer or requested by
the respondent, with the costs thereof to be borne by the person making the
order or request. A copy of the tape recording or transcript of the proceedings
shall be made available to the respondent upon request and upon payment of the
cost of preparation thereof.
   (F)   Following the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall render a decision on
the proposed disqualification. The decision shall be in writing and shall
specify the reasons therefor. If the Hearing Officer upholds the
disqualification, the notice of decision shall specify the length of the
disqualification period and notify the respondent of his or her right to appeal
the decision pursuant to division (G), below.
   (G)   The respondent shall have ten days from the date of the Hearing
Officer's decision to appeal the decision to the City Manager. The appeal shall
be in writing and shall be received by the City Manager by the close of
business not later than the tenth day following the date of the Hearing
Officer's decision except that, if such date falls on a Saturday, Sunday or
city holiday, the appeal period shall be extended to the close of business on
the next regular business day.
(Ord. 2023-08, passed 9-19-2023)
§ 5.62.100 Appeal to the City Manager.
   (A)   Upon the timely receipt of an appeal, the Hearing Officer's decision
shall be abated and the City Manager shall schedule a time at which the
respondent Hearing Officer meet with the City Manager to explain why the
Hearing Officer's decision should be set aside or modified.
   (B)   Evidence or testimony not previously presented to the Hearing Officer
shall not be permitted at the meeting unless the City Manager determines, in
his or her sole discretion, that the interest of justice requires the
consideration of such new evidence or testimony.
   (C)   If ordered by the City Manager, the proceedings may be tape-recorded
or transcribed in the manner described in the §
5.62.090.
   (D)   At the conclusion of the meeting, the City Manager shall render a
decision to uphold, modify, or set aside the Hearing Officer's decision and
shall provide written notice of the decision to the respondent or the
respondent's representative. If the City Manager determines to uphold the
Hearing Officer's decision to disqualify the respondent, the disqualification
period shall commence from the date of the City Manager's decision.
   (E)   The City Manager's decision shall be final, except a review as
provided in the §
5.62.110. Any appeal of the City Manager's decision shall be made to the
Superior Court within ten days from the date of the City Manager's decision.
(Ord. 2023-08, passed 9-19-2023)
§ 5.62.110 Review of decision.
   (A)   The City Manager or Hearing Officer's decision to disqualify a person
as provided herein may be modified or vacated by the City Manager or Hearing
Officer, as the case may be, if, in his or her sole judgment, good cause exists
for such modification
or vacation. Good cause for review may be based on one or more of the following
reasons:
      (1)   Newly-discovered, material evidence not previously available to the
parties.
      (2)   Final, judicial reversal of a conviction or civil judgment upon
which the disqualification was based.
      (3)   A bona fide change in ownership or management of the respondent's
business.
      (4)   Elimination of the grounds upon which the disqualification was
based.
   (B)   The respondent shall have no right of review by the City Manager or
Hearing Officer. Such review shall be at the City Manager or Hearing Officer's
sole discretion.
   (C)   A request for review shall be submitted by the respondent or the
respondent's representative in writing and shall be accompanied by competence
evidence in support thereof. Upon receipt of the request, the City Manager or
Hearing Officer, as the case may be, shall respond within a reasonable period
of time as to whether the decision will be reviewed. The City Manager or
Hearing Officer's denial of such request shall be non-appealable and not
subject to judicial review.
   (D)   If the City Manager or Hearing Officer agrees to review the decision,
he or she shall render a written decision within a reasonable time thereafter.
The decision shall be final and delivered to the respondent or respondent's
representative.
(Ord. 2023-08, passed 9-19-2023)
§ 5.62.120 Requirement to submit information.
   The city may require any person submitting a bid or proposal on a city
contract to submit the following as part of such bid or proposal:
   (A)   A statement under penalty of perjury, that neither such person,
including any principal, affiliate or predecessor-in-interest of such person,
nor any subcontractor, supplier or surety engaged or to be engaged by the
person:
      (1)   Is currently disqualified or has been disqualified at any time
during the preceding ten years, from submitting a bid or proposal on a contract
by any federal, state or local agency.
      (2)   Has, at any time during the preceding ten years, been convicted of
any offense, been subject to a civil judgment or been subject to a penalty or
sanction by any federal, state or local agency for any act or omission
described in this chapter.
   (B)   Any other information or documentation deemed necessary to determine
the person's eligibility to submit a bid or proposal on a city contract.
(Ord. 2023-08, passed 9-19-2023)
§ 5.62.130 Doing business with a disqualified person.
   In performance of any city contract, no person having actual or constructive
knowledge shall utilize the services of any person who is currently
disqualified pursuant to this chapter. No person having actual or constructive
knowledge shall use or list, in any bid or proposal for a city contract, any
subcontractor, supplier, insurer or surety who is currently disqualified
pursuant to this chapter. Violation of this section may result in rejection of
the bid or proposal, nonpayment by the city for work performed by such person,
annulment of award or termination of an award of contract, issuance of a stop
work order, disqualification from submitting future bids or proposals on city
contracts, or any other remedy provided by law. A person who uses or lists a
disqualified subcontractor, supplier, insurer or surety without having actual
or constructive knowledge of such disqualification shall be allowed to
substitute the disqualified subcontractor, supplier, insurer or surety in
accordance with state law or, if not applicable, the provisions of the contract
governing contract changes.
(Ord. 2023-08, passed 9-19-2023)
§ 5.62.140 Existing contracts.
   (A)   The city shall not renew or extend the term of any contract(s) with
any person who is disqualified in accordance with this chapter, or who utilizes
the services of any supplier, subcontractor, insurer or surety who is
disqualified in accordance with this chapter, unless the City Manager
determines that such renewal or extensions is in the best interest of the city.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the disqualification of any person, the city may, at
its sole option, elect to continue a contract in existence at the time the
person is disqualified, unless the City Manager determines that termination of
such contract is in the best interest of the city.
(Ord. 2023-08, passed 9-19-2023)
§ 5.62.150 List of disqualified persons.
   (A)   The City Manager shall maintain a list of all persons who are
currently disqualified by the city pursuant to this chapter and the effective
dates of such disqualification. Such list shall not include a person
disqualified by another local agency or the state or federal government unless
the person has been disqualified by the city under this chapter. Such list
shall be filed with the City Clerk, who shall make thelist available for public
inspection and copying during regular business hours and in accordance with the
California Public Records Act.
   (B)   Such list shall be deemed to be constructive notice as to the persons
who have been disqualified from submitting bids or proposals on city contracts
or who are ineligible to participate in such contracts.
(Ord. 2023-08, passed 9-19-2023)
CHAPTER 5.64: PRIVATE PATROLS
Section
   
5.64.010   Definitions.
   
5.64.020   Notices—Form—Service.
   
5.64.030   Permit required.
   
5.64.040   Transfer of permit.
   
5.64.050   Application for permit—Contents.
   
5.64.060   Signing of application.
   
5.64.070   Disposition of application.
   
5.64.080   Investigation by Police Chief
   
5.64.090   Prerequisites to issuance of permit.
   
5.64.100   Denial of application—Grounds
   
5.64.110   Need for surety bond— Sufficiency.
   
5.64.120   Action upon bond.
   
5.64.130   Cancellation of bond.
   
5.64.140   Revocation of permit—Grounds.
   
5.64.150   Hearing required—Notice.
   
5.64.160   Surrender of permit.
   
5.64.170   Conditions on permit.
   
5.64.180   Misuse of badges—Insignia.
   
5.64.190   Misuse of uniforms.
   
5.64.200   Rank—Insignia of rank.
   
5.64.210   License tax.
   
5.64.220   Appeals—Hearing.
§ 5.64.010   Definitions.
   As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings herein ascribed to them.
   PRIVATE PATROL SYSTEM. A business which purports to furnish and does furnish
by private agreement with diverse merchants, or other occupants of property
within the city, any private police officer, watchperson or guard to patrol and
watch their property and protect the same from intrusion by persons whose
presence thereon is not necessary.
   PRIVATE WATCHPERSON or SPECIAL POLICE OFFICER. Shall not include a private
watchperson employed by just one or two persons to guard the property of the
persons exclusively; nor is the term intended to include a special police
officer appointed by the Chief of Police, at the request of the person to be
employed by the persons as a watchperson, or for like purposes.
(1995 Code, § 5.64.010)
§ 5.64.020   Notices—Form—Service.
   Any notice required by this chapter must be in writing and may be given by
personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail the notice must be
deposited in the United States Post Office in a sealed envelope, with postage
prepaid, addressed to the person to whom it is to be served, at his or her last
known address as the same appears from the files of the Clerk. The service
shall be deemed complete at the time of the deposit in the Post Office.
(1995 Code, § 5.64.020)
§ 5.64.030   Permit required.
   It is unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent or otherwise, to
engage in the business of operating a private patrol system without first
having obtained a permit therefor as in this chapter provided.
(1995 Code, § 5.64.030)
§ 5.64.040   Transfer of permit.
   No private patrol system permit may be transferred without the written
consent of the Manager obtained upon application in the same manner as is
herein provided for the original application for the permit.
(1995 Code, § 5.64.040)
§ 5.64.050   Application for permit—Contents.
   Any person desiring a permit to engage in the business of operating a
private patrol system shall file with the Chief of Police a written
application, in duplicate, addressed to the Manager, setting forth the
information required by this chapter. An application for a permit to operate a
private patrol system shall be on a form supplied by the Clerk and shall set
forth the following information:
   (A)   Name, address of applicant. The full name and home address of each
person signing the application;
   (B)   Business name. The name under which it is proposed to operate the
intended private patrol system;
   (C)   Post employment. The business or occupation for the five years last
past of each person signing the application, giving the name and address of
each employer, the date of employment, and the nature of the services performed
by each person;
   (D)   Proposed territory. The territory of the city in which it is desired
to operate the proposed private patrol system;
   (E)   Proposed hours. The hours during which it is proposed to patrol the
territory or render guard or watch person service;
   (F)   Business address. The address of the principal place of business of
the applicant or the proposed principal place of business, and all existing or
proposed branch offices;
   (G)   State detective license. State whether or not the applicant holds a
license issued by the Board of Prison Directors of the state as a private
detective;
   (H)   Date of license; surety. If the applicant holds the license, give the
date of the issuance thereof, and the name and address of his or her surety or
sureties;
   (I)   Date of application for denied license. If the applicant has ever
applied for such a license and had the same denied, give date of application;
   (J)   Arrests. State whether any person signing this application has ever
been arrested on a charge of the commission of a felony, or a charge involving
moral turpitude, at any time, or arrested for any reason, within five years
last past, giving full details;
   (K)   Manager’s name, address. The name and address of the person who will
have the active operation and management of the business;
   (L)   Resolution of corporation. If the applicant is a corporation, the
application shall be accompanied by a certified copy of the resolution
authorizing the application; and
   (M)   Other information. Such other information as the Chief of Police or
the Manager may require.
(1995 Code, § 5.64.050)
§ 5.64.060   Signing of application.
   (A)   By individual. If the application is an individual, he or she shall
sign the application personally.
   (B)   By association. If the applicant is an association, firm or
copartnership, the application shall be signed personally by each person
composing or intending to compose the association, firm or copartnership.
   (C)   By corporation. If the applicant is a corporation, the application
shall be singed by each member of the Board of Directors.
   (D)   Verification. The application shall be sworn to by all persons signing
the same before some person authorized to administer oaths.
(1995 Code, § 5.64.060)
§ 5.64.070   Disposition of application.
   Upon receipt of an application for a permit to operate a private patrol
system, the Chief of Police shall forward to the Manager the original copy of
the application, retaining the duplicate copy.
(1995 Code, § 5.64.070)
§ 5.64.080   Investigation by Police Chief.
   The Chief of Police shall immediately make an investigation as to the
truthfulness of the facts therein set forth, and the reputation and character,
competency and integrity of each person signing the application, and whether
the management, conduct and operation of the proposed private patrol system
will or will not comport with the public welfare; and for this purpose shall
consider any facts or evidence bearing on the moral fitness and reputation of
those who will be in charge of the private patrol system and any other evidence
or fact tending to assist in enlightening the Manager in this respect. Upon
completion of the investigation, he or she shall file a written report thereof
with the Manager. The Manager shall grant or deny a permit to the applicant
within 20 days from the date of an application being filed with the Chief of
Police.
(1995 Code, § 5.64.080)
§ 5.64.090   Prerequisites to issuance of permit.
   The permit shall not be issued until the applicant shall exhibit to the
Manager a valid and existing license issued to him or her by the License
Collector to carry on such business and shall have filed with the Clerk a
surety bond as hereinafter provided, or shall have filed with the Clerk a
certified copy of a valid and existing license issued to the applicant by the
Board of Prison Directors of the state to carry on the business of a private
detective.
(1995 Code, § 5.64.090)
§ 5.64.100   Denial of application—Grounds.
   The Manager shall deny an application if it appears:
   (A)   That any person signing the application has ever been convicted of a
felony or a misdemeanor, involving moral turpitude;
   (B)   That any person signing the application does not have a good
reputation for honesty, character, integrity or sobriety, or is not a
responsible person; and
   (C)   For any reason, within his or her sound discretion, that a private
patrol system is not needed within the territory set forth in the application,
or for any other reason would not comport with the public welfare.
(1995 Code, § 5.64.100)
§ 5.64.110   Need for surety bond—Sufficiency.
   Any person who has made application for a private patrol system permit under
this chapter and who does not hold a valid permit issued by the Board of Prison
Directors of the state to carry on the business of a private detective, shall,
before any permit issued to him or her, deliver to and file with the Clerk a
surety bond, executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the
state in the sum of $1,000, conditioned for the faithful and honest conduct of
the business by the applicant, which bond shall be upon a form provided by the
Clerk and approved as to its form and execution by the Attorney.
(1995 Code, § 5.64.110)
§ 5.64.120   Action upon bond.
   The bond shall be taken in the name of the people of the city and every
person injured by the willful, malicious, negligent or wrongful act of the
principal, his or her agents or employees, may bring an action on the bond in
his or her own name to recover damages suffered by reason of the willful,
malicious, negligent or wrongful act.
(1995 Code, § 5.64.120)
§ 5.64.130   Cancellation of bond.
   A surety bond filed as herein required may be canceled only by service of a
written notice upon the Clerk not less than five days prior to the effective
date of the cancellation; and the holder of a private patrol system permit and
his or her private patrol watchperson, thereby secured, shall be ipso facto
suspended upon the cancellation of the bond, until such time as another bond is
filed as herein reacquired in the first instance.
(1995 Code, § 5.64.130)
§ 5.64.140   Revocation of permit—Grounds.
   Any permit granted pursuant to this chapter for the operation of a private
patrol system may be revoked by the Manager for any reason for which the
granting of the permit might be lawfully denied, or for the violation of any
provisions of this chapter, or for any other good cause.
(1995 Code, § 5.64.140)
§ 5.64.150   Hearing required—Notice.
   The revocation shall be made only after a hearing granted to the holder of
the permit before the Manager, after five days notice to the permit holder,
setting forth the grounds of complaint. The hearing may be continued from time
to time as the circumstances may require.
(1995 Code, § 5.64.150)
§ 5.64.160   Surrender of permit.
   Upon revocation of any permit, the permit shall be immediately surrendered
to the Manager. The revocation of any permit shall be in addition to any
penalties otherwise provided in this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 5.64.160)
§ 5.64.170   Conditions on permit.
   Any permit for a private patrol system shall be issued upon condition that
the private patrol system shall be operated and conducted subject to the
general supervision of the Chief of Police.
(1995 Code, § 5.64.170)
§ 5.64.180   Misuse of badges—Insignia.
   No person shall wear or display, or cause to be worn or displayed, any badge
or insignia similar in design to that used by the Police or Fire Departments.
No badge or insignia shall be worn, displayed or used in any manner unless the
same has been first approved by the Chief of Police.
(1995 Code, § 5.64.180)
§ 5.64.190   Misuse of uniforms.
   No person shall wear or permit to be worn, any uniform in the operation of a
private patrol system that is similar to the uniforms used by the Police and
Fire Departments. No uniform shall be worn unless the same shall have been
first approved by the Chief of Police.
(1995 Code, § 5.64.190)
§ 5.64.200   Rank—Insignia of rank.
   No person shall use, wear or exhibit any rank or insignia of rank or permit
to be used, worn or exhibited any rank or insignia of rank, by any person
operating, or employed by a person operating a private patrol system, except
such as may be approved in writing by the Chief of Police.
(1995 Code, § 5.64.200)
§ 5.64.210   License tax.
   Every person operating a private patrol system shall pay the following
license tax: $13.50 per annum, together with an additional $5 per annum for
person working at the business.
(1995 Code, § 5.64.210)
Editor’s note:
   For the most recent fee, please see the Rates and Fees Resolution passed by
the city and on file in the city offices
§ 5.64.220   Appeals—Hearing.
   Any holder of, or applicant for, a private patrol system permit excepting to
any denial or revocation of a permit applied for or held by him or her, or to
any action taken by an official of the Council by filing with the Clerk a
written notice of the appeal, setting forth the specific grounds thereof. The
notice must be filed within 14 days after notice of the action appealed from,
but in no event later than 30 days after date of the action. The Clerk shall
forthwith set the matter for hearing before the Council and cause notice
thereof to be given not less than five days prior to the hearing to the
appellant. At the hearing, the appellant shall show cause, on the grounds
specified in the notice of appeal, why the action, excepted to, should not be
approved. The hearings may, by the Council, be continued over from time to
time. Its findings on the appeal shall be final and conclusive in the matter.
(1995 Code, § 5.64.220)
CHAPTER 5.68: TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Section
   
5.68.010   Title.
   
5.68.020   Definitions.
   
5.68.030   Amount of tax—Prepayment by transient.
   
5.68.040   Exemptions.
   
5.68.050   Duties of operator.
   
5.68.060   Registration of operators.
   
5.68.070   Reporting and remitting.
   
5.68.080   Remittance by mail.
   
5.68.090   Penalties and interest—Original delinquency.
   
5.68.100   Continued delinquency.
   
5.68.110   Fraud.
   
5.68.120   Interest.
   
5.68.130   Penalties and interest merge with tax.
   
5.68.140   Failure to collect and report tax.
   
5.68.150   Deficiency determinations.
   
5.68.160   Refunds.
   
5.68.170   Appeals.
   
5.68.180   Records.
   
5.68.190   Actions to collect.
   
5.68.200   Violations.
§ 5.68.010   Title.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Transient Occupancy Tax Law of the City
of Tulare”.
(1995 Code, § 5.68.010)
§ 5.68.020   Definitions.
   Except where the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall
govern the construction of this chapter.
   HOTEL. Any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or
intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or
sleeping proposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel,
studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house,
dormitory, public or private club, or other similar structure or portion
thereof. HOTEL also includes a “mobile home”, as defined in Cal. Health and
Safety Code § 18008, which is located outside a mobile home park when the
tenant is not an employee of the owner or operator of the mobile home. HOTEL
does not include a hospital room, medical clinic, convalescent home or home for
the aged. Also, HOTEL does not include a private home, vacation cabin or
similar facility which is rented by a person who is not regularly engaged in
the business of renting the facilities and does so only occasionally and
incidentally to his or her own use thereof.
   OCCUPANCY. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of
any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or
sleeping purposes.
   OPERATOR. The person who is the proprietor of the hotel, whether in the
capacity of owner, lessee, subleasee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any
other capacity. If the operator performs his or her functions through a
managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing
agent shall also be deemed an OPERATOR for the purposes of this chapter and
shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance
with provisions of this chapter be either the principal or the managing agent
shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.
   RENT. The consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy
of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods,
labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and
services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom.
   TAX COLLECTOR. The Tax Collector of the City of Tulare.
   TRANSIENT. Any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by
reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a
period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar
days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be
deemed to be a transient until the period of 30 days has expired unless there
is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for
a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient,
uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the
effective date of this chapter may be considered.
(1995 Code, § 5.68.020)
§ 5.68.030   Amount of tax—Prepayment by transient.
   For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel on and after July 1, 1994, each
transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of 10% of the rent
charged by the operator. The tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to
the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city.
The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the
rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the
tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due when the
transient ceases to occupy space in the hotel. If the tax due is not paid to
the operator, the tax shall be paid directly to the Tax Collector.
(1995 Code, § 5.68.030)
§ 5.68.040   Exemptions.
   No tax shall be imposed upon the following persons:
   (A)   Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the
power of the city to impose tax herein provided;
   (B)   Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by
reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty; and
   (C)   Any occupant whose rent is less than $2 a day. No exemption shall be
granted under divisions (A), (B) or (C) of this section unless a claim of
exemption in the form prescribed by the Tax Collector is executed by the
transient under penalty of perjury and filed with the operator at the time rent
is collected.
(1995 Code, § 5.68.060)
§ 5.68.050   Duties of operator.
   Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same
extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The
amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged
and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment of the tax from the
operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner,
whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part therefor will be
assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent,
or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner provided in
this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 5.68.050)
§ 5.68.060   Registration of operators.
   Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a
hotel in the city shall register with the Tax Collector on a form provided by
him or her. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than
January 1, 1965, or within 30 days after commencing business whichever is
later, but the privilege of registration after the date of imposition of the
tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of collection and payment
of tax on and after the date of imposition thereof, regardless of registration.
The registration form shall set forth the name under which the person transact
or intends to transact business, the location of his or her place or places of
business and such other information to facilitate the collection of the tax as
the Tax Collector may require. The registration form shall be signed by the
owner if a natural person, by a member or partner in case of an association or
partnership, and by an executive officer or some person specifically authorized
by the corporation to sign the registration form in the case of a corporation.
The Tax Collector shall, within ten days after receiving the registration form,
issue without charge a certificate of authority to each registrant to collect
the tax from transients, together with a duplicate thereof for each additional
place of business of the registrant. The certificates shall be nonassignable
and nontransferable and shall be surrendered immediately to the Tax Collector
upon the cessation of business at the location named or upon sale or transfer
of the hotel. Each certificate shall be prominently displayed in the hotel so
as to be seen and come to the notice readily of all occupants and persons
seeking occupancy. The certificate shall contain the following information:
   (A)   The name of the operator;
   (B)   The address of the hotel;
   (C)   The date upon which the certificate was issued;
   (D)   The following statement: “This Transient Occupancy Registration
Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled
the requirements of the Transient Occupancy Tax Law of the City by registering
with the Tax Collector for the purpose of collecting from transients the
Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the Tax Collector. This
certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or
to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel
without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not
limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or
office of this City. This certificate does not constitute a permit.”
   (E)   Such additional information as may be required by the Tax Collector.
(1995 Code, § 5.68.060)
§ 5.68.070   Reporting and remitting.
   Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the calendar month
following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter
reporting period which may be established by the Tax Collector, make a return
to the Tax Collector, on forms provided by him or her, of the total rents
charged and received and the amount of tax collected from transient
occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax
collected shall be remitted to the Tax Collector. The Tax Collector may
establish shorter reporting periods for any operator if he or she deems it
necessary in order to insure collection of the tax and he or she may require
additional information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately
upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators
pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city
until payment thereof is made to the Tax Collector.
(1995 Code, § 5.68.070)
§ 5.68.080   Remittance by mail.
   If a remittance to cover a payment required by this chapter to be made to
the Tax Collector on or before a specified date is sent through the United
States mail, properly addressed with postage prepaid, it shall be deemed to
have been received by the Tax Collector on the date shown by the post office
cancellation mark stamped upon the envelope containing the remittance, or on
the date it was mailed if proof satisfactory to the Tax Collector establishes
that the mailing occurred on an earlier date. Nothing in this section shall be
construed as constituting payment of any remittance required, unless the
remittance is actually received by the Tax Collector.
(1995 Code, § 5.68.080)
§ 5.68.090   Penalties and interest—Original delinquency.
   Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the
time required by §
5.68.070 of this chapter shall pay a penalty of 10% of the amount of the tax in
addition to the amount of the tax.
(1995 Code, § 5.68.090)
§ 5.68.100   Continued delinquency.
   Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before the
last day of the second calendar month following the close of each calendar
quarter shall pay a second delinquency penalty of 10% of the amount of the tax
in addition to the amount of the tax and the 10% penalty first imposed.
(1995 Code, § 5.68.100)
§ 5.68.110   Fraud.
   If the Tax Collector determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due
under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of 25% of the amount of the tax
shall be added thereto in additional to the penalties stated in §§
5.68.090 and
5.68.100 of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 5.68.110)
§ 5.68.120   Interest.
   In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any
tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of 0.5% per month or
any fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the
date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.
(1995 Code, § 5.68.120)
§ 5.68.130   Penalties and interest merge with tax.
   Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of
§§
5.68.090 through
5.68.120 of this chapter shall become a part of the tax herein required to be
paid.
(1995 Code, § 5.68.130)
§ 5.68.140   Failure to collect and report tax.
   If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect the tax and to make, within
the time provide in this chapter, any report and remittance of the tax or any
portion thereof required by this chapter, the Tax Collector shall proceed in
such manner as he or she may deem best to obtain facts and information on which
to base his or her estimate of the tax due. As soon as the Tax Collector
secures such facts and information as he or she is able to obtain upon which to
base the assessment of any operator who has failed or refused to collect the
same and to make the report and remittance, he or she shall proceed to
determine and assess against the operator the tax, interest and penalties
provided for by this chapter. When the determination has been made, the Tax
Collector shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it
personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid,
addressed to the operator so assessed at this last known address. The operator
may, within ten days after the serving or mailing of the notice, make
application in writing to the Tax Collector for a hearing on the amount
assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the
ten-day period, the tax, interest and penalties determined by the Tax Collector
shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such
application is made, the Tax Collector shall give not less than five-days’
written notice to the operator, in the manner prescribed above, to show cause
at a time and place fixed in said notice why the amount specified therein
should not be so fixed. After the hearing, the Tax Collector shall determine
the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the
operator in the manner prescribed above of the determination and the amount of
the tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be
payable 15 days after the serving or mailing of the notice unless an appeal is
taken as provided in §
5.68.170 of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 5.68.140)
§ 5.68.150   Deficiency determinations.
   If the Tax Collector is not satisfied with a return filed by an operator or
the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city pursuant to a return, he
or she may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis
of the facts contained in the return or upon the basis of any information
within his or her possession or that may come into his or her possession. One
or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for any period.
The Tax Collector shall give to the operator written notice of his or her
determination in the same manner as provided in §
5.68.140 of this chapter. The operator shall be entitled to apply for a hearing
on the amount assessed to him or her pursuant to the procedure set forth in §
5.68.140 of this chapter and shall thereafter be entitled to appeal to the City
Council in accordance with the provisions of §
5.68.170 of this chapter. The penalties and interest provided by §§
5.68.090 through
5.68.120 of this chapter shall be applicable to the amount of deficiency
established pursuant to this section.
(1995 Code, § 5.68.150)
§ 5.68.160   Refunds.
   Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than
once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the Tax
Collector under this chapter, it may be refunded provided a verified claim in
writing therefor, stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded,
is filed with the Tax Collector within three years from the date of payment.
The claim shall be made on forms provided by the Tax Collector. If the claim is
approved by the Tax Collector, the excess amount collected or paid may be
refunded or may be credited on any amount then due and payable from the person
from whom it was collected or by whom paid and the balance my be refunded to
such person, his or her administrators or executors.
(1995 Code, § 5.68.160)
§ 5.68.170   Appeals.
   Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Collector may appeal to
the City Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 15
days after the serving or mailing of the notice of the decision. The City
Council shall fix a time and place for a hearing the appeal and the City Clerk
shall give notice in writing to the operator at his or her last known address.
The decision of the City Council shall be final and conclusive and shall be
served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice
of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable
upon the service of the notice.
(1995 Code, § 5.68.170)
§ 5.68.180   Records.
   Every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax
imposed by this chapter shall keep and preserve, for a period of three years,
all records necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have
been liable for the collection of and payment to the city. The Tax Collector
shall have the right to inspect the records at all reasonable times.
(1995 Code, § 5.68.180)
§ 5.68.190   Actions to collect.
   Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax
collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a
debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under
the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name
of the city for the recovery of the amount.
(1995 Code, § 5.68.190)
§ 5.68.200   Violations.
   It shall be unlawful for any operator or other person required to do so to
fail or refuse to register as required herein, or to furnish any return
required to be made, or to furnish a supplemental return or other data required
by the Tax Collector, or to render a false or fraudulent return or claim. It
shall also be unlawful for any person required to make, render, sign or verify
any report or return to make any false or fraudulent report or return with
intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this
chapter to be made.
(1995 Code, § 5.68.200)
CHAPTER 5.72: DOCUMENTARY STAMP TAX
Section
   
5.72.010   Title.
   
5.72.020   Tax imposed.
   
5.72.030   Payment.
   
5.72.040   Exception.
   
5.72.050   Exemptions.
   
5.72.060   Bankruptcies.
   
5.72.070   Securities, stocks and bonds.
   
5.72.080   Partnerships.
   
5.72.090   County Recorder to administer tax.
   
5.72.100   Claim for refund.
§ 5.72.010   Title.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance of
the City of Tulare”. It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Cal.
Revenue and Taxation Part 6.7 (commencing with § 11901) of Division 2.
(1995 Code, § 5.72.010)
§ 5.72.020   Tax imposed.
   There is hereby imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any
lands, tenements or other realty sold within the city shall be granted,
assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to or vested in, the purchaser or
purchasers, or any other person by his or her direction, when the consideration
or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any
lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds $100, a tax
at the rate of $0.275 for each $500 or fractional part thereof.
(1995 Code, § 5.72.020)
§ 5.72.030   Payment.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to §
5.72.020 hereof shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any
document or instrument subject to the tax or for whose use or benefit the same
is made, signed or issued.
(1995 Code, § 5.72.030)
§ 5.72.040   Exception.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument
in writing given to secure a debt.
(1995 Code, § 5.72.040)
§ 5.72.050   Exemptions.
   The United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or
territory, or political subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia shall
not be liable for any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter with respect to any
deed, instrument, or writing to which it is a party, but the tax may be
collected by assessment from any other party liable therefor.
(1995 Code, § 5.72.050)
§ 5.72.060   Bankruptcies.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making,
delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of
reorganization or adjustment:
   (A)   Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;
   (B)   Approved in an equity receiving proceeding in a court involving a
railroad corporation, as defined in 11 U.S.C. § 101(33), as amended;
   (C)   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a
corporation; or
   (D)   Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organizations
effected. Divisions (A) to (D), inclusive, of this section shall only apply if
the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs
within five years from the date of such confirmation approval or change.
(1995 Code, § 5.72.060)
§ 5.72.070   Securities, stocks and bonds.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or
delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and
Exchange Commission, as defined in § 1083(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1954; but only if:
   (A)   The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to
which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or
appropriate to effectuate the provisions of 15 U.S.C. § 79k, relating to the
Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;
   (B)   The order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; or
   (C)   The conveyance is made in obedience to the order.
(1995 Code, § 5.72.070)
§ 5.72.080   Partnerships.
   (A)   In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be
imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a
partnership or otherwise, if:
      (1)   The partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing
partnership within the meaning of § 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954;
and
      (2)   The continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.
   (B)   If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of §
708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, the
partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was
conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or
encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by the partnership at the time
of the termination.
   (C)   Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by
reason of a termination described in division (B) above, and any transfer
pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by the partnership at the
time of the termination.
(1995 Code, § 5.72.080)
§ 5.72.090   County Recorder to administer tax.
   The County Recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the
provisions of Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code Part 6.7 of Division 2 and the
provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto.
(1995 Code, § 5.72.090)
§ 5.72.100   Claim for refund.
   Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be
governed by the provisions of Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code Chapter 5
(commencing with § 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1.
(1995 Code, § 5.72.100)
CHAPTER 5.74: COMMUNICATION USER’S TAX
Section
   
5.74.010   Short title.
   
5.74.020   Definitions.
   
5.74.030   Constitutional, statutory, and other exemptions.
   
5.74.040   Communication users’ tax.
   
5.74.050   Bundling taxable items with non-taxable items.
   
5.74.060   Substantial nexus/minimum contacts.
   
5.74.070   Reserved.
   
5.74.080   Duty to collect—Procedures.
   
5.74.090   Collection penalties—Service suppliers.
   
5.74.100   Actions to collect.
   
5.74.110   Deficiency determination and assessment—Tax application errors.
   
5.74.120   Administrative remedy—Non-paying service users.
   
5.74.130   Additional powers and duties of the Tax Administrator.
   
5.74.140   Records.
   
5.74.150   Refunds.
   
5.74.160   Appeals.
   
5.74.170   Notice no injunction/writ of mandate.
   
5.74.180   Notice of changes to chapter.
   
5.74.190   Future amendment to cited statute.
   
5.74.200   Independent audit of tax collection, exemption, remittance, and
expenditure.
   
5.74.210   Interaction with prior tax.
   
5.74.220   Amendment or repeal.
   
5.74.230   Severability.
   
5.74.240   Ratification of prior tax.
§ 5.74.010   Short title.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Communication Users’ Tax Law” of the
city.
(Ord. 07-05, passed 6-5-2007)
§ 5.74.020   Definitions.
   The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter shall be
construed as defined in this section.
   ANCILLARY TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES. Services that are associated with or
incidental to the provision, use or enjoyment of telecommunications services,
including but not limited to the following services:
      (1)   CONFERENCE BRIDGING SERVICE. An ancillary service that links two or
more participants of an audio or video conference call and may include the
provision of a telephone number. CONFERENCE BRIDGING SERVICE does not include
the telecommunications services used to reach the conference bridge.
      (2)   DETAILED TELECOMMUNICATIONS BILLING SERVICE. An ancillary service
of separately stating information pertaining to individual calls on a
customer’s billing statement.
      (3)   DIRECTORY ASSISTANCE. An ancillary service of providing telephone
number information, and/or address information.
      (4)   VERTICAL SERVICE. An ancillary service that is offered in
connection with one or more telecommunications services, which offers advanced
calling features that allow customers to identify callers and to manage
multiple calls and call connections, including conference bridging services.
      (5)   VOICE MAIL SERVICE. An ancillary service that enables the customer
to store, send or receive recorded messages. VOICE MAIL SERVICE does not
include any vertical services that the customer may be required to have in
order to utilize the voice mail service.
   ANCILLARY VIDEO SERVICES. Services that are associated with or incidental to
the provision or delivery of video services, including but not limited to
electronic program guide services, search functions, or other interactive
services or communications that are associated with or incidental to the
provision, use or enjoyment of video programming.
    BILLING ADDRESS. The mailing address of the service user where the service
supplier submits invoices or bills for payment by the customer.
   CITY. The City of Tulare.
   COMMUNICATION SERVICES. Means: “telecommunication services,” “ancillary
telecommunication services,” “video services” and “ancillary video services.”
   MOBILE TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. Has the same meaning and usage as set
forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. § 124) and the
regulations thereunder.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   MUNICIPAL ORGANIZATION. An organization or association created by statute or
by voluntary action, whose purpose is to facilitate the development and
dissemination of uniform rulings or interpretations regarding the application
of utility users taxes to communication services in the State of California.
   PERSON. Without limitation, any natural individual, firm, trust, common law
trust, estate, partnership of any kind, association, syndicate, club, joint
stock company, joint venture, limited liability company, corporation (including
foreign, domestic, and non-profit), municipal district or municipal corporation
(other than the city) cooperative, receiver, trustee, guardian, or other
representative appointed by order of any court.
   PLACE OF PRIMARY USE. The street address representative of where the
customer’s use of the communications service primarily occurs, which must be
the residential street address or the primary business street address of the
customer.
   POST-PAID TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICE. The telecommunication service obtained
by making a payment on a communication-by-communication basis either through
the use of a credit card or payment mechanism such as a bank card, travel card,
credit card, or debit card, or by charge made to a service number which is not
associated with the origination or termination of the telecommunication
service.
   PREPAID TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICE. The right to access telecommunication
services, which must be paid for in advance and which enables the origination
of communications using an access number or authorization code, whether
manually or electronically dialed, and that is sold in predetermined units or
dollars of which the number declines with use in a known amount.
   PRIVATE TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICE. A telecommunication service that entitles
the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group
of channels between or among termination points, regardless of the manner in
which such channel or channels are connected, and includes switching capacity,
extension lines, stations, and any other associated services that are provided
in connection with the use of such channel or channels. A communications
channel is a physical or virtual path of communications over which signals are
transmitted between or among customer channel termination points (i.e., the
location where the customer either inputs or receives the communications).
   SERVICE ADDRESS. Either:
      (1)   The location of the service user’s communication equipment from
which the communication originates or terminates, regardless of where the
communication is billed or paid; or
      (2)   If the location in division (1) of this definition is unknown
(e.g., mobile telecommunications service or VoIP service), the SERVICE ADDRESS
means the location of the service user’s place of primary use.
      (3) For prepaid telecommunication service, SERVICE ADDRESS means the
location associated with the service number.
   SERVICE SUPPLIER. Any entity or person, including the city, that provides
communication service to a user of such service within the city.
   SERVICE USER. A person required to pay a tax imposed under the provisions of
this chapter.
   STATE. The State of California.
   TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The Finance Director/Treasurer of the city or his or her
designee.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES. The transmission, conveyance, or routing of
voice, data, audio, video, or any other information or signals to a point, or
between or among points, whatever the technology used, and includes broadband
services (e.g., digital subscriber line (DSL), fiber optic, coaxial cable, and
wireless broadband, including Wi-Fi, WiMAX, and Wireless MESH) to the extent
federal and/or state law permits taxation of such broadband services, now or in
the future. The term TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES includes such transmission,
conveyance or routing in which computer processing applications are used to act
on the form, code or protocol of the content for purposes of transmission,
conveyance or routing without regard to whether such services are referred to
as voice over internet protocol (VoIP) services or are classified by the
Federal Communications Commission as enhanced or value added, and includes
video and/or data services that is functionally integrated with
TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES.  TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES include, but are not
limited to the following services, regardless of the manner or basis on which
such services are calculated or billed: ancillary telecommunication services;
broadband service (to the extent federal and/or state law permits taxation of
such service); mobile telecommunications service; prepaid telecommunication
service; post-paid telecommunication service; private telecommunication
service; paging service; 800 service (or any other toll-free numbers designated
by the Federal Communications Commission); 911 service (or any other similar
numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission for services
whereby subscribers who call in to pre-recorded or live service); and value-
added non-voice data service.
   VALUE-ADDED NON-VOICE DATA SERVICE. A service that otherwise meets the
definition of telecommunications services in which computer processing
applications are used to act on the form, content, code, or protocol of the
information or data primarily for a purpose other than transmission, conveyance
or routing.
   VIDEO PROGRAMMING. Those programming services commonly provided to
subscribers by a video service supplier including but not limited to basic
services, premium services, audio services, video games, pay-per-view services,
video on demand, origination programming, or any other similar services,
regardless of the content of such video programming, or the technology used to
deliver such services, and regardless of the manner or basis on which such
services are calculated or billed.
   VIDEO SERVICES. Any and all services related to the providing or delivering
of video programming (including origination programming and programming using
Internet Protocol, e.g., IP-TV and IP-Video) using one or more channels by a
video service supplier, regardless of the technology used to deliver or provide
such services, and regardless of the manner or basis on which such services are
calculated or billed, and includes data services, telecommunication services,
or interactive communication services that are functionally integrated with
VIDEO SERVICES.  
   VIDEO SERVICE SUPPLIER. Any person, company, or service which provides or
sells one or more channels of video programming, or provides or sells the
capability to receive one or more channels of video programming, including any
communications that are ancillary, necessary or common to the provision, use or
enjoyment of the video programming, to or from a business or residential
address in the city, where some fee is paid, whether directly or included in
dues or rental charges for that service, whether or not public rights-of-way
are utilized in the delivery of the video programming or communications. A
VIDEO SERVICE SUPPLIER includes, but is not limited to, multichannel video
programming distributors (as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(13)); open video
systems (OVS) suppliers; and suppliers of cable television; master antenna
television; satellite master antenna television; multichannel multipoint
distribution services (MMDS); video services using internet protocol (e.g., IP-
TV and IP-Video, which provide, among other things, broadcasting and video on
demand); direct broadcast satellite to the extent federal law permits taxation
of its video services, now or in the future; and other suppliers of video
programming or communications (including two-way communications), whatever the
technology.
(Ord. 07-05, passed 6-5-2007)
§ 5.74.030   Constitutional, statutory, and other exemptions.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any
person or service when the imposition of such tax upon such person or service
would be in violation of a federal or state statute, the Constitution of the
United States or the constitution of the state.
   (B)   (1)   Any service user that is exempt from the tax imposed by this
chapter pursuant to division (A) of this section shall file an application with
the Tax Administrator for an exemption; provided, however, this requirement
shall not apply to a service user that is a state or federal agency or
subdivision with a commonly recognized name for such service. The application
shall be made upon a form approved by the Tax Administrator and shall state
those facts, declared under penalty of perjury, which qualify the applicant for
an exemption, and shall include the names of all utility service suppliers
serving that service user. If deemed exempt by the Tax Administrator, such
service user shall give the Tax Administrator timely written notice of any
change in utility service suppliers so that the Tax Administrator can properly
notify the new utility service supplier of the service user’s tax exempt
status. A service user that fails to comply with this section shall not be
entitled to a refund of utility users’ taxes collected and remitted to the Tax
Administrator from such service user as a result of such noncompliance.
      (2)   The decision of the Tax Administrator may be appealed pursuant to §
5.74.160 of this chapter. Filing an application with the Tax Administrator and
appeal to the City Manager pursuant to §
5.74.160 of this chapter is a prerequisite to a suit thereon.
   (C)   The City Council may, by resolution, establish one or more classes of
persons or one or more classes of utility service otherwise subject to payment
of a tax imposed by this chapter and provide that such classes of persons or
service shall be exempt, in whole or in part from such tax for a specified
period of time.
   (D)   The Tax Administrator shall prepare a list of the persons exempt from
the provisions of this chapter by virtue of this section and furnish a copy
thereof to each service supplier.
(Ord. 07-05, passed 6-5-2007)
§ 5.74.040   Communication users’ tax.
   (A)   There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the city using
communication services. The maximum tax imposed by this section shall be at the
rate of six percent of the charges made for such services and shall be
collected from the service user by the communication services supplier or its
billing agent. There is a rebuttable presumption that communication services,
which are billed to a billing or service address in the city, are used, in
whole or in part, within the city’s boundaries, and such services are subject
to taxation under this chapter. If the billing address of the service user is
different from the service address, the service address of the service user
shall be used for purposes of imposing the tax. As used in this section, the
term CHARGES shall include the value of any other services, credits, property
of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in
exchange for the communication services.
   (B)   Mobile telecommunications service shall be sourced in accordance with
the sourcing rules set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4
U.S.C. § 124). The Tax Administrator may issue and disseminate to communication
service suppliers, which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this
chapter, sourcing rules for the taxation of other communication services,
including but not limited to post-paid communication services, prepaid
communication services, and private communication services, provided that such
rules are based upon custom and common practice that further administrative
efficiency and minimize multi-jurisdictional taxation.
   (C)   The Tax Administrator may issue and disseminate to communication
service suppliers, which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this
chapter, an administrative ruling identifying those communication services, or
charges therefore, that are subject to or not subject to the tax of division
(A) above.
   (D)   As used in this section, the term TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES shall
include, but are not limited to charges for: connection, reconnection,
termination, movement, or change of telecommunication services; late payment
fees; detailed billing; central office and custom calling features (including
but not limited to call waiting, call forwarding, caller identification and
three-way calling); voice mail and other messaging services; directory
assistance; access and line charges; universal service charges; regulatory,
administrative and other cost recovery charges; local number portability
charges; and text messaging. As used in this section, the term
TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES shall not include separately stated charges for:
installation or maintenance of wiring or equipment on a customer’s premises and
wire maintenance fees; sale or rental of tangible personal property; digital
products delivered electronically, such as software, downloaded music, ring
tones and reading materials; 911 surcharge; and sales for resale.
   (E)   Charges for communication services (video) shall include, but are not
limited to, charges for the following:
      (1)   Franchise fees and access fees (PEG);
      (2)   Initial installation of equipment necessary for provision and
receipt of communication services;
      (3)   Late fees, collection fees, bad debt recoveries, and return check
fees;
      (4)   Activation fees, reactivation fees, and reconnection fees;
      (5)   All video programming services (e.g., basic services, premium
services, audio services, video games, pay-per-view services, or on demand
programming);
      (6)   Ancillary programming services (e.g., electronic program guide
services, search functions, or other interactive services or communications
that are ancillary, necessary or common to the use or enjoyment of the video
programming);
      (7)   Equipment leases (e.g., converters, remote devices); and
      (8)   Service calls, service protection plans, name changes, changes of
services, and special services.
   (F)   To facilitate the uniform interpretation and application of similar
ordinance provisions in other local jurisdictions in the state, the Tax
Administrator may, prior to issuing and disseminating a sourcing rule or an
administrative tax ruling, submit its proposed sourcing rule or administrative
tax ruling to a municipal organization for review and comment, according to the
rules and procedures of that municipal organization, or its successor
organization.
   (G)   To prevent actual multi-jurisdictional taxation of communication
services subject to tax under this section, any service user, upon proof to the
Tax Administrator that the service user has previously paid the same tax in
another state or city on such communication services, shall be allowed a credit
against the tax imposed to the extent of the amount of such tax legally imposed
in such other state or city; provided, however, the amount of credit shall not
exceed the tax owed to the city under this section.  
   (H)   The tax on communication services imposed by this section shall be
collected from the service user by the service supplier. The amount of tax
collected in one month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator, and must be
received by the Tax Administrator on or before the twentieth day of the
following month.
   (I)   Upon a showing of hardship, the Tax Administrator may administratively
delay the implementation of this section until no later than January 1, 2008.
Prior to such time, the Tax Administrator may administratively permit the
telecommunications tax to be applied to telecommunication services in the same
manner as the federal excise tax was applied to communication services as
defined in §§ 4251 and 4252 of the Internal Revenue Code, and the IRS
regulations and rulings pertaining thereto, prior to May 25, 2006, and
regardless of whether charges for such services are based on time, distance, or
on any other basis, and as such sections are limited by the exceptions of §§
4252(d) and 4253.
   (J)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) hereinabove, the City
Council may, by Resolution, to be adopted on or before May 15 of each year,
reduce the tax rate of division (A) and/or adopt a maximum tax for certain
classes of customers, for the ensuing fiscal year as set forth in said
Resolution. Unless the City Council re-adopts said Resolution by May 15 of the
subsequent year, the tax percentage reduction and any other actions taken (e.g.
establishment of a maximum tax) shall automatically expire and be discontinued,
and the original voter-approved tax percentage shall apply, without the
necessity of a vote of the people.
(Ord. 09-04, passed 12-1-2009; Ord. 07-05, passed 6-5-2007)
§ 5.74.050   Bundling taxable items with non-taxable items.
   Except as otherwise provided by applicable federal or state law, if any
nontaxable charges are combined with and not separately stated from taxable
service charges on the customer bill or invoice of a service supplier, the
combined charge is subject to tax unless the service supplier identifies, by
reasonable and verifiable standards, the portions of the combined charge that
are nontaxable and taxable through the service supplier’s books and records
kept in the regular course of business, and in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles, and not created and maintained for tax
purposes. The service supplier has the burden of proving the proper
apportionment of taxable and non-taxable charges.
(Ord. 07-05, passed 6-5-2007)
§ 5.74.060   Substantial nexus/minimum contacts.
   (A)   For purposes of imposing a tax or establishing a duty to collect and
remit a tax under this chapter, substantial nexus and minimum contacts shall be
construed broadly in favor of the imposition, collection and/or remittance of
the utility users tax to the fullest extent permitted by state and federal law,
and as it may change from time to time by judicial interpretation or by
statutory enactment. Any communication service (including VoIP) used by a
person with a service address in the city, which service is capable of
terminating a call to another person on the general telephone network, shall be
subject to a rebuttable presumption that substantial nexus/minimum contacts
exists for purposes of imposing a tax, or establishing a duty to collect and
remit a tax, under this chapter. A service supplier shall be deemed to have
sufficient activity in the city for tax collection and remittance purposes if
its activities include, but are not limited to, any of the following: maintains
or has within the city, directly or through an agent or subsidiary, a place of
business of any nature; solicits business in the city by employees, independent
contractors, resellers, agents or other representatives; solicits business in
the city on a continuous, regular, seasonal or systematic basis by means of
advertising that is broadcast or relayed from a transmitter with the city or
distributed from a location with the city; or advertises in newspapers or other
periodicals printed and published within the city or through materials
distributed in the city by means other than the United States mail.
   (B)   The city shall make available, upon request, an accurate description
of its jurisdictional boundaries based on street addresses and/or ZIP Plus
Four, in an electronic format. If a service supplier relies upon such
information provided by city, it shall not be responsible for any errors in
taxation that may result.
(Ord. 07-05, passed 6-5-2007)
§ 5.74.070   Reserved.
§ 5.74.080   Duty to collect – Procedures.
   (A)   Collection by service suppliers. The duty of service suppliers to
collect and remit the taxes imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be
performed as follows.
      (1)   The tax shall be collected by service suppliers insofar as
practicable at the same time as, and along with, the collection of the charges
made in accordance with the regular billing practice of the service supplier.
Where the amount paid by a service user to a service supplier is less than the
full amount of the charge and tax which was accrued for the billing period, a
proportionate share of both the charge and the tax shall be deemed to have been
paid. In those cases where a service user has notified the service supplier of
refusal to pay the tax imposed on the charges, §
5.74.120 shall apply.
      (2)   The duty of a service supplier to collect the tax from a service
user shall commence with the beginning of the first regular billing period
applicable to the service user where all charges normally included in such
regular billing are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Where a service
user receives more than one billing, one or more being for different periods
than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing
period.
   (B)   Filing return and payment. Each person required by this chapter to
remit a tax shall file a return to the Tax Administrator, on forms approved by
the Tax Administrator, on or before the due date. The full amount of the tax
collected shall be included with the return and filed with the Tax
Administrator. The Tax Administrator is authorized to require such additional
information as he or she deems necessary to determine if the tax is being
levied, collected, and remitted in accordance with this chapter. Returns are
due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. Pursuant to Cal.
Revenue and Tax Code § 7284.6, the Tax Administrator, and its agents, shall
maintain such filing returns as confidential information that is exempt from
the disclosure provisions of the Public Records Act.
(Ord. 07-05, passed 6-5-2007)
§ 5.74.090   Collection penalties – Service suppliers.
   (A)   Taxes collected from a service user are delinquent if not received by
the Tax Administrator on or before the due date. Should the due date occur on a
weekend or legal holiday, the return must be received by the Tax Administrator
on the first regular working day following the weekend or legal holiday. A
direct deposit, including electronic fund transfers and other similar methods
of electronically exchanging monies between financial accounts, made by a
service supplier in satisfaction of its obligations under this division shall
be considered timely if the transfer is initiated on or before the due date,
and the transfer settles into the city’s account on the following business day.
   (B)   If the person required to collect and/or remit the utility users’ tax
fails to collect the tax (by failing to properly assess the tax on one or more
services or charges on the customer’s billing) or fails to remit the tax
collected on or before the due date, the Tax Administrator shall attach a
penalty for such delinquencies or deficiencies at the rate of 15% of the total
tax that is delinquent or deficient in the remittance, and shall pay interest
at the rate of and 0.75% per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of
the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first
became delinquent, until paid.
   (C)   The Tax Administrator shall have the power to impose additional
penalties upon persons required to collect and remit taxes pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter for fraud or gross negligence in reporting or
remitting at the rate of 15% of the amount of the tax collected and/or required
to be remitted, or as recomputed by the Tax Administrator.
   (D)   For collection purposes only, every penalty imposed and such interest
that is accrued under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the
tax herein required to be paid.
   (E)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Tax Administrator may, in his or
her discretion, modify the due dates of this chapter to be consistent with any
uniform standards or procedures that are mutually agreed upon by other public
agencies imposing a utility users tax, or otherwise legally established, to
create a central payment location or mechanism.
(Ord. 07-05, passed 6-5-2007)
§ 5.74.100   Actions to collect.
   Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the city. Any such
tax collected from a service user which has not been remitted to the Tax
Administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the person required to
collect and remit and shall no longer be a debt of the service user. Any person
owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to
an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount,
including penalties and interest as provided for in this chapter, along with
any collection costs incurred by the city as a result of the person’s
noncompliance with this chapter, including, but not limited to, reasonable
attorneys fees. Any tax required to be collected by a service supplier or owed
by a service user is an unsecured priority excise tax obligation under 11 U.S.C
§ 507(a)(8)(C).
(Ord. 07-05, passed 6-5-2007)
§ 5.74.110   Deficiency determination and assessment – Tax application errors.
   (A)   The Tax Administrator shall make a deficiency determination if he or
she determines that any person required to pay or collect taxes pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter has failed to pay, collect, and/or remit the proper
amount of tax by improperly or failing to apply the tax to one or more taxable
services or charges.
   (B)   The Tax Administrator shall mail a notice of such deficiency
determination to the person required to pay or remit the tax, which notice
shall refer briefly to the amount of the taxes owed, plus interest at the rate
of 0.75% per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax from the
date on which the tax should have been received by the city. Within 14 calendar
days after the date of service of such notice, the person may request in
writing to the Tax Administrator for a hearing on the matter.
   (C)   If the person fails to request a hearing within the prescribed time
period, the amount of the deficiency determination shall become a final
assessment, and shall immediately be due and owing to the city. If the person
requests a hearing, the Tax Administrator shall cause the matter to be set for
hearing, which shall be scheduled within 30 days after receipt of the written
request for hearing. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be
mailed by the Tax Administrator to such person at least ten calendar days prior
to the hearing, and, if the Tax Administrator desires the person to produce
specific records at such hearing, such notice may designate the records
requested to be produced.
   (D)   At the time fixed for the hearing, the Tax Administrator shall hear
all relevant testimony and evidence, including that of any other interested
parties. At the discretion of the Tax Administrator, the hearing may be
continued from time to time for the purpose of allowing the presentation of
additional evidence. Within a reasonable time following the conclusion of the
hearing, the Tax Administrator shall issue a final assessment (or non-
assessment), thereafter, by confirming, modifying or rejecting the original
deficiency determination, and shall mail a copy of such final assessment to
person owing the tax. The decision of the Tax Administrator may be appealed
pursuant to §
5.74.160 of this chapter. Filing an application with the Tax Administrator and
appeal to the City Manager pursuant to §
5.74.160 of this chapter is a prerequisite to a suit thereon.
   (E)   Payment of the final assessment shall become delinquent if not
received by the Tax Administrator on or before the thirtieth day following the
date of receipt of the notice of final assessment. The penalty for delinquency
shall be 15% on the total amount of the assessment, along with interest at the
rate of 0.75% per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax,
exclusive of penalties, from the date of delinquency, until paid. The
applicable statute of limitations regarding a claim by the city seeking payment
of a tax assessed under this chapter shall commence from the date of
delinquency as provided in this division (E).
   (F)   All notices under this section may be sent by regular mail, postage
prepaid, and shall be deemed received on the third calendar day following the
date of mailing, as established by a proof of mailing.
(Ord. 07-05, passed 6-5-2007)
§ 5.74.120   Administrative remedy – Non-paying service users.
   (A)   Whenever the Tax Administrator determines that a service user has
deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by the service user from the
amounts remitted to a person required to collect the tax, or whenever the Tax
Administrator deems it in the best interest of the city, he or she may relieve
such person of the obligation to collect the taxes due under this chapter from
certain named service users for specific billing periods. To the extent the
service user has failed to pay the amount of tax owed for a period of two or
more billing periods, the service supplier shall be relieved of the obligation
to collect taxes due. The service supplier shall provide the city with the
names and addresses of such service users and the amounts of taxes owed under
the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   In addition to the tax owed, the service user shall pay a delinquency
penalty at the rate of 15% of the total tax that is owed, and shall pay
interest at the rate of 0.75% per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount
of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the due date, until paid.
   (C)   The Tax Administrator shall notify the non-paying service user that
the Tax Administrator has assumed the responsibility to collect the taxes due
for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes, including penalties
and interest. The notice shall be served on the service user by personal
delivery or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage
prepaid, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made
by the person required to collect the tax; or, should the service user have a
change of address, to his or her last known address.
   (D)   If the service user fails to remit the tax to the Tax Administrator
within 30 days from the date of the service of the notice upon him or her, the
Tax Administrator may impose an additional penalty of 15% of the amount of the
total tax that is owed.
(Ord. 07-05, passed 6-5-2007)
§ 5.74.130   Additional powers and duties of the Tax Administrator.
   (A) The Tax Administrator shall have the power and duty, and is hereby
directed, to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The Tax Administrator may adopt administrative rules and regulations
consistent with provisions of this chapter for the purpose of interpreting,
clarifying, carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance
of the taxes herein imposed. The administrative ruling shall not impose a new
tax, revise an existing tax methodology as stated in this section, or increase
an existing tax, except as allowed by Cal. Government Code § 53750(h)(2). A
copy of such administrative rules and regulations shall be on file in the Tax
Administrator’s office.
   (C)   Upon a proper showing of good cause, the Tax Administrator may make
administrative agreements, with appropriate conditions, to vary from the strict
requirements of this chapter and thereby:
      (1)   Conform to the billing procedures of a particular service supplier
so long as the agreements result in the collection of the tax in conformance
with the general purpose and scope of this chapter; or
      (2)   To avoid a hardship where the administrative costs of collection
and remittance greatly outweigh the tax benefit. A copy of each such agreement
shall be on file in the Tax Administrator’s office, and are voidable by the Tax
Administrator or the city at any time.
   (D)   The Tax Administrator may conduct an audit, to ensure proper
compliance with the requirements of this chapter, of any person required to
collect and/or remit a tax pursuant to this chapter. The Tax Administrator
shall notify the person of the initiation of an audit in writing. In the
absence of fraud or other intentional misconduct, the audit period of review
shall not exceed a period of three years next preceding the date of receipt of
the written notice by the person from the Tax Administrator. Upon completion of
the audit, the Tax Administrator may make a deficiency determination pursuant
to §
5.74.110 of this chapter for all taxes (and applicable penalties and interest)
owed and not paid, as evidenced by information provided by such person to the
Tax Administrator. If the person is unable or unwilling to provide sufficient
records to enable the Tax Administrator to verify compliance with this chapter,
the Tax Administrator is authorized to make a reasonable estimate of the
deficiency. The reasonable estimate shall be entitled to a rebuttable
presumption of correctness.
   (E)   Upon receipt of a written request of a taxpayer, and for good cause,
the Tax Administrator may extend the time for filing any statement required
pursuant to this chapter for a period of not to exceed 45 days, provided that
the time for filing the required statement has not already passed when the
request is received. No penalty for delinquent payment shall accrue by reason
of such extension. Interest shall accrue during the extension at the rate of
0.75% per month, prorated for any portion thereof.
   (F)   The Tax Administrator shall determine the eligibility of any person
who asserts a right to exemption from, or a refund of, the tax imposed by this
chapter.
   (G)   Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter to the contrary, the Tax
Administrator may waive any penalty or interest imposed upon a person required
to collect and/or remit for failure to collect the tax imposed by this chapter
if the non-collection occurred in good faith. In determining whether the non-
collection was in good faith, the Tax Administrator shall take into
consideration industry practice or other precedence.
(Ord. 07-05, passed 6-5-2007)
§ 5.74.140   Records.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and/or remit
to the city any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period
of at least three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the
amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and
remittance to the Tax Administrator, which records the Tax Administrator shall
have the right to inspect at a reasonable time.
   (B)   The city may issue an administrative subpoena to compel a person to
deliver, to the Tax Administrator, copies of all records deemed necessary by
the Tax Administrator to establish compliance with this chapter, including the
delivery of records in a common electronic format on readily available media if
such records are kept electronically by the person in the usual and ordinary
course of business. As an alternative to delivering the subpoenaed records to
the Tax Administrator on or before the due date provided in the administrative
subpoena, such person may provide access to such records outside the city on or
before the due date, provided that such person shall reimburse the city for all
reasonable travel expenses incurred by the city to inspect those records,
including travel, lodging, meals, and other similar expenses, but excluding the
normal salary or hourly wages of those persons designated by the city to
conduct the inspection.
   (C)   The Tax Administrator is authorized to execute a non-disclosure
agreement approved by the City Attorney to protect the confidentiality of
customer information pursuant to Cal. Revenue and Tax Code §§ 7284.6 and
7284.7.
   (D)   If a service supplier uses a billing agent or billing aggregator to
bill, collect, and/or remit the tax, the service supplier shall:
      (1)   Provide to the Tax Administrator the name, address and telephone
number of each billing agent and billing aggregator currently authorized by the
service supplier to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax to the city; and
      (2)   Upon request of the Tax Administrator, deliver, or effect the
delivery of, any information or records in the possession of such billing agent
or billing aggregator that, in the opinion of the Tax Administrator, is
necessary to verify the proper application, calculation, collection and/or
remittance of such tax to the city.
   (E)   If any person subject to record-keeping under this section
unreasonably denies the Tax Administrator access to such records, or fails to
produce the information requested in an administrative subpoena within the time
specified, then the Tax Administrator may impose a penalty of $500 on such
person for each day following:
      (1)   The initial date that the person refuses to provide such access; or
      (2)   The due date for production of records as set forth in the
administrative subpoena. This penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty
imposed under this chapter.
(Ord. 07-05, passed 6-5-2007)
5.74.150   Refunds.
   Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than once or
has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the Tax
Administrator under this chapter from a person or service supplier, it may be
refunded as provided in this section.
   (A)   The Tax Administrator may refund any tax that has been overpaid or
paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received
by the Tax Administrator under this chapter from a person or service supplier,
provided that no refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section
unless the claimant or his or her guardian, conservator, executor, or
administrator has submitted a written claim to the Tax Administrator within one
year of the overpayment or erroneous or illegal collection of the tax. Such
claim must clearly establish claimant’s right to the refund by written records
showing entitlement thereto. Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim
on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers unless each member of the class has
submitted a written claim under penalty of perjury as provided by this section.
   (B)   The filing of a written claim pursuant to Cal. Government Code § 935
is a prerequisite to any suit thereon. Any action brought against the city
pursuant to this section shall be subject to the provisions of Cal. Government
Code §§ 945.6 and 946. The Tax Administrator, or the City Council where the
claim is in excess of $5,000, shall act upon the refund claim within the time
period set forth in Cal. Government Code § 912.4. If the Tax Administrator or
City Council fails or refuses to act on a refund claim within the time
prescribed by Cal. Government § 912.4, the claim shall be deemed to have been
rejected by the City Council on the last day of the period within which the
City Council was required to act upon the claim as provided in Cal. Government
Code § 912.4. The Tax Administrator shall give notice of the action in a form
which substantially complies with that set forth in Cal. Government Code § 913.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the notice provisions of division (A) of this section,
a service supplier that has collected any amount of tax in excess of the amount
of tax imposed by this chapter and actually due from a service user (whether
due to overpayment or erroneous or illegal collection of the tax), may refund
such amount to the service user, or credit to charges subsequently payable by
the service user to the service supplier, and claim credit for such overpayment
against the amount of tax which is due upon any other monthly returns to the
Tax Administrator, provided such credit is claimed in a return dated no later
than one year from the date of overpayment or erroneous or illegal collection
of the tax. The Tax Administrator shall first determine the validity of the
service user’s claim of credit, and the underlying basis for such claim.
   (D)   Notwithstanding the notice provisions of division (A) of this section,
in the event that a service supplier remits a tax to city in excess of the
amount of tax imposed by this chapter, the service supplier may claim credit
for such overpayment against the amount of tax which is due upon any other
monthly returns to the Tax Administrator, provided such credit is claimed in a
return dated no later than one year from the date of overpayment of the tax.
The Tax Administrator shall first determine the validity of the service user’s
claim of credit, and the underlying basis for such claim.
(Ord. 07-05, passed 6-5-2007)
§ 5.74.160   Appeals.
   (A)   The provisions of this section apply to any decision (other than a
decision relating to a refund pursuant to §
5.74.150 of this chapter), deficiency determination, assessment, or
administrative ruling of the Tax Administrator. Any person aggrieved by any
decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to §
5.74.150 of this chapter), deficiency determination, assessment, or
administrative ruling of the Tax Administrator, shall be required to comply
with the appeals procedure of this section. Compliance with this section shall
be a prerequisite to a suit thereon. (See Cal. Government Code § 935(b).)
Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim or action on behalf of a
class or group of taxpayers.
   (B)   If any person is aggrieved by any decision (other than a decision
relating to a refund pursuant to §
5.74.150 of this chapter), deficiency determination, assessment, or
administrative ruling of the Tax Administrator, he or she may appeal to the
City Manager by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 14 days of
the date of the decision, deficiency determination, assessment, or
administrative ruling of the Tax Administrator which aggrieved the service user
or service supplier.
   (C)   The matter shall be scheduled for hearing before an independent
hearing officer selected by the City Manager, no more than 30 days from the
receipt of the appeal. The appellant shall be served with notice of the time
and place of the hearing, as well as any relevant materials, at least five
calendar days prior to the hearing. The hearing may be continued from time to
time upon mutual consent. At the time of the hearing, the appealing party, the
Tax Administrator, and any other interested person may present such relevant
evidence as he or she may have relating to the determination from which the
appeal is taken.
   (D)   Based upon the submission of such evidence and the review of the
city’s files, the hearing officer shall issue a written notice and order
upholding, modifying or reversing the determination from which the appeal is
taken. The notice shall be given within 14 days after the conclusion of the
hearing and shall state the reasons for the decision. The notice shall specify
that the decision is final and that any petition for judicial review shall be
filed within 90 days from the date of the decision in accordance with Cal. Code
of Civil Procedure § 1094.6.
   (E)   All notices under this section may be sent by regular mail, postage
prepaid, and shall be deemed received on the third calendar day following the
date of mailing, as established by a proof of mailing.
(Ord. 07-05, passed 6-5-2007)
§ 5.74.170   Notice no injunction/writ of mandate.
   No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against this city or
against any officer of the city to prevent or enjoin the collection under this
chapter of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and/or
remitted.
(Ord. 07-05, passed 6-5-2007)
§ 5.74.180   Notice of changes to chapter.
   If a tax under this chapter is added repealed, increased, reduced, or the
tax base is changed, the Tax Administrator shall follow the notice requirements
of Cal. Public Utilities Code § 799.
(Ord. 07-05, passed 6-5-2007)
§ 5.74.190   Future amendment to cited statute.
   Unless specifically provided otherwise, any reference to a state or federal
statute in this chapter shall mean such statute as it may be amended from time
to time.
(Ord. 07-05, passed 6-5-2007)
§ 5.74.200   Independent audit of tax collection, exemption, remittance, and
expenditure.
   The city shall annually verify that the taxes owed under this chapter have
been properly applied, exempted, collected, and remitted in accordance with
this chapter, and properly expended according to applicable municipal law. The
annual verification shall be performed by a qualified independent third party
and the review shall employ reasonable, cost-effective steps to assure
compliance, including the use of sampling audits. The verification shall not be
required of tax remitters where the cost of the verification may exceed the tax
revenues to be reviewed.
(Ord. 07-05, passed 6-5-2007)
§ 5.74.210   Interaction with prior tax.
   (a)   Satisfaction of tax obligation by service users. Any person who pays
the tax levied pursuant to §
5.74.030 of this code with respect to any charge for a communication service
shall be deemed to have satisfied his or her obligation to pay the tax levied
pursuant to §§
5.76.020 and
5.76.060 of this code with respect to that charge. Likewise, prior to November
1, 2007, any person who pays the tax levied pursuant to §§
5.76.020 and
5.76.060 of this code with respect to any charge for a service shall be deemed
to have satisfied his or her obligation to pay the tax levied pursuant to §
5.74.030 of this code with respect to that charge. The intent of this division
is to prevent the imposition of multiple taxes upon a single utility charge
during the transition period from the prior telephone and video users’ tax to
the new communication users’ tax (which transition period ends November 1,
2007) and to permit communications service providers, during that transition
period to satisfy their collection obligations by collecting either tax.
   (B)   Collection of tax by service providers. Service providers shall begin
to collect the tax imposed by this chapter as soon as feasible after the
effective date of the chapter, but in no event later than permitted by the Cal.
Public Utilities Code § 799.
(Ord. 07-05, passed 6-5-2007)
§ 5.74.220   Amendment or repeal.
   
Chapter 5.74 of Title 5 of the Tulare Municipal Code may be repealed or amended
by the City Council without a vote of the people. However, as required by
Article XIIIC of the California Constitution, voter approval is required for
any amendment provision that would increase the rate of any tax levied pursuant
to this chapter.
(Ord. 07-05, passed 6-5-2007)
§ 5.74.230   Severability.
   If any section, division, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unenforceable by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the remaining portions of this chapter shall
nonetheless remain in full force and effect. The people hereby declare that
they would have adopted each section, division, sentence, clause, phrase, or
portion of this chapter, irrespective of the fact that any one or more
sections, divisions, sentences, clauses, phrases, or portions of this chapter
be declared invalid or unenforceable.
(Ord. 07-05, passed 6-5-2007)
§ 5.74.240   Ratification of prior tax.
   The voters of the City of Tulare hereby ratify and approve the past
collection of the telephone and video users tax under
Chapter 5.76 of the Tulare Municipal Code as it existed prior to the effective
date of this chapter.
(Ord. 07-05, passed 6-5-2007)
CHAPTER 5.76: UTILITIES TAX
Section
   
5.76.010   Definitions.
   
5.76.020   Constitutional and statutory exemptions.
   
5.76.030   Telephone users’ tax.
   
5.76.040   Electricity users’ tax.
   
5.76.050   Gas users’ tax.
   
5.76.060   Collection of tax from service users receiving direct purchase of
gas or electricity.
   
5.76.070   Water users’ tax.
   
5.76.080   Reserved.
   
5.76.090   Bundling taxable items with non- taxable items.
   
5.76.100   Substantial nexus/minimum contacts.
   
5.76.110   Duty to collect–Procedures.
   
5.76.120   Collection penalties–Service suppliers and self-collectors.
   
5.76.130   Actions to collect.
   
5.76.140   Deficiency determination and assessment–Tax application errors.
   
5.76.150   Administrative remedy–Non- paying service users.
   
5.76.160   Additional powers and duties of the Tax Administrator.
   
5.76.170   Records.
   
5.76.180   Refunds.
   
5.76.190   Appeals.
   
5.76.200   Notice no injunction/writ of mandate.
   
5.76.210   Notice of changes to chapter.
   
5.76.220   Future amendment of cited statute.
   
5.76.230   Severability.
§ 5.76.010   Definitions.
   The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter shall be
construed as defined in this section as follows.
   BILLING ADDRESS. The mailing address of the service user where the service
supplier submits invoices or bills for payment by the customer.
   CHARGES FOR MOBILE TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES. Has the same meaning and
usage as set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. §§
116 and 124) and the regulations thereunder.
   CITY. The City of Tulare.
   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager of city, or his or her authorized
representative.
   COGENERATOR. Any corporation or person employing cogeneration (as defined in
the Cal. Public Utilities Code § 218.5) for producing power for the generation
of electricity for self use or sale to others from a qualified cogeneration
facility (as defined in the Federal Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of
1978 and regulations thereunder).
   EXEMPT WHOLESALE GENERATOR. Has the same meaning as set forth in the Federal
Power Act (15 U.S.C. 79z-5a) and regulations thereunder.
   GAS. Natural or manufactured gas or any alternate hydrocarbon fuel which may
be substituted therefore.
   MOBILE TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. Has the same meaning and usage as set
forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. § 124) and the
regulations thereunder.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   NON-UTILITY SUPPLIER.
      (1)   A service supplier, other than a supplier of electric distribution
services to all or a significant portion of the city, which generates
electricity for sale to others, and shall include, but is not limited to, any
publicly-owned electric utility, investor-owned utility, cogenerator, municipal
utility district, federal power marketing authority, electric rural
cooperative, or other supplier or seller of electricity;
      (2)   An electric service provider (ESP), electricity broker, marketer,
aggregator, pool operator, or other electricity supplier other than a supplier
of electric distribution services to all or a significant portion of the city,
which sells or supplies electricity or supplemental services to electricity
users within the city;
      (3)   A gas service supplier, aggregator, marketer, or broker, other than
a supplier of gas distribution services to all or a significant portion of the
city, which sells or supplies gas to users within the city; and
      (4)   A water service supplier, distributor, wholesaler, marketer, or
broker, which sells or supplies water to users within the city (other than a
supplier of water distribution services to all or a significant portion of the
city).
   PERSON. Without limitation, any natural individual, firm, trust, common law
trust, estate, partnership of any kind, association, syndicate, club, joint
stock company, joint venture, limited liability company, corporation (including
foreign, domestic, and non-profit), municipal district or municipal corporation
(other than the city) cooperative, receiver, trustee, guardian, or other
representative appointed by order of any court.
   PLACE OF PRIMARY USE. 
      (1)   The street address representative of where the customer’s use of
the telecommunications service primarily occurs, which must be:
         (a)   The residential street address or the primary business street
address of the customer; and
         (b)   In the case of a mobile telecommunications service user, within
the licensed service area of the home service provider.
      (2)   See Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S. C. §§ 116 et
seq.).
   SERVICE ADDRESS. The residential street address or the business street
address of the service user. For a telephone communication service user,
SERVICE ADDRESS means either:
      (1)   The location of the telecommunications equipment to which a service
user’s call is charged and from which the call originates or terminates,
regardless of where the call is billed or paid; or
      (2)   If the location in division (1) of this definition is unknown
(e.g., mobile telecommunications or VoIP service), the SERVICE ADDRESS means
the location of the service user’s place of primary use.
   SERVICE SUPPLIER. Any entity or person, including the city, that provides
telephone communication, electric, gas, water or video service to a user of
such services within the city, and includes an entity or person required to
collect, or self-collect under §
5.76.060 of this chapter, and remit a tax as imposed by this chapter, including
its billing agent in the case of electric, gas, water or video service
suppliers.
   SERVICE USER. A person required to pay a tax imposed under the provisions of
this chapter.
   STATE. The State of California.
   TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The Finance Director/Treasurer of the City of Tulare or
any person designated by the City Manager or the Finance Director to perform
the functions of the Tax Administrator specified in this chapter.
   TELEPHONE COMMUNICATION SERVICES. Any service that is capable of
transmitting telephonic quality communications with the general telephone
public (including the use of Internet Protocol (IP) or other protocol), whether
provided by analog, digital, electronic, radio or similar means through
INTERCONNECTED SERVICE with the PUBLIC SWITCHED NETWORK (as these terms are
commonly used in the Federal Communications Act and the regulations of the
Federal Communications Commission - see 47 U.S.C. § 332 (d)) or over digital
networks by which communications with the general telephone public is available
(e.g., voice using internet protocol or VoIP), and whether such transmission
occurs by wire, typewriter, cable, cable modem or digital subscriber line
(DSL), internet, fiber-optic, WiFi, light wave, laser, microwave, switching
facilities, satellite, radio wave (including, but not limited to, mobile
telecommunications service, cellular service, commercial mobile service and
commercial mobile radio service (see 47 U.S.C. § 332(d) (1) and 47 C.F.R. part
20.3), personal communications service (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR),
and other similar services regardless of radio spectrum used), or any other
similar facilities and whether charges for such services are based on time,
distance, or on any other basis. TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES shall also include,
but is not limited to, COMMUNICATION SERVICES as defined in the Internal
Revenue Code §§ 4251 and 4252, and the regulations thereunder.
   VIDEO SERVICE SUPPLIER. Any person, company, or service which provides one
or more channels of video programming including any communications that are
ancillary, necessary or common to the use and enjoyment of the video
programming, to or from an address in the city, including to or from a
business, home, condominium, or apartment, where some fee is paid, whether
directly or included in dues or rental charges for that service, whether or not
public rights-of-way are utilized in the delivery of the video programming or
communications. A VIDEO SERVICE SUPPLIER includes, but is not limited to: a
multichannel video programming distributor (as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(13));
a supplier of open video systems (OVS), cable television, master antenna
television, satellite master antenna television, multichannel multipoint
distribution services (MMDS), video services using interne protocol (e.g., IP-
TV and IP-Video, which provide, among other things, broadcasting and video on
demand), or direct broadcast satellite to the extent federal law permits
taxation of its video services, now or in the future; and other suppliers of
video programming or communications (including two-way communications),
whatever their technology.
   VIDEO SERVICES. Any and all services related to the providing of video
programming (including origination programming) including any communications
that are ancillary, necessary or common to the use or enjoyment of such video
programming, regardless of the content of such video programming or
communications, or the technology used to deliver such services. VIDEO SERVICES
shall not include services for which a tax is paid under §
5.76.030 of this chapter.
   WATER CORPORATION, TELEPHONE CORPORATION, ELECTRICAL CORPORATION, AND GAS
CORPORATION. Shall have the same meanings as defined in Cal. Public Utilities
Code §§ 234, 218, 222, and 241, respectively, as the sections existed on
January 1, 1969. ELECTRICAL CORPORATION and WATER CORPORATION shall be
construed to include any organization, municipality or other agency engaged in
the selling or supplying of electrical power or water to the service user;
provided that, pursuant to Cal. Public Utilities Code § 218(b), ELECTRICAL
CORPORATION does not include a corporation or person employing cogeneration
technology or producing power from other than a conventional power source for
the generation of electricity solely for the purposes specified therein.
(1995 Code, § 5.76.010) (Ord. 05-1958, passed - -2005)
§ 5.76.020   Constitutional and statutory exemptions.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon:
      (1)   Any person or service when the imposition of such tax upon such
person or service would be in violation of a federal or state statute, the
Constitution of the United States or the constitution of the state; and
      (2)   The city.
   (B)   Any person that is exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter
pursuant to division (A) of this section shall file an application with the Tax
Administrator for an exemption; provided, however, this requirement shall not
apply to a service user that is a state or federal agency or subdivision with a
commonly recognized name, or is a service user of telephone communication
services that has received a federal excise tax exemption certificate for such
service. The application shall be made upon a form approved by the Tax
Administrator and shall state those facts, declared under penalty of perjury,
which qualify the applicant for an exemption, and shall include the names of
all utility service suppliers serving that service user. If deemed exempt by
the Tax Administrator, such service user shall give the Tax Administrator
timely written notice of any change in utility service suppliers so that the
Tax Administrator can properly notify the new utility service supplier of the
service user’s tax exempt status. A service user that fails to comply with this
section shall not be entitled to a refund of utility users’ taxes collected and
remitted to the Tax Administrator from such service user as a result of such
noncompliance. Upon request of the Tax Administrator, a service supplier or
non-utility service supplier, or its billing agent, shall provide a list of the
names and addresses of those customers which, according to its billing records,
are deemed exempt from the utility users’ tax. With respect to a service user
of telephone communication services, a service supplier of such telephone
communication services doing business in the city shall, upon request of the
Tax Administrator, provide a copy of the federal exemption certificate for each
exempt customer within the city that is served by such service supplier.
   (C)   The decision of the Tax Administrator may be appealed pursuant to §
5.76.190 of this chapter. Filing an application with the Tax Administrator and
appeal to the City Manager pursuant to §
5.76.190 of this chapter is a prerequisite to a suit thereon.
   (D)   The City Council may, by resolution, establish one or more classes of
persons or one or more classes of utility service otherwise subject to payment
of a tax imposed by this chapter and provide that such classes of persons or
service shall be exempt, in whole or in part from such tax for a specified
period of time.
   (E)   The Tax Administrator shall prepare a list of the persons exempt from
the provisions of this chapter by virtue of this section and furnish a copy
thereof to each service supplier
(1995 Code, § 5.76.020) (Ord. 05-1958, passed - -2005)
§ 5.76.030   Telephone users’ tax.
   (A)   There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the city who uses
intrastate telephone communication services. The tax imposed by this section
shall be at the rate of seven percent of all charges made for such telephone
communication services. There is a rebuttable presumption that telephone
communication services, which are billed to a billing or service address in the
city, are used, in whole or in part, within the city’s boundaries, and such
services are subject to taxation under this chapter. If the billing address of
the service user is different from the service address, the service address of
the service user shall be used for purposes of imposing the tax, regardless of
where the telephone communication service may originate, terminate, or pass
through.
   (B)   As used in this section, the term TELEPHONE COMMUNICATION SERVICES
shall not include PRIVATE MOBILE RADIO SERVICE, as defined in 47 C.F.R. part
20, or PRIVATE MOBILE SERVICE, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d)(3), which is
not interconnected with the public switched network or is not provided over
digital networks by which communications with a substantial portion of the
public is available (e.g., voice using internet protocol or VolP). The tax
imposed under division (A) above shall not be imposed upon any person for using
telecommunication services to the extent that, pursuant to the Internal Revenue
Code §§ 4252(d) and 4253, the amounts paid for such communication services are
exempt from or not subject to the tax imposed under the Internal Revenue Code §
4251. In the event that the federal excise tax on communication services as
provided in the Internal Revenue Code §§ 4251, 4252 and 4253 is subsequently
repealed, any reference in this §
5.76.030 and in §
5.76.010 (telephone communication services) to such law, including any related
federal regulations, private letter rulings, case, law, and other opinions
interpreting these sections, shall refer to that body of law that existed
immediately prior to the date of repeal, as well as to any final published
decision by the U.S. Supreme Court or by a federal court in the Ninth Circuit
Court of Appeals interpreting such federal excise tax law.
   (C)   As used in this section, the term CHARGES shall include the value of
any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other
consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the telephone
communication services. As used in this section, the term CHARGES shall not
include charges for services paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated
telephones, except that where such coin-operated telephone service is furnished
for a guaranteed amount, the amounts paid under such guarantee, plus any fixed
monthly or other periodic charge, shall be included in the base for computing
the amount of tax due.
   (D)   The Tax Administrator, from time to time, may issue and disseminate to
telecommunication service suppliers which are subject to the tax collection
requirements of this chapter, an administrative ruling, pursuant to §
5.76.160(B) of this chapter, identifying those telecommunication services that
are subject to the tax of division (A) above and/or identifies the sourcing of
such services for tax administration purposes. This administrative ruling shall
not impose a new tax, revise an existing tax methodology as stated in this
section, or increase an existing tax, except as allowed by Cal. Government Code
§ 53750(h)(2)(A). An administrative ruling shall not constitute a new tax or an
increase in an existing tax if such administrative ruling is:
      (1)   Consistent with the existing ordinance language; and
      (2)   Merely reflects a change in, clarification to, or new rendition of:
         (a)   The definition, interpretation, or application of substantial
nexus by a court of competent jurisdiction or by preemptive state or federal
law, for purposes of taxation;
         (b)   The sourcing of taxable transactions based upon industry custom
and practice, which furthers administrative efficiency and minimizes multi-
jurisdictional taxation; or
         (c)   The definition, interpretation, or application of the federal
excise tax rules, regulations, and laws pertaining to COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES
(26 U.S.C. §§ 4251, 4252 and 4253) by the Internal Revenue Service, or by the
Tax Administrator in assuming an interpretative role of those rules,
regulations, and laws in the event that the federal excise tax on
communications services is repealed.
   (E)   To prevent actual multi-jurisdictional taxation of telephone
communication services subject to tax under this section, any service user,
upon proof to the Tax Administrator that the service user has previously paid
the same tax in another state or city on such telephone communication services,
shall be allowed a credit against the tax imposed to the extent of the amount
of such tax legally imposed in such other state or city; provided, however, the
amount of credit shall not exceed the tax owed to the city under this section.
   (F)   The tax imposed by this section shall be collected from the service
user by the service supplier. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be
remitted to the Tax Administrator, and must be received by the Tax
Administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month.
   (G)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) herein, the tax imposed
under this section shall not exceed the sum of $560 for any one calendar year
of service.
(1995 Code, § 5.76.030) (Ord. 05-1958, passed - -2005)
§ 5.76.040   Electricity users’ tax.
   (A)   There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person using electricity in
the city. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of six percent
of the charges made for such electricity and for any supplemental services or
other associated activities directly related to and/or necessary for the
provision of electricity to the service user, which are provided by a service
supplier or non-utility service supplier to a service user.
   (B)   (1)   As used in this section, the term CHARGES shall apply to all
services, components and items that are:
         (a)   Necessary or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of
electric service; or,
         (b)   Currently, or historically have been, included in a single or
bundled rate for electric service by a local distribution company to a class of
retail customers.
      (2)   The term CHARGES shall include, but is not limited to, the
following charges:
         (a)   Energy charges;
         (b)   Distribution or transmission charges;
         (c)   Metering charges;
         (d)   Stand-by, reserves, firming, ramping, voltage support,
regulation, emergency, or other similar minimum charges for supplemental
services to an electric service user that produces electricity for self-use and
is subject to §
5.76.060;
         (e)   Customer charges, late charges, service establishment or
reestablishment charges, demand charges, fuel or other cost adjustments, power
exchange charges, independent system operator (ISO) charges, stranded
investment or competitive transition charges (CTC), public purpose program
charges, nuclear decommissioning charges, trust transfer amounts (bond
financing charges), franchise fees, franchise surcharges, annual and monthly
charges, and other charges, fees and surcharges which are necessary to or
common for the receipt, use and enjoyment of electric service; and
         (f)   Charges, fees, or surcharges for electricity services or
programs, which are mandated by the California Public Utilities Commission or
the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, whether or not such charges, fees, or
surcharges appear on a bundled or line item basis on the customer billing.
   (C)   As used in this section, the term CHARGES shall include the value of
any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other
consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the electricity or
services related to the provision of such electricity.
   (D)   The Tax Administrator, from time to time, may survey the electric
service suppliers to identify the various unbundled billing components of
electric retail service that they commonly provide to residential and
commercial/industrial customers in the city, and the charges therefor,
including those items that are mandated by state or federal regulatory agencies
as a condition of providing such electric service. The Tax Administrator,
thereafter, may issue and disseminate to such electric service suppliers an
administrative ruling identifying those components and items which are:
      (1)   Necessary or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of electric
service; or,
      (2)   Currently, or historically have been, included in a single or
bundled rate for electric service by a local distribution company to a class of
retail customers. Unbundled charges for such components and items shall be
subject to the tax of division (A) above.
   (E)   As used in this section, the term USING ELECTRICITY shall not be
construed to include electricity used in water pumping by water corporations;
nor shall the term include the mere receiving of such electricity by an
electrical corporation at a point within the city for resale.
   (F)    The tax on electricity provided by self-production or by a non-
utility service supplier not under the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be
collected and remitted in the manner set forth in §
5.76.060. All other taxes imposed by this section shall be collected from the
service user by the electric service supplier or its billing agent. The amount
of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator, and
must be received by the Tax Administrator on or before the 20th day of the
following month; or, at the option of the person required to collect and/or
remit the tax, such person shall remit an estimated amount of tax measured by
the tax billed in the previous month or upon the payment pattern of the service
user, which must be received by the Tax Administrator on or before the 20th day
of the following month, provided that the service user shall submit an adjusted
payment or request for credit, as appropriate, within 60 days following each
calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the Tax Administrator, may be
applied against any subsequent tax bill that becomes due.
   (G)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) hereinabove, the City
Council may, by Resolution, to be adopted on or before May 15 of each year,
reduce the tax rate of division (A) and/or adopt a maximum tax for certain
classes of customers, for the ensuing fiscal year as set forth in said
Resolution. Unless the City Council re-adopts said Resolution by May 15 of the
subsequent year the tax percentage reduction and any other actions taken (e.g.
establishment of a maximum tax) shall automatically expire and be discontinued,
and the original voter-approved tax percentage shall apply, without the
necessity of a vote of the people.
(1995 Code, § 5.76.040) (Ord. 09-04, passed 12-1-2009; Ord. 05-1958, passed - -
2005)
§ 5.76.050   Gas users’ tax.
   (A)   There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person using gas in the city
which is delivered through a pipeline distribution system. The tax imposed by
this section shall be at the rate of six percent of the charges made for such
gas, including all services related to the storage, transportation and delivery
of such gas.
   (B)   (1)   As used in this section, the term CHARGES shall apply to all
services, components and items for gas service that are:
         (a)   Necessary or common to the receipt; use and enjoyment of gas
service; or
         (b)   Currently, or historically have been, included in a single or
bundled rate for gas service by a local distribution company to a class, of
retail customers.
      (2)   The term CHARGES shall include, but is not limited to, the
following charges:
         (a)   The commodity charges for purchased gas, or the cost of gas
owned by the service user (including the actual costs attributed to drilling,
production, lifting, storage, gathering, trunkline, pipeline, and other
operating costs associated with the production and delivery of such gas), which
is delivered through a gas pipeline distribution system;
         (b)   Gas transportation charges (including interstate charges to the
extent not included in commodity charges);
         (c)   Storage charges; provided, however, that the service supplier
shall not be required to apply the tax to any charges for gas storage services
when the service supplier cannot, as a practical matter, determine the
jurisdiction where such stored gas is ultimately used; but it shall be the
obligation of the service user to self-collect the amount of tax not applied to
any charge for gas storage by the service supplier and to remit the tax to the
appropriate jurisdiction;
         (d)   Capacity or demand charges, late charges, service establishment
or reestablishment charges, transition charges, customer charges, minimum
charges, annual and monthly charges, and any other charges which are necessary
or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of gas service; and
         (e)   Charges, fees, or surcharges for gas services or programs, which
are mandated by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission, whether or not such charges, fees, or surcharges
appear on a bundled or line item basis on the customer billing.
   (C)   As used in this section, the term CHARGES shall include the value of
any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other
consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the gas or services
related to the delivery of such gas.
   (D)   The Tax Administrator, from time to time, may survey the gas service
suppliers to identify the various unbundled billing components of gas retail
service that they commonly provide to residential and commercial/industrial
customers in the city, and the charges therefore, including those items that
are mandated by state or federal regulatory agencies as a condition of
providing such gas service. The Tax Administrator, thereafter, may issue and
disseminate to such gas service suppliers an administrative ruling identifying
those components and items which are:
      (1)   Necessary or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of gas
service; or
      (2)   Currently, or historically have been, included in a single or
bundled rate for gas service by a local distribution company to a class of
retail customers. Unbundled charges for such components and items shall be
subject to the tax of division (A) above.
   (E)   The tax otherwise imposed by this section is not applicable to:
      (1)   Charges made for gas which is to be resold and delivered through
mains and pipes;
      (2)   Charges made for gas to be used in the generation of electricity by
an electrical corporation;
      (3)   Charges made by a gas corporation for gas used and consumed in the
conduct of its business;
       (4)   Charges made for gas used in water pumping by water corporations.
   (F)   The tax on gas provided by self-production or by a non-utility service
supplier not under the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be collected and
remitted in the manner set forth in §
5.76.060 of this chapter. All other taxes imposed by this section shall be
collected from the service user by the gas service supplier or its billing
agent, the Administrator, and must be received by the Tax Administrator on or
before the twentieth day of the following month; or, at the option of the
person required to collect and/or remit the tax, such person shall remit an
estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month or
upon the payment pattern of the service user, which must be received by the Tax
Administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month, provided
that the service user shall submit an adjusted payment or request for credit,
as appropriate, within 60 days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if
approved by the Tax Administrator, may be applied against any subsequent tax
bill that becomes due.
   (G)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) hereinabove, the City
Council may, by Resolution, to be adopted on or before May 15 of each year,
reduce the tax rate of division (A) and/or adopt a maximum tax for certain
classes of customers, for the ensuing fiscal year as set forth in said
Resolution. Unless the City Council re-adopts said Resolution by May 15 of the
subsequent year, the tax percentage reduction and any other actions taken (e.g.
establishment of a maximum tax) shall automatically expire and be discontinued,
and the original voter-approved tax percentage shall apply, without the
necessity of a vote of the people.
(1995 Code, § 5.76.050) (Ord. 09-04, passed 12-1-2009; Ord. 05-1958, passed - -
2005)
§ 5.76.060   Collection of tax from service users receiving direct purchase of
gas or electricity.
   (A)   Any service user subject to the tax imposed. by §§
5.76.040 or
5.76.050 of this chapter, which produces gas or electricity for self-use; which
receives gas or electricity, including any related supplemental services,
directly from a non-utility service supplier not under the jurisdiction of this
chapter; or which, for any other reason is not having the full tax collected
and remitted by its service supplier, a non-utility service supplier, or its
billing agent on the use of gas or electricity in the city, including any
related supplemental services, shall report the fact to the Tax Administrator
and shall remit the tax due directly to the Tax Administrator within 30 days of
such use. In lieu of paying the actual tax, the service user may, at its
option, remit to the Tax Administrator within 30 days of such use an estimated
amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month, or upon the
payment pattern of similar customers of the service supplier using similar
amounts of gas or electricity, provided that the service user shall submit an
adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate; within 60 days
following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the Tax
Administrator, may be applied against any subsequent tax bill that becomes due.
   (B)   The Tax Administrator may require the service user to identify its
non-utility service supplier and provide, subject to audit, invoices, books of
account, or other satisfactory evidence documenting the quantity of gas or
electricity used, including any related supplemental services, and the cost or
price thereof. If the service user is unable to provide such satisfactory
evidence; or, if the administrative cost of calculating the tax in the opinion
of the Tax Administrator is excessive, the Tax Administrator may determine the
tax by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges the service user would
have incurred if the gas or electricity used, including any related
supplemental services, had been provided by the service supplier that is the
primary supplier of gas or electricity within the city. Rate schedules for this
purpose shall be available from the city.
(1995 Code, § 5.76.060) (Ord. 05-1958, passed - -2005)
§ 5.76.070   Water users’ tax.
   (A)   There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person using water in the
city which is delivered through a pipeline distribution system. The tax imposed
by this section shall be at the rate of six percent of the charges made for
such water and shall be collected by the water service supplier or its billing
agent.
   (B)   (1)   As used in this section, the term CHARGES shall apply to all
services, components and items that are:
         (a)   Necessary or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of water
service; or
         (b)   Currently, or historically have been, included in a single or
bundled: rate for water service by a local distribution company to a class of
retail customers.
      (2)   The term CHARGES shall include, but is not limited to, the
following charges:
         (a)   Water commodity charges (potable and non-potable);
         (b)   Distribution or transmission charges;
         (c)   Metering charges;
         (d)   Customer charges, late charges, service establishment or
reestablishment charges, franchise fees, franchise surcharges, annual and
monthly charges, and other charges, fees and surcharges which are necessary for
or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of water service; and
         (e)   Charges, fees, or surcharges for water services or programs,
which are mandated by a water district or a state or federal agency, whether or
not such charges, fees, or surcharges appear on a bundled or line item basis on
the customer billing.
   (C)   As used in this section, the term CHARGES shall include the value of
any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other
consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the water services.
   (D)   (1)   The Tax Administrator, from time to time, may survey the water
service suppliers in the city to identify the various unbundled billing
components of water retail service that they commonly provide to residential
and commercial/industrial customers in the city, and the charges therefore,
including those items that are mandated by a water district or a state or
federal agency as a condition of providing such water service. The Tax
Administrator, thereafter, may issue and disseminate to such water service
suppliers an administrative ruling identifying those components and items which
are:
         (a)   Necessary or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of water
service; or
         (b)   Currently, or historically have been, included in a single or
bundled rate for water service by a local distribution company to a class of
retail customers.
      (2)   Unbundled charges for such components and items shall be subject to
the tax of division (A) of this section.
   (E)   There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed in this
section is computed charges made for water which is to be resold and delivered
through mains or pipes and charges made by a water corporation for water used
and consumed by such water corporation in the conduct of its business.
   (F)   The tax imposed by this section shall be collected from the service
user by the service supplier or its billing agent. The amount of tax collected
in one month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator, and must be received
by the Tax Administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month.
   (G)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) hereinabove, the City
Council may, by Resolution, to be adopted on or before May 15 of each year,
reduce the tax rate of division (A) and/or adopt a maximum tax for certain
classes of customers, for the ensuing fiscal year as set forth in said
Resolution. Unless the City Council re-adopts said Resolution by May 15 of the
subsequent year, the tax percentage reduction and any other actions taken (e.g.
establishment of a maximum) shall automatically expire and be discontinued, and
the original voter-approved tax percentage shall apply, without the necessity
of a vote of the people.
(1995 Code, § 5.76.070) (Ord. 09-04, passed 12-1-2009; Ord. 05-1958, passed - -
2005)
§ 5.76.080   Reserved.
§ 5.76.090   Bundling taxable items with non-taxable items.
   Except as otherwise provided by state or federal law, or as approved in
writing by the Tax Administrator, if one or more non-taxable items are bundled
or aggregated together with one or more taxable items (as provided for by this
chapter) under a single charge on a service user’s bill, the entire single
charge shall be deemed taxable. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a telephone
service provider of intrastate, interstate, and/or international services, may,
with the prior written consent of the Tax Administrator, employ a reasonable
method to estimate the intrastate portion of its collected revenues that are
subject to the tax under §
5.76.030.
(1995 Code, § 5.76.090) (Ord. 05-1958, passed - -2005)
§ 5.76.100   Substantial nexus/minimum contacts.
   For purposes of imposing a tax or establishing a duty to collect and remit a
tax under this chapter, substantial nexus and minimum contacts shall be
construed broadly in favor of the imposition, collection and/or remittance of
the utility users tax to the fullest extent permitted by state and federal law,
and as it may change from time to time by judicial interpretation or by
statutory enactment.
(1995 Code, § 5.76.100) (Ord. 05-1958, passed - -2005)
§ 5.76.110   Duty to collect–Procedures.
   (A)   Collection by service suppliers. The duty of service suppliers to
collect and remit the taxes imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be
performed as follows.
      (1)   The tax shall be collected by service suppliers insofar as
practicable at the same time as, and along with, the collection of the charges
made in accordance with the regular billing practice of the service supplier.
Where the amount paid by a service user to a service supplier is less than the
full amount of the charge and tax which was accrued for the billing period, a
proportionate share of both the charge and the tax shall be deemed to have been
paid. In those cases where a service user has notified the service supplier of
refusal to pay the tax imposed on the charges, §
5.76.150 shall apply.
      (2)   The duty of a service supplier to collect the tax from a service
user shall commence with the beginning of the first regular billing period
applicable to the service user where all charges normally included in such
regular billing are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Where a person
receives more than one billing, one or more being for different periods than
another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing period.
   (B)   Filing return and payment. Each person required by this chapter to
remit a tax shall file a return to the Tax Administrator, on forms approved by
the Tax Administrator, on or before the due date. The full amount of the tax
collected shall be included with the return and filed with the Tax
Administrator. The Tax Administrator is authorized to require such additional
information as he or she deems necessary to determine if the tax is being
levied, collected, and remitted in accordance with this chapter. Returns are
due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. Pursuant to Cal.
Revenue and Tax Code § 7284.6, the Tax Administrator, and its agents, shall
maintain such filing returns as confidential information that is exempt from
the disclosure provisions of the Public Records Act.
(1995 Code, § 5.76.110) (Ord. 05-1958, passed - -2005)
§ 5.76.120   Collection penalties–Service suppliers and self-collectors.
   (A)   Taxes collected from a service user, or owed by a service user subject
to §
5.76.060 of this chapter, are delinquent if not received by the Tax
Administrator on or before the due date. Should the due date occur on a weekend
or legal holiday, the return must be received by the Tax Administrator on the
first regular working day following the weekend or legal holiday. A direct
deposit, including electronic fund transfers and other similar methods of
electronically exchanging monies between financial accounts, made by a service
supplier in satisfaction of its obligations under this division shall be
considered timely if the transfer is initiated on or before the due date, and
the transfer settles into the city’s account on the following business day.
   (B)   If the person required to collect and/or remit the utility users’ tax
fails to collect the tax (by failing to properly assess the tax on one or more
services or charges on the customer’s billing) or fails to remit the tax
collected on or before the due date, or, in the case of a service user that
fails to properly self-collect and remit the tax under §
5.76.060 of this chapter on or before the due date, the Tax Administrator shall
attach a penalty for such delinquencies or deficiencies at the rate of 15% of
the total tax that is delinquent or deficient in the remittance, and shall pay
interest at the rate of 0.75% per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount
of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first
became delinquent, until paid.
   (C)   The Tax Administrator shall have the power to impose additional
penalties upon persons required to collect and remit taxes pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter for fraud or gross negligence in reporting or
remitting at the rate of 15% of the amount of the tax collected and/or required
to be remitted, or as recomputed by the Tax Administrator.
   (D)   For collection purposes only, every penalty imposed and such interest
that is accrued under the provisions of this section shall become, a part of
the tax herein required to be paid.
(1995 Code, § 5.76.120) (Ord. 05-1958, passed - -2005)
§ 5.76.130   Actions to collect.
   Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the city. Any such
tax collected from a service user which has not been remitted to the Tax
Administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the person required to
collect and remit and shall no longer be a debt of the service user. Any person
owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to
an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount,
including penalties and interest as provided for in this chapter, along with
any collection costs incurred by the city as a result of the person’s
noncompliance with this chapter; including, but not limited to, reasonable
attorneys fees. Any tax required to be collected by a service supplier or owed
by a service user is an unsecured priority excise tax obligation under 11
U.S.C. § 507(a)(8)(C).
(1995 Code, § 5.76.130) (Ord. 05-1958, passed - -2005)
§ 5.76.140   Deficiency determination and assessment _Tax application errors.
   (A)   The Tax Administrator shall make a deficiency determination if he or
she determines that any person required to pay, collect or self-collect taxes
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter has failed to pay, collect, self-
collect and/or remit the proper amount of tax by improperly or failing to apply
the tax to one or more taxable services or charges.
   (B)   The Tax Administrator shall mail a notice of such deficiency
determination to the person required to pay or remit the tax, which notice
shall refer briefly to the amount of the taxes owed, plus interest at the rate
of 0.75% per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax from the
date on which the tax should have been received by the city. Within 14 calendar
days after the date of service of such notice, the person may request in
writing to the Tax Administrator for a hearing on the matter.
   (C)   If the person fails to request a hearing within the prescribed time
period, the amount of the deficiency determination shall become a final
assessment, and shall immediately be due and owing to the city. If the person
requests a hearing, the Tax Administrator shall cause the matter to be set for
hearing, which shall be scheduled within 30 days after receipt of the written
request for hearing. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be
mailed by the Tax Administrator to such person at least ten calendar days prior
to the hearing, and, if the Tax Administrator desires the person to produce
specific records at such hearing, such notice may designate the records
requested to be produced.
   (D)   At the time fixed for the hearing, the Tax Administrator shall hear
all relevant testimony and evidence, including that of any other interested
parties. At the discretion of the Tax Administrator, the hearing may be
continued from time to time for the purpose of allowing the presentation of
additional evidence. Within a reasonable time following the conclusion of the
hearing, the Tax Administrator shall issue a final assessment (or non-
assessment), thereafter, by confirming, modifying or rejecting the original
deficiency determination, and shall mail a copy of such final assessment to
person owing the tax. The decision of the Tax Administrator may be appealed
pursuant to §
5.76.190 of this chapter. Filing an application with the Tax Administrator and
appeal to the City Manager pursuant to §
5.76.190 of this chapter is a prerequisite to a suit thereon.
   (E)   Payment of the final assessment shall become delinquent if not
received by the Tax Administrator on or before the thirtieth day following the
date of receipt of the notice of final assessment. The penalty for delinquency
shall be 15% on the total amount of the assessment, along with interest at the
rate of 0.75% per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax,
exclusive of penalties, from the date of delinquency, until paid. The
applicable statute of limitations regarding a claim by the city seeking payment
of a tax assessed under this chapter shall commence from the date of
delinquency as provided in this division (E).
   (F)   All notices under this section may be sent by regular mail, postage
prepaid, and shall be deemed received on the third calendar day following the
date of mailing, as established by a proof of mailing.
(1995 Code, § 5.76.140) (Ord. 05-1958, passed - -2005)
§ 5.76.150   Administrative remedy_Non-paying service users.
   (A)   Whenever the Tax Administrator determines that a service user has
deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by the service user from the
amounts remitted to a person required to collect the tax, or whenever the Tax
Administrator deems it in the best interest of the city, he or she may relieve
such person of the obligation to collect the taxes due under this chapter from
certain named service users for specific billing periods. To the extent the
service user has failed to pay the amount of tax owed for a period of two or
more billing periods, the service supplier shall be relieved of the obligation
to collect taxes due. The service supplier shall provide the city with the
names and addresses of such service users and the amounts of taxes owed under
the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   In addition to the tax owed, the service user shall pay a delinquency
penalty at the rate of 15% of the total tax that is owed, and shall pay
interest at the rate of 0.75% per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount
of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the due date, until paid.
   (C)   The Tax Administrator shall notify the nonpaying service user that the
Tax Administrator has assumed the responsibility to collect the taxes due for
the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes, including penalties and
interest. The notice shall be served on the service user by personal delivery
or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid,
addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made by the
person required to collect the tax; or, should the service user have a change
of address, to his or her last known address.
   (D)   If the service user fails to remit the tax to the Tax Administrator
within 30 days from the date of the service of the notice upon him or her, the
Tax Administrator may impose an additional penalty of 15% of the amount of the
total tax that is owed.
(1995 Code, § 5.76.150) (Ord. 05-1958, passed - -2005)
§ 5.76.160    Additional powers and duties of the Tax Administrator.
   (A)   The Tax Administrator shall have the power and duty, and is hereby
directed, to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The Tax Administrator may adopt administrative rules and regulations
not inconsistent with provisions of this chapter for the purpose of
interpreting, clarifying, carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection
and remittance of the taxes herein imposed. A copy of such administrative rules
and regulations shall be on file in the Tax Administrator’s office. The
adoption of an administrative ruling by Tax Administrator, pursuant to this
division (B) shall not constitute an “extension” or “increase” of the tax
imposed by this chapter, provided that the administrative ruling does not cause
the percentage rate of the tax to exceed the percentage rates set forth in this
chapter (as authorized by California Constitution Chapter XIIIC, Section 2(d),
and Cal. Government Code § 53750(h)(2)).
   (C)   Upon a proper showing of good cause, the Tax Administrator may make
administrative agreements, with appropriate conditions, to vary from the strict
requirements of this chapter and thereby:
      (1)   Conform to the billing procedures of a particular service supplier
(or service user subject to §
5.76.060 of this chapter) so long as the agreements result in the collection of
the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of this chapter; or
      (2)   To avoid a hardship where the administrative costs of collection
and remittance greatly outweigh the tax benefit. A copy of each such agreement
shall be on file in the Tax Administrator’s office, and are voidable by the Tax
Administrator or the city at any time.
   (D)   The Tax Administrator may conduct an audit, to ensure proper
compliance with the requirements of this chapter, of any person required to
collect and/or remit a tax pursuant to this chapter. The Tax Administrator
shall notify the person of the initiation of an audit in writing. In the
absence of fraud or other intentional misconduct, the audit period of review
shall not exceed a period of three years next preceding the date of receipt of
the written notice by the person from the Tax Administrator. Upon completion of
the audit, the Tax Administrator may make a deficiency determination pursuant
to §
5.76.140 of this chapter for all taxes (and applicable penalties and interest)
owed and not paid, as evidenced by information provided by such person to the
Tax Administrator. If the person is unable or unwilling to provide sufficient
records to enable the Tax Administrator to verify compliance with this chapter,
the Tax Administrator is authorized to make a reasonable estimate of the
deficiency. The reasonable estimate shall be entitled to a rebuttable
presumption of correctness.
   (E)   Upon receipt of a written request of a taxpayer, and for good cause,
the Tax Administrator may extend the time for filing any statement required
pursuant to this chapter for a period of not to exceed 45 days, provided that
the time for filing the required statement has not already passed when the
request is received. No penalty for delinquent payment shall accrue by reason
of such extension. Interest shall accrue during the extension at the rate of
0.75% per month, prorated for any portion thereof.
   (F)   The Tax Administrator shall determine the eligibility of any person
who asserts a right to exemption from, or a refund of, the tax imposed by this
chapter.
   (G)   (1)   The City Manager may compromise a claim made pursuant to this
chapter in accordance with the authority set forth in Tulare Municipal Code §
5.76.120.
      (2)   ALTERNATIVE: The Tax Administrator, with the written approval of
the City Attorney, may compromise a claim pursuant to this chapter where the
portion of the claim proposed to be released is less than $5,000; and, with the
approval of the City Attorney and the City Council, may compromise such a claim
where the portion proposed to be released is equal to or greater than $5,000.
   (H)   Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter to the contrary, the Tax
Administrator may waive any penalty or interest imposed upon a person required
to collect and/or remit for failure to collect the tax imposed by this chapter
if the non-collection occurred in good faith. In determining whether the non-
collection was in good faith, the Tax Administrator shall take into
consideration industry practice or other precedence.
(1995 Code, § 5.76.160) (Ord. 05-1958, passed - -2005)
§ 5.76.170   Records.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and/or remit
to the city any tax imposed by this chapter, to keep and preserve, for a period
of at least three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the
amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and
remittance to the Tax Administrator, which records the Tax Administrator shall
have the right to inspect at a reasonable time.
   (B)   The city may issue an administrative subpoena to compel a person to
deliver to the Tax Administrator copies of all records deemed necessary by the
Tax Administrator to establish compliance with this chapter, including the
delivery of records in a common electronic format on readily available media if
such records are kept electronically by the person in the usual and ordinary
course of business. As an alternative to delivering the subpoenaed records to
the Tax Administrator on or before the due date provided in the administrative
subpoena, such person may provide access to such records outside the city on or
before the due date, provided that such person shall reimburse the city for all
reasonable travel expenses incurred by the city to inspect those records,
including travel, lodging, meals, and other similar expenses, but excluding the
normal salary or hourly wages of those persons designated by the city to
conduct the inspection.
   (C)   The Tax Administrator is authorized to execute a non-disclosure
agreement approved by the City Attorney to protect the confidentiality of
customer information pursuant to Cal. Revenue and Tax Code §§ 7284.6 and
7284.7. The Tax Administrator may request from a person providing
transportation services of gas or electricity to service users within the city
a list of the names and addresses, and other pertinent information, of its
transportation customers within the city pursuant to Cal. Public Utilities Code
§ 6354(e).
   (D)   If a service supplier uses a billing agent or billing aggregator to
bill, collect, and/or remit the tax, the service supplier shall:
      (1)   Provide to the Tax Administrator the name, address and telephone
number of each billing agent and billing aggregator currently authorized by,
the service supplier to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax to the city; and
      (2)   Upon request of the Tax Administrator, deliver, or effect the
delivery of, any information or records in the possession of such billing agent
or billing aggregator that, in the opinion of the Tax Administrator, is
necessary to verify the proper application, calculation, collection and/or
remittance of such tax to the city.
   (E)   (1)   If any person subject to record-keeping under this section
unreasonably denies the Tax Administrator access to such records, or fails to
produce the information requested in an administrative subpoena within the time
specified, then the Tax Administrator may impose a penalty of $500 on such
person for each day following:
         (a)   The initial date that the person refuses to provide such access;
or
         (b)   The due date for production of records as set forth in the
administrative subpoena.
       (2)   This penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed
under this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 5.76.170) (Ord. 05-1958, passed - -2005)
§ 5.76.180   Refunds.
   Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than once or
has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the. Tax
Administrator under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in this
section.
   (A)   The Tax Administrator may refund any tax that has been overpaid or
paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received
by the Tax Administrator under this chapter, provided that no refund shall be
paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant or his or her
guardian, conservator, executor, or administrator has submitted a written claim
to the Tax Administrator within one year of the overpayment or erroneous or
illegal collection of the tax. Such claim must clearly establish claimant’s
right to the refund by written records showing entitlement thereto.
   (B)   The submission of a written claim, which is acted upon by the City
Council, shall be a prerequisite to a suit thereon. (See Cal. Government Code §
935.) The Tax Administrator, or the City Council where the claim is in excess
of $5,000, shall act upon the refund claim within the time period set forth in
Cal. Government Code § 912.4. If the Tax Administrator/City Council fails or
refuses to act on a refund claim within the time prescribed by Cal. Government
Code § 912.4, the claim shall be deemed to have been rejected by the City
Council on the last day of the period within which the City Council was
required to act upon the claim as provided in Cal. Government Code § 912.4. The
Tax Administrator shall give notice of the action in a form which substantially
complies with that set forth in Cal. Government Code § 913. Nothing herein
shall permit the filing of a claim on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the notice provisions of division (A) of this section,
a service supplier that has collected any amount of tax in excess of the amount
of tax imposed by this chapter and actually due from a service user (whether
due to overpayment or erroneous or illegal collection of the tax), may refund
such amount to the service user, or credit to charges subsequently payable by
the service user to the service supplier, and claim credit for such overpayment
against the amount of tax which is due upon any other monthly returns to the
Tax Administrator, provided such credit is claimed in a return dated no later
than one year from the date of overpayment or erroneous or illegal collection
of said tax. The Tax Administrator shall determine the validity of the service
user’s claim of credit, and the underlying basis for such claim.
   (D)   Notwithstanding the notice provisions of division (A) of this section,
in the event that a service supplier, or a service user subject to §
5.76.060 of this chapter, remits a tax to city in excess of the amount of tax
imposed by this chapter, the service supplier, or service user subject to §
5.76.060 of this chapter, may claim credit for such overpayment against the
amount of tax which is due upon any other monthly returns to the Tax
Administrator, provided such credit is claimed in a return dated no later than
one year from the date of overpayment of the tax. The Tax Administrator shall
determine the validity of the service user’s claim of credit, and the
underlying basis for such claim.
   (E)   Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, whenever a service
supplier, pursuant to an order of the California Public Utilities Commission,
makes a refund to service users of charges for past utility services, the taxes
paid pursuant to this chapter on the amount of such refunded charges shall also
be refunded to service users, and the service supplier shall be entitled to
claim a credit for such refunded taxes against the amount of tax which is due
upon the next monthly returns. In the event this chapter is repealed, the
amounts of any refundable taxes will be borne by the city.
   (F)   A service user who desires to obtain the benefits of the maximum tax
limitations in §§
5.76.030(G),
5.76.040(G),
5.76.050(G),
5.76.060(F) and
5.76.070(F), shall file a claim for refund with the Tax Administrator and the
claimant must establish his or her right to a refund by written records or
other relevant evidence.
(1995 Code, § 5.76.180) (Ord. 05-1958, passed - -2005)
§ 5.76.190   Appeals.
   (A)   The provisions of this section apply to any decision (other than a
decision relating to a refund pursuant to §
5.76.180 of this chapter), deficiency determination, assessment, or
administrative ruling of the Tax Administrator. Any person aggrieved by any
decision. (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to §
5.76.180 of this chapter), deficiency determination, assessment, or
administrative ruling of the Tax Administrator, shall be required to comply
with the appeals procedure of this section. Compliance with this section shall
be a prerequisite to a suit thereon. (See Cal. Government Code § 935(b).)
Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim or action on behalf of a
class or group of taxpayers.
   (B)   If any person is aggrieved by any decision (other than a decision
relating to a refund pursuant to §
5.76.180 of this chapter), deficiency determination, assessment, or
administrative ruling of the Tax Administrator, he or she may appeal to the
City Manager by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 14 days of
the date of the decision, deficiency determination, assessment, or
administrative ruling of the Tax Administrator which aggrieved the service user
or service supplier.
   (C)   The matter shall be scheduled for hearing before an independent
hearing officer selected by the City Manager, no more than 30 days from the
receipt of the appeal. The appellant shall be served with notice of the time
and place of the hearing, as well as any relevant materials, at least five
calendar days prior to the hearing. The hearing may be continued from time to
time upon mutual consent. At the time of the hearing, the appealing party, the
Tax Administrator, and any other interested person may present such relevant
evidence as he or she may have relating to the determination from which the
appeal is taken.
   (D)   Based upon the submission of such evidence and the review of the city’
files, the hearing officer shall issue a written notice, and order upholding,
modifying or reversing the determination from which the appeal is taken. The
notice shall be given within 14 days after the conclusion of the hearing and
shall state the reasons for the decision. The notice shall specify that the
decision is final and that any petition for judicial review shall be filed
within 90 days from the date of the decision in accordance with Cal. Code of
Civil Procedure § 1094.6.
   (E)   All notices under this section may be sent by regular mail, postage
prepaid, and shall be deemed received on the third calendar day following the
date of mailing, as established by a proof of mailing.
(1995 Code, § 5.76.190) (Ord. 05-1958, passed - -2005)
§ 5.76.200   Notice no injunction/writ of mandate.
   No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against this city or
against any officer of the city to prevent or enjoin the collection under this
chapter of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and/or
remitted.
(1995 Code, § 5.76.200) (Ord. 05-1958, passed - -2005)
§ 5.76.210   Notice of changes to chapter.
   If a tax under this chapter is added repealed, increased, reduced, or the
tax base is changed, the Tax Administrator shall follow the notice requirements
of Cal. Public Utilities Code § 799. Prior to the effective date of the
ordinance change, the service supplier shall provide the Tax Administrator with
a copy of any written procedures describing the information that the service
supplier needs to implement the ordinance change. If the service supplier fails
to provide such written instructions, the Tax Administrator, or his or her
agent, shall send, by first class mail, a copy of the ordinance change to all
collectors and remitters of the city’s utility users’ taxes according to the
latest payment records of the Tax Administrator.
(1995 Code, § 5.76.210) (Ord. 05-1958, passed - -2005)
§ 5.76.220   Future amendment of cited statute.
   Unless specifically provided otherwise, any reference to a state or federal
statute in this chapter shall mean such statute as it may be amended from time
to time.
(1995 Code, § 5.76.220) (Ord. 05-1958, passed - -2005)
§ 5.76.230   Severability.
   If any section, division, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or
phrase of this chapter, or any part thereof, is for any reason held to be
invalid, unlawful or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this chapter or any part thereof. The
Mayor and Council hereby declare that they would have adopted each section,
division, subdivision, paragraph, .sentence, clause, or phrase thereof,
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, divisions,
subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared invalid,
unlawful or unconstitutional.
(1995 Code, § 5.76.230) (Ord. 05-1958, passed - -2005)
CHAPTER 5.78: TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX FOR GENERAL PURPOSES
Section
   
5.78.010   Purpose.
   
5.78.020   Operative date.
   
5.78.030   Contract with state.
   
5.78.040   Imposition of transactions tax.
   
5.78.050   Presumption as to place of sales.
   
5.78.060   Imposition of use tax.
   
5.78.070   Adoption of certain sections of California Revenue and Taxation Code
by reference.
   
5.78.080   Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes.
   
5.78.090   Permit not required.
   
5.78.100   Exemptions and exclusions.
   
5.78.110   Amendments.
   
5.78.120   Enjoining collection prohibited.
§ 5.78.010   Purpose.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Transactions and Use Tax for General
Purposes Ordinance”. The City of Tulare shall hereinafter be called “city”.
This ordinance shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the city.
This chapter of the Tulare Municipal Code has been adopted for the following
(and other) purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in
order to accomplish those purposes:
   (A)   To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the
provisions of Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code Part 1.6 (commencing with § 7251)
of Division 2 and § 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which authorizes the city
to adopt this chapter which shall be operative if a majority of the electors
voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election
called for that purpose;
   (B)   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates
provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of
California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the
requirements and limitations contained in Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code Part
1.6 of Division 2;
   (C)   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a
tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by
the state’s Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as
practical to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing
statutory and administrative procedures followed by the state’s Board of
Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Transactions
and Use Taxes;
   (D)   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be
administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the
provisions of Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code Parts 1.6 and 1.7 of Division 2,
minimize the cost of collecting city transactions and use taxes, and at the
same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to
taxation under the provisions thereof; and
   (E)   To provide a source of revenue to be used by the city for general
purposes. There shall be no legal obligation created by this chapter for use of
the funds for specific purposes.
(1995 Code, § 5.78.010) (Ord. 05-1996, passed - -2005)
§ 5.78.020   Operative date.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
     OPERATIVE DATE. The first day of the first calendar quarter commencing
more than 110 days after the adoption of this chapter, the date of such
adoption being set forth below.
(1995 Code, § 5.78.020) (Ord. 05-1996, passed - -2005)
§ 5.78.030   Contract with state.
   Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the state’s Board
of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and
operation hereof. If the city has not contracted with the state’s Board of
Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and
in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar
quarter following the execution of such a contract. The Council may make any
technical amendments to this chapter required by the state’s Board of
Equalization, except for any changes affecting the tax rate, its manner of
collection, or the purpose for which the revenue from the tax may be used.
(1995 Code, § 5.78.030) (Ord. 05-1996, passed - -2005)
§ 5.78.040   Imposition of transactions tax.
   For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is
hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city at
the rate of 0.5% of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all
tangible personal property sold at retail in the City of Tulare on and after
the operative date of this chapter. The City Council is authorized to establish
a tax rate of 0.5% by resolution. This tax is imposed in addition to the tax
imposed pursuant to
Chapter 5.08 of this code. The City Council may, by resolution after public
notice and public hearing, reduce the tax to 0.25%.
(1995 Code, § 5.78.040) (Ord. 05-1996, passed - -2005)
§ 5.78.050   Presumption as to place of sales.
   For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the
place of business of the retailer, unless the tangible personal property sold
is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to
a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross
receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are
subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which
delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in
the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which
the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and
regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the Board of Equalization.
(1995 Code, § 5.78.050) (Ord. 05-1996, passed - -2005)
§ 5.78.060   Imposition of use tax.
   An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in
the City of Tulare of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on
or after the operative date of this chapter, at the rate of 0.50% of the sales
price of the property subject to the tax. The sales price shall include
delivery charges when the charges are subject to state transactions or use tax
regardless of the place to which delivery is made. The City Council is
authorized to establish a tax rate of 0.5% by resolution. The tax imposed is in
addition to the tax imposed pursuant to
Chapter 5.08 of this code. The City Council may, by resolution after public
notice and public hearing, reduce the tax to 0.25%.
(1995 Code, § 5.78.060) (Ord. 05-1996, passed - -2005)
§ 5.78.070   Adoption of certain sections of California Revenue and Taxation
Code by reference.
   Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent
with the provisions of Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code Parts 1.6 and 1.7 of
Division 2, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the code, as
amended and in force and effect on the operative date of this chapter,
applicable to use taxes are hereby adopted and made a part of this section as
though fully set forth herein.
(1995 Code, § 5.78.070) (Ord. 05-1996, passed - -2005)
§ 5.78.080   Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes.
   In adopting the provisions of Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code Part 1 of
Division 2:
   (A)   Wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing
agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. However, the
substitution shall not be made when:
      (1)   The word “State” is used as a part of the title of the State
Controller, State Treasurer, State Board of Control, State Board of
Equalization, State Treasury or the Constitution of the State of California;
      (2)   The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by
or against this city or any agency, officer or employee thereof rather than by
or against the state’s Board of Equalization, in performing the functions
incident to the administration or operation of this chapter.
      (3)   In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to
sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where
the result of the substitution would be to: provide an exemption from this tax
with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible
personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such
sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state
under the provisions of Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code Part 1 of Division 2; or
impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other
consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by
the state under the provision of that code.
      (4)    In Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 6701, 6702 (except in the
last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828.
   (B)   The word “city” shall be substituted for the word “state” in the
phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in § 6203 and in the
definition of that phrase in § 6203.
(1995 Code, § 5.78.080) (Ord. 05-1996, passed - -2005)
§ 5.78.090   Permit not required.
   If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Cal. Revenue and
Taxation Code § 6067, an additional transactor’s permit shall not be required
by this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 5.78.090) (Ord. 05-1996, passed - -2005)
§ 5.78.100   Exemptions and exclusions.
   (A)   There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and
the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State of
California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-
Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-
administered transactions or use tax.
   (B)   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions
tax the gross receipts from:
      (1)   Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum
products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside
the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of
such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of
the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government.
      (2)   Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a
point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to the
point by the retailer or his or her agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a
carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this
division, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied:
         (a)   With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles)
subject to registration pursuant to Cal. Vehicle Code Chapter 1 (commencing
with § 4000) of Division 3, aircraft licensed in compliance with Cal. Public
Utilities Code § 21411, and undocumented vessels registered under Cal. Vehicle
Code Chapter 2 of Division 3.5 (commencing with § 9840) by registration to an
out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by
the buyer, stating that the address is, in fact, his or her principal place of
residence; and
         (b)   With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place
of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the
buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address.
      (3)   The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated
to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into
prior to the operative date of this chapter.
      (4)   A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of
such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to
lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date
of this chapter.
      (5)   For the purposes of divisions (B)(3) and (4) of this section, the
sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated
pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to
the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or
lease upon notice, whether or not the right is exercised.
   (C)   There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this chapter, the
storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property:
      (1)   The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a
transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax
ordinance.
      (2)   Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of
aircraft and used or consumed by the operators directly and exclusively in the
use of the aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or
compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued
pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign
government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Cal.
Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 6366 and 6366.1.
      (3)   If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed
price pursuant to a contact entered into prior to the operative date of this
chapter.
      (4)   If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over,
the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is continuing
purchase of the property for any period of time for which the lessee is
obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the
operative date of this chapter.
      (5)   For the purposes of divisions (B)(3) and (4) of this section,
storage, use or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right
or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated
pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to
the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or
lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
      (6)   Except as provided in division (B)(7), a retailer engaged in
business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the
purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers
the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale
of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the
order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in
the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary
or person in the city under the authority of the retailer.
      (7)   A retailer engaged in business in the city shall also include any
retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to
Cal. Vehicle Code Chapter 1 (commencing with § 4000) of Division 3, aircraft
licensed in compliance with Cal. Public Utilities Code § 21411, or undocumented
vessels registered under Cal. Vehicle Code Chapter 2 of Division 3.5
(commencing with § 9840). That retailer shall be required to collect use tax
from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft
at an address in the city.
   (D)   Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against
that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a
district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Cal.
Revenue and Taxation Code Part 1.6 of Division 2 with respect to the sale to
the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is
subject to the use tax.
(1995 Code, § 5.78.100) (Ord. 05-1996, passed - -2005)
§ 5.78.110   Amendments.
   All amendments subsequent to the operative date of this chapter to Cal.
Revenue and Taxation Code Part 1 of Division 2 relating to sales and use taxes
and which are not inconsistent with Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code Part 1.6 and
Part 1.7 of Division 2, and all amendments to Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code
Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2, shall automatically become a part of this
chapter, provided however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect
the rate of tax imposed by this chapter. If any provision of this chapter or
the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the
remainder of the chapter and the application of such provision to other persons
or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
(1995 Code, § 5.78.110) (Ord. 05-1996, passed - -2005)
§ 5.78.120   Enjoining collection prohibited.
   No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this
city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin
the collection hereunder, or Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code Parts 1.6 and 1.7
of Division 2, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected.
(1995 Code, § 5.78.120) (Ord. 05-1996, passed - -2005)
CHAPTER 5.80: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
Section
   
5.80.010   Drug paraphernalia defined.
   
5.80.020   Sale or display of drug paraphernalia prohibited.
   
5.80.030   Exceptions.
   
5.80.040   Violations—Infraction.
   
5.80.050   Violations—Grounds for revocation of license.
§ 5.80.010   Drug paraphernalia defined.
   (A)   As used in this chapter, DRUG PARAPHERNALIA means all equipment,
products and materials of any kind which are intended for use or designed for
use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing,
packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substances.
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA includes, but is not limited to, all of the following:
      (1)   Kits intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a
controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;
      (2)   Kits intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled
substance;
      (3)   Isomerization devices intended for use or designed for use in
increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance;
      (4)   Testing equipment intended for use or designed for use in
identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
controlled substances;
      (5)   Scales and balances intended for use or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances;
      (6)   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose and lactose, intended for use or designed for use in cutting
controlled substances;
      (7)   Separation gins and sifters intended for use or designed for use in
removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana;
      (8)   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices intended for
use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;
      (9)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers intended for use
or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances;
      (10)   Containers and other objects intended for use or designed for use
in storing or concealing controlled substances;
      (11)   Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects intended for use or
designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human
body; and
      (12)   Objects intended for use or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil
into the human body, such as:
         (a)   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal
bowls;
         (b)   Water pipes;
         (c)   Carburetion tubes and devices;
         (d)   Smoking and carburetion masks;
         (e)   Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material such
as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in
the hand;
         (f)   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
         (g)   Chamber pipes;
         (h)   Carburetor pipes;
         (i)   Air-driven pipes;
         (k)   Chillums;
         (l)   Bongs; and
         (m)   Ice pipes and chillers.
   (B)   In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or
other authority may consider, in addition to all other logically relevant
factors, the following:
      (1)   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use;
      (2)   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or of anyone in control of
the object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled
substances;
      (3)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he knows, or
should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of
this section. The innocence of any owner, or of anyone in control of the
object, as to direct violation of this section shall not prevent a finding that
the object is intended for use, or designed for use, as drug paraphernalia;
      (4)   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning
its use;
      (5)   Descriptive materials, accompanying the object which explains or
depicts its use;
      (6)   National and local advertising concerning its use;
      (7)   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
      (8)   Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a
legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a
licensed distributor of dealer of tobacco products;
      (9)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community; and
      (10)   Expert testimony concerning its use.
(1995 Code, § 5.80.010)
§ 5.80.020   Sale or display of drug paraphernalia prohibited.
   No person shall maintain or operate any place of business in which drug
paraphernalia is kept, displayed or offered in any manner, sold, furnished,
transferred or given away.
(1995 Code, § 5.80.020)
§ 5.80.030   Exceptions.
   This chapter shall not apply to any of the following:
   (A)   Any pharmacist or other authorized person who sells or furnishes drug
paraphernalia described in §
5.80.010(A)(11) upon the prescription of a physician, dentist, podiatrist or
veterinarian;
   (B)   Any physician, dentist, podiatrist or veterinarian who furnished or
prescribes drug paraphernalia described in §
5.80.010(A)(11) to his or her patients; and/or
   (C)   Any manufacturer, wholesaler or retailer licensed by the California
State Board of Pharmacy to sell or transfer drug paraphernalia described in §
5.80.010(A)(11).
(1995 Code, § 5.80.030)
§ 5.80.040   Violations—Infraction.
   It is unlawful and constitutes an infraction for any person to violate or
fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter. Any person convicted of an
infraction under the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as set
forth in §
1.12.010 of this code.
(1995 Code, § 5.80.040)
§ 5.80.050   Violations—Grounds for revocation of license.
   Conviction of a violation of §
5.80.020 of this chapter shall constitute grounds for revocation of any
business license issued by the city for the premises on which the violation
took place.
(1995 Code, § 5.80.050)
CHAPTER 5.84: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; WARNING SIGNS
Section
   
5.84.010   Signs—Dangers of consuming alcoholic beverages during pregnancy.
   
5.84.020   Violations—Infractions.
§ 5.84.010   Signs—Dangers of consuming alcoholic beverages during pregnancy.
   (A)   Duty to post. Any person or entity who owns, operates, manages, leases
or rents a premises offering for sale or dispensing for consideration to the
public, alcoholic beverages, including beer and wine, shall cause a sign or
notice to be posted or displayed on the premises as provided in this section.
The sign or notice shall comply with the readability requirements specified
herein and shall read substantially as follows: “Pregnancy and alcohol do not
mix. Drinking wine, beer and other alcoholic beverages during pregnancy can
cause birth defects. For information call (phone number).” In no event shall a
sign as required herein be smaller than eight inches wide and eight inches
long, nor shall any lettering thereon be less than one-half inch in height.
   (B)   Placement. A sign or notice required by division (A) above shall be
placed as follows:
      (1)   Where the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages, including beer
and wine, to the public is primarily intended for consumption off the premises,
at least one sign shall be placed as to assure that it is readable from all
locations at which the sale or dispensing occurs;
      (2)   Where the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages, including beer
and wine, to the public is primarily provided through over the counter service,
at least one sign shall be placed to insure that it is readable from all
counter locations available to the public; and
      (3)   Where the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages, including beer
and wine, to the public is primarily provided for consumption on the premises
by the public at tables served by food or beverage service persons, at least
one sign shall be placed to assure it is readable by the public entering the
premises; provided, however, that notices may be placed or displayed at each of
the tables in a manner which will assure that the notices are as readily
visible and readable as materials provided to the public which list food and
beverage prices.
(1995 Code, § 5.84.010)
§ 5.84.020   Violations—Infractions.
   It is unlawful and constitutes an infraction for any person to violate or
fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter. Any person convicted of an
infraction under the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as set
forth in §
1.12.010 of this code.
(1995 Code, § 5.84.020)
CHAPTER 5.88: LICENSING AND REGULATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
   
5.88.010   Prohibited uses, conduct and activities.
   
5.88.020   Purpose and intent.
   
5.88.030   Classification of sexually oriented businesses.
   
5.88.040   Definitions.
   
5.88.050   Permit required.
   
5.88.060   Application for permit.
   
5.88.070   Continuing permit obligations.
   
5.88.080   Filing of the completed application.
   
5.88.090   Issuance of permit.
   
5.88.100   Processing the completed application.
   
5.88.110   Notification of permit denial; subsequent application.
   
5.88.120   Annual permit fee.
   
5.88.130   Inspection.
   
5.88.140   Administrative and judicial review of permit denial, suspension or
revocation.
   
5.88.150   Transfer of permit.
   
5.88.160   Registration of new employees.
   
5.88.170   Business operation.
   
5.88.180   Prohibitions regarding minors and sexually oriented businesses.
   
5.88.190   Display regulations.
   
5.88.200   Additional requirements.
   
5.88.210   Exemptions.
   
5.88.220   Criminal penalties and additional legal, equitable and injunctive
relief.
   
5.88.230   Suspension or revocation of permit.
   
5.88.240   Immunity from prosecution.
   
5.88.250   Severability.
§ 5.88.010   Prohibited uses, conduct and activities.
   (A)   One of the important purposes of the regulations set forth in this
chapter is to discourage and to minimize the opportunity for criminal conduct.
As such, nothing in this chapter shall permit or be interpreted to permit any
use, conduct, and/or activity which is specifically prohibited under the
following Penal Code sections:
      (1)   Receipt of money for placement of person for purposes of
cohabitation, Cal. Penal Code § 266d;
      (2)   Purchase of person for purposes of prostitution or placement of
person for immoral purposes, Cal. Penal Code § 266e;
      (3)   Sale of person for immoral purposes, Cal. Penal Code § 266f;
      (4)   Pimping, Cal. Penal Code § 266h;
      (5)   Pandering, Cal. Penal Code § 266i;
      (6)   Lewd or obscene conduct, Cal. Penal Code § 314;
      (7)   Houses of ill-fame, Cal. Penal Code § 315;
      (8)   Disorderly houses which disturb the immediate neighboring, Cal.
Penal Code § 316;
      (9)   Places of prostitution, Cal. Penal Code § 317; and
      (10)   Places of prostitution; place of lewdness; place used as bathhouse
permitting conduct capable of transmitting AIDS, Cal. Penal Code § 11225.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to permit or permit any
use, conduct and or activity which violates any federal, state or local law or
regulation.
   (C)   A “sexual encounter establishment” is not a permitted use. For
purposes of these regulations, a “sexual encounter establishment” means any
business or commercial establishment that as one of its important business
purposes offers for any form of consideration a place where two or more persons
may congregate, associate or consort for the purposes of “specified sexual
activities” when one or more of the persons of the establishment is in a “state
of nudity” or where two or more persons may congregate, associate or consort
for the purpose of the exposure of “specified anatomical areas” where one of
the patrons of the establishment is in a “state of nudity” or “state of semi-
nudity”. The definition of “sexual encounter establishment” shall not include
an establishment where a medical practitioner, physiologist, psychiatrist or
similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically approved
and recognized sexual therapy.
(1995 Code, § 5.88.010) (Ord. 01-1872, passed - -2001)
§ 5.88.020   Purpose and intent.
   It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented
businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
citizens of the city and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to
prevent any deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented
businesses within the city, thereby reducing or eliminating the adverse
secondary effects from such sexually oriented businesses. The provisions of
this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or
restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually
oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this
ordinance to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials
protected by the first Amendment, or to deny access by the distributor and
exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither
is it the intended nor effect of the chapter to condone or legitimize the
distribution of obscene materials.
(1995 Code, § 5.88.030) (Ord. 01-1872, passed - -2001)
§ 5.88.030   Classification of sexually oriented businesses.
   The following uses and/or activities shall be classified as “sexually
oriented businesses”:
   (A)   Adult arcades;
   (B)   Adult bookstores;
   (C)   Adult cabarets;
   (D)   Adult motels;
   (E)   Adult motion picture theaters;
   (F)   Adult novelty stores;
   (G)   Adult theaters;
   (H)   Adult video stores; and
   (I)   Nude model studios.
(1995 Code, § 5.88.040) (Ord. 01-1872, passed - -2001)
§ 5.88.040   Definitions.
   For purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as
follows.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES. Those businesses defined as follows:
   (A)   ADULT ARCADE. An establishment where, for any form of consideration,
one or more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors or similar
machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are regularly available or
used to show films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.
   (B)   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE. A
commercial establishment which:
      (1)   Has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-trade;
      (2)   Derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues;
      (3)   Devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior floor
or display space; or
      (4)   Devotes a significant or substantial portion of its business
activities or employees’ time, or advertising, to the sale, rental or viewing
for any form of consideration, of any one or more of the following:
         (a)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other visual
representations which are characterized by the depiction or description of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”;
         (b)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use
in connection with “specified sexual activities”; and/or
         (c)   An establishment may have other significant or substantial
business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale, rental or viewing
of materials, depicting or describing “specified sexual activities” or
“specified” anatomical areas”, and still be categorized as adult bookstore,
adult novelty store, or adult video store. Such other business purposes as an
adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store so long as one of its
significant or substantial business purposes is offering for sale or rental,
for some form of consideration, the specified materials which depict or
describe “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities.”
   (C)   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant, “bottle club” or similar
commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which
regularly features:
      (1)   Persons who appear nude or in a state of nudity or semi-nude;
      (2)   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
“specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities”; and
      (3)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities”.
   (D)   ADULT MOTEL. A motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment which:
      (1)   Offers public accommodations, for any form of consideration, and
which regularly provides or makes available to patrons with closed-circuit
television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or
other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities”,
and which advertises the availability of this sexually oriented type of
material by means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way, or by means
of any off-premises advertising including but not limited to, newspapers,
magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or television;
      (2)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time less than ten
hours; or
      (3)   Allows a tenant or occupant to rent or sub-rent the sleeping room
for a time period of less than ten hours.
   (E)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions
depicting or describing “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual
activities”, are regularly shown for any form of consideration.
   (F)   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment which, for any form or consideration, regularly
features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are
characterized by exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual
activities”.
   (G)   NUDE MODEL STUDIO. Any place where a person, who appears in a state of
nudity or displays “specified anatomical areas” is provided for money or any
form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
photographed or similarly depicted by other persons.
   (H)   REGULARLY FEATURES or REGULARLY SHOWN. With respect to an adult
cabaret, adult theater or adult motion picture theater means at least three
times within any 30-day period; or carried on as part of the business’s routine
scheduling of events or activities and not so infrequently as to constitute a
single, rare or unusual event or occurrence.
   (I)   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT. A business or commercial
establishment, that as one of its important business purposes, offers for any
form of consideration, a place where two or more persons may congregate,
associate or consort for the purpose of “specified sexual activities” or the
exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or activities when one or more of the
persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity. The definition of sexually
oriented businesses shall not include an establishment where a medical
practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person
licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual
therapy.
   (J)   SIGNIFICANT OR SUBSTANTIAL PORTION. A percentage of its activities,
space allocation, revenues, advertising, targeting, stock in trade, floor or
display space, business receipts, revenues or other business undertakings as to
indicate to a reasonable person that the sexually oriented portion of the
business is one of its important activities, though not necessarily its only or
even primary activity; for this purpose, evidence that 25% or more of its
revenues are derived from such sexually oriented activities or materials, or
that 25% or more of its interior floor space or display space is devoted to
such sexually oriented activities or materials, or that 25% or more of its
actual stock in trade regularly displayed and immediately available for use,
rental, purchase, viewing or perusal is comprised of such sexually oriented
materials, all as defined herein, shall be evidence that a “significant or
substantial portion” of the business is devoted to such uses.
   EMPLOYEE. A person who works or performs in and/or for a sexually oriented
business, regardless of whether or not the person is paid a salary, wage or
other compensation by the operator of the business.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Any of the following:
   (A)   The opening or commencement of any such business as a new business;
   (B)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this
chapter;
   (C)   The addition of any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in
this chapter to any other existing sexually oriented business;
   (D)   The relocation of any such sexually oriented business; and
   (E)   The substantial enlargement of any such sexually oriented business.
   NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY.
   (A)   The appearance or display of human bare buttock, anus, male genitals,
female genitals or the areola or nipple of the female breast; or
   (B)   A state of dress which fails to opaquely and fully cover a human
buttock, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region or areola or nipple of the
female breast.
   OPERATOR. The owner, permit holder, custodian, manager, operator or person
in charge of any permitted or licensed premises.
   PERMITTED OR UNPERMITTING PREMISES. Any premises that requires a license
and/or permit and that is classified as a sexually oriented business.
   PERMITTEE and/or LICENSEE. A person in whose name a permit and/or license to
operate a sexually oriented business has been issued as well as the individual
listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or license.
   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association
or other legal entity.
   PUBLIC BUILDING REGULARLY FREQUENTED BY CHILDREN. Any building owned, leased
or held by the United States, the state, the county, the city, any special
district, school district or any other agency or political subdivision of the
state or the United States, which building is used as a library, community
center, children’s center or any other use having special attraction to
children, or which building is often visited by children for social activities
unaccompanied by their parents or other adult custodians.
   PUBLIC PARK OR RECREATION AREA. Public land which has been designated for
park or recreational activities including but not limited to a park,
playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball
or tennis courts, open space wilderness areas, or similar public land within
the city which is under the control, operation or management of the city park
and recreation authorities.
   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. Any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building
which is used primarily for religious workshop and related religious
activities.
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. An area zoned for single-family homes, duplexes, town
homes, multiple-family residences, mobile home parks or subdivisions, and
recreational vehicle parks, as defined in the Tulare City Zoning Ordinance.
   SCHOOL. Any public or private educational facility including but not limited
to child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens,
elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools,
middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools,
continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges and
universities. SCHOOL includes the school grounds, but does not include the
facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a
school.
   SEMI-NUDE. A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region and areolae of the female breast, as well as portions of
the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty
shop, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture
theater, adult theater, massage parlor, sexual encounter establishment, escort
agency or nude model studio.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Any of the following:
   (A)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the
top of the areolae; and/or
   (B)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Any of the following:
   (A)   The fondling or other intentional touching of buttocks for purpose of
sexual arousal, or fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals,
pubic region, anus or female breasts;
   (B)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;
   (C)   Masturbation, actual or simulated;
   (D)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or
tumescence; and/or
   (E)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in divisions (A) through (D) of this definition.
   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An increase in the
floor areas occupied by the business as the floor areas existed on the affected
date of this chapter.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Any of the
following:
   (A)   The sale, lease or sublease of the business; and/or
   (B)   The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in
the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means.
(1995 Code, § 5.88.050) (Ord. 01-1872, passed - -2001)
§ 5.88.050   Permit required.
   No person shall operate, maintain, manage or conduct a sexually oriented
business without a valid sexually oriented business permit issued by the city
for the particular type of sexually oriented business.
(1995 Code, § 5.88.060) (Ord. 01-1872, passed - -2001)
§ 5.88.060   Application for permit.
   (A)   The city’s designee is responsible for granting, denying, revoking,
renewing, suspending and canceling sexually oriented business permits for
proposed or existing oriented businesses.
   (B)   The city’s designee shall be the City Manager, or any other officer or
employee designated in writing by the City Manager to deal with the provisions
of this chapter.
   (C)   An application for a permit must be made on a form provided by the
city.
   (D)   The completed application shall contain the following information and
shall be accompanied by the following documents:
      (1)   If the applicant is:
         (a)   An individual; the individual shall state his or her legal name,
any aliases and date of birth;
         (b)   A partnership; the partnership shall state its complete name,
and the names of all general partners; and
         (c)   A corporation; the corporation shall state its complete name,
the names and capacity of all officers, directors and the name and address of
the registered corporate agent for service of process.
      (2)   If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business
under a name other than that on the application, he or she must state the
sexually oriented business’ fictitious name;
      (3)   A statement as to whether the applicant or any other individuals
identified in the application, excluding any agent for service of process who
is not also listed as a director or officer, has had a previous permit under
this chapter, or any other similar sexually oriented business ordinance of the
city, denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the
sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or
revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation;
      (4)   A statement as to whether the applicant or any other individuals
identified in the application, excluding any agent for service of process who
is not also listed as a director or officer, has been a sole proprietor,
general partner, officer or director of a sexually oriented business that has
had a previous permit under this chapter, or any other similar sexually
oriented business ordinance of the city has been suspended or revoked by the
city, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for
which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of
denial, suspension or revocation;
      (5)   The name(s) of the responsible person(s) who will be on the
premises to act as manager during the times that the business is open, or a
statement that the applicant has not yet selected the manager(s);
      (6)   The classification, as defined in this chapter, of the sexually
oriented business for which the applicant is seeking a permit;
      (7)   The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including
a legal description of the property, street address and telephone number(s)
currently in service;
      (8)   The applicant’s address;
      (9)   A recent photograph of the applicant;
      (10)   The applicant’s driver’s license or permit number or
identification number and Social Security number and/or the applicant’s state
or federally issued tax identification number;
      (11)   A clearly legible sketch or diagram showing the configuration of
the premises all improvements to the site including parking, landscaping, sign
configuration and location and outdoor lighting, including a statement of total
floor space and its purpose, occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram
need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a designated scale
or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy
of plus or minus six inches;
      (12)   A certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within 30 days
prior to application depicting the building and the portion thereof to be
occupied by the sexually oriented business, and:
         (a)   The property line of any other sexually oriented business within
1,500 square feet of the main primary entrance of the sexually oriented
businesses for which a permit is requested; and
         (b)   The property lines of any church, school, park, residential zone
or use within 1,500 square feet of the primary entrance of the sexually
oriented businesses.
      (13)   A diagram of the off-street parking areas and premises entries of
the sexually oriented business showing the location of the lighting system
required pursuant to this chapter; and
      (14)   Each individual listed on the application pursuant to §
5.88.060(D), excluding any agent for service of process who is not also listed
as a director or officer, shall sign the application.
   (E)   The applicant shall be required to pay a non-refundable application
fee of $100 at the time of filing an application pursuant to this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 5.88.070) (Ord. 01-1872, passed - -2001)
Editor’s note:
   For the most recent fee, please see the Rates and Fees Resolution passed by
the city and on file in the city offices.
§ 5.88.070   Continuing permit obligations.
   (A)   The fact that a person possesses other types of state or city permits
and/or licenses does not exempt him or her from the requirement of obtaining a
sexually oriented business permit.
   (B)   By applying for a permit under this chapter, the applicant shall be
deemed to have consented to the provisions of this chapter and to the exercise
by the city or its designee, the Chief of Police’s office, and all other city
departments charged with enforcing the laws, ordinances and codes applicable in
the city of their respective responsibilities under this chapter.
   (C)   An operator shall promptly update, correct or supplement the
information contained in the application for a sexually oriented business
permit on file with the city as necessary to keep the information contained
therein accurate.
(1995 Code, § 5.88.080) (Ord. 01-1872, passed - -2001)
§ 5.88.080   Filing of the completed application.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a complete application properly filed with the city
and upon payment of the non-refundable application fee, the city or its
designee shall immediately stamp the application as received on that date.
   (B)   If the city designee determines that the applicant has completed the
application improperly, or otherwise deems the application to be incomplete,
the city designee shall, within 15 days of receipt of the original application,
notify the applicant of the fact and, on request of the applicant, grant the
applicant an extension of time 15 days or less to submit a complete
application. In addition, the applicant may request an extension of time, not
to exceed 15 days, of the time for the city designee to act on the application.
The time period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the
period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time.
(1995 Code, § 5.88.090) (Ord. 01-1872, passed - -2001)
§ 5.88.090   Issuance of permit.
   Within 30 business days of receipt of a completed application, the city
shall issue a sexually oriented business permit upon verification of the
following facts:
   (A)   The location of the business complies with all applicable zoning laws;
   (B)   The configuration of the premises, as set out in the sketch or plan
submitted with the application, does not reveal any violation of applicable
health, zoning, fire and safety laws of the State of California and ordinances
of the City of Tulare applicable thereto, including those set out in this
chapter;
   (C)   The applicants or individuals identified therein, excluding any agent
for service of process who is not also listed as a director or officer, are not
otherwise disqualified from lawful operation of a sexually oriented business
pursuant to any state, county, federal or local law, including those set out in
this chapter;
   (D)   The applicant is 18 years of age or older;
   (E)   The applicant has provided all information required by this chapter,
none of which is known to the city to be incorrect;
   (F)   The application or permit fees required by this chapter have been
paid; and
   (G)   Applicant has no prior conviction of sexually related convictions
listed in §
5.88.010.
(1995 Code, § 5.88.100)
§ 5.88.100   Processing the completed application.
   The city, or its designee, shall grant or deny a completed application for a
sexually oriented business permit within 30 business days from the date city
receives completed application. Upon the expiration of the thirtieth day,
unless the city or its designee has given written notice to the applicant, the
application shall be deemed granted and the operator shall be excused from the
requirement that a duly issued permit be posted at the premises until such time
as the permit is issued pursuant to this section.
(1995 Code, § 5.88.110)
§ 5.88.110   Notification of permit denial; subsequent application.
   If the city, or its designee, denies the application, he or she shall notify
the applicant of the denial in writing and state the reason(s) for the denial.
Any subsequent application which has been supplemented to cure the grounds for
prior denial shall be treated as a new application.
(1995 Code, § 5.88.120)
§ 5.88.120   Annual permit fee.
   (A)   The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit is $100 to
partially offset the costs of monitoring and policing the operations of the
business entities involved.
   (B)   The city is here by determines that the actual cost of monitoring and
policing each such business is at least that amount.
   (C)   The fee shall be due yearly on the anniversary of the issuance of the
permit and shall be deemed delinquent 30 days thereafter.
(1995 Code, § 5.88.130)
§ 5.88.130   Inspection.
   Every operator shall permit representatives of the city and/or Police, Fire
or Health Departments to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business
for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law at any time it is occupied
or open for business.
(1995 Code, § 5.88.140)
§ 5.88.140   Administrative and judicial review of permit denial, suspension or
revocation.
   (A)   Administrative appeal to the City Council. After denial of an
application or suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant or permittee
may seek prompt review of the administrative action through the City Council,
under the provisions of Tulare Municipal Code §§
5.04.370 et seq.
   (B)   Expedited review of free speech claims. An administrative appeal shall
be heard and decided at the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting when
the written request for an administrative appeal alleges that the
administrative action constitutes a violation of the applicant or permittee’s
state or federal constitutional rights to free speech, press or expression. If
affirmed by the City Council, the administrative action is subject to prompt
review by the Superior Court for the State of California, in and for the County
of Tulare, pursuant to Cal. Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.8.
(1995 Code, § 5.88.150)
§ 5.88.150   Transfer of permit.
   (A)   A permittee shall not operate sexually oriented business under the
authority of a permit at any place other than the address designated in the
application for permit.
   (B)   A permittee shall not transfer his or her permit to another person
unless and until such other person satisfied the following requirements:
      (1)   Obtains an amendment to the permit from the city or its designee,
which provides that he or she is now the permittee, which amendment may be
obtained only if he or she has completed and properly filed an application with
the city or its designee, setting for the information called for under §
5.88.060 of this chapter in the application; and
      (2)   Pays a transfer fee of 50% of the annual permit fee set by this
chapter.
   (C)   No permit may be transferred during the pendency of administrative
procedures following notice by the city or its designee to the permittee that
suspension or revocation proceedings have been or will be brought against the
permittee, until the proceedings have been completed, withdrawn or otherwise
canceled.
   (D)   Permittee shall not transfer a permit whether directly, or indirectly
in violation of this section is hereby declared void, and the permit shall be
considered abandoned and shall automatically revert to the city.
(1995 Code, § 5.88.160)
§ 5.88.160   Registration of new employees.
   (A)   As a further condition of approval of every sexually oriented business
permit issued pursuant to this chapter, every owner operator shall register
every employee or independent contractor working on its premises with the
Police Department within five business days of the commencement of the
employee’s period of employment at the sexually oriented business.
   (B)   Each employee/independent contractor shall be required to provide two
recent color passport quality photographs and shall allow himself or herself to
be fingerprinted by the Police Department for purposes of identification. In
addition, each new employee/independent contractor shall provide the following
information on a form provided by the Police Department:
      (1)   Name, current resident address and telephone number;
      (2)   Date of birth;
      (3)   Social Security number;
      (4)   Height, weight, color of eyes and hair; and
      (5)   Stage name (if applicable) and other aliases used within the
previous two years.
   (C)   The information provided for purposes of this section shall be
maintained by the Police Department as confidential information, and shall not
be disclosed as public record unless pursuant to an order issued by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
   (D)   Each owner or operator of a sexually oriented business shall maintain
a current register of names of all employees and independent contractors
currently employed by or working at the sexually oriented business, and shall
disclose such registration for inspection by any designated city representative
for purposes of determining compliance with this section.
   (E)   Failure to register each new employee/ independent contractor within
five days of commencement of employment, or to maintain a current register of
the names of all employees shall be deemed a violation of the conditions of the
permit and may be considered grounds for suspension.
(1995 Code, § 5.88.165) (Ord. 01-1875, passed - -2001)
§ 5.88.170   Business operation.
   (A)   Visibility.
      (1)   The entire interior of an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult
novelty store, adult cabaret, adult video arcade, nude model studio and any
non-conforming sexual encounter establishment and the entire concession area of
an adult motion picture theater or adult theater, the entire common areas of an
adult motel and the entire exhibition area of an adult motion picture theater
or adult theater, shall be visible upon entrance to such areas.
      (2)   Visibility from the entrance shall not be obstructed by any
curtain, door, wall, merchandise rack or any other thing.
      (3)   No partially or fully enclosed booths or partially or fully
concealed booths shall be maintained within the sexually oriented business.
      (4)   No patrons shall be permitted access to any area of the premises
not visible from the entrance.
      (5)   Customers, patrons or visitors of adult arcades shall not be
allowed to stand idly by in the vicinity of any such video booths, or from
remaining in the common area of such business, other than the restrooms, who
are not actively engaged in shopping for or reviewing the products available on
display for purchaser viewing. Signs prohibiting loitering shall be posted in
prominent places in and near the video booths.
      (6)   All areas of the sexually oriented business shall be illuminated at
a minimum of the following foot-candles, minimally maintained and evenly
distributed at ground level:
 
Area                        Foot-Candles
Bookstores and other retail 20
establishments
                            5 (except during performances, at which
Theaters and cabarets       times lighting shall be at least 1.25
                            foot-candles
Arcades                     10
 
      (7)   All off-street parking area and premise entries of the sexually
oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation
with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal
illumination of five foot candles of light on the parking surface and/or
walkways. The required lighting level is established in order to provide
sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the sexually
oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to
reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. The lighting shall be
shown on the required sketch or diagram of the premises.
   (B)   Exceptions to visibility requirements.
      (1)   Section
5.88.170(A) shall not apply to those areas of a sexually oriented business to
which only employees are permitted access and patrons are excluded and which
cannot be viewed from any area accessible to patrons.
      (2)   Section
5.88.170(A) shall not apply to a restroom; however, no restroom shall contain
any merchandise, materials, product, or service referenced in §
5.88.040 above.
   (C)   Private viewing booths or rooms.
      (1)   No viewing room or booth of an adult arcade or adult video arcade
may be occupied by more than one person at any time.
      (2)   The walls or partitions between viewing rooms or booths shall be
maintained in good repair at all times, with no holes between any two such
rooms such as would allow viewing from one booth into another or such as to
allow physical contact of any kind between the occupants of any two such booths
or rooms.
      (3)   The floors, seats, walls and other interior portions of all viewing
rooms or booths shall be maintained clean and free from waste and bodily
secretions.
   (D)   Business hours.
      (1)   A sexually oriented business shall be open only between the hours
of 9:00 a.m. to midnight on any particular day.
      (2)   At all times that any patron is present inside the premises, at
least one manager shall be situated at a location within the premises so as to
allow her or him an obstructed view of the entire area accessible to patrons.
Within those sexually oriented businesses lawfully configured to include more
than one open room accessible to patrons, such as an adult theater with both a
concession area and an exhibition area, or various common areas of an adult
motel, sufficient additional managers shall be present as necessary to allow
management personnel to maintain an unobstructed view of the entirely at all
times of all areas accessible to patrons.
      (3)   Every permittee shall ensure that all employees are familiar with
the provisions of this chapter as amended from time to time and with all other
regulations adopted by the city related to sexually oriented businesses.
   (G)   Required physical modification to premises.
      (1)   Every permittee shall ensure that all employees are familiar with
the provisions of this chapter as amended from time to time and with all other
regulations adopted by the city related to sexually oriented businesses.
      (2)   The reasonable period of time shall normally be 30 days from the
effective date of the ordinance to file the appropriate plans and designs with
the city, and up to 90 days thereafter for completion of the modifications.
      (3)   Every permittee shall ensure that all employees are familiar with
the provisions of this chapter as amended from time to time and with all other
regulations adopted by the city related to sexually oriented businesses.
   (H)   Separate restrooms. The sexually oriented business shall provide and
maintain separate restroom facilities for male patrons and employees, and
female patrons and employees. Male patrons and employees shall be prohibited
from using the restroom(s) for females, and female patrons and employees shall
be prohibited from using the restroom(s) for males, except to carry out duties
of repair, maintenance and cleaning of the restroom facilities. The restroom(s)
shall be free from any adult material. Restroom(s) shall not contain television
monitors or other motion picture or video projection, recording or reproduction
equipment. The foregoing provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to a
sexually oriented business which deals exclusively with sale or rental of adult
material which is not used or consumed on the premises, such as an adult
bookstore or adult video store, and which does not provide restroom facilities
to its patrons or the general public.
   (I)   No alcohol. No alcoholic beverages shall be served or consumed on the
premises of any sexually oriented business.
(1995 Code, § 5.88.170) (Ord. 01-1872, passed - -2001)
§ 5.88.180   Prohibitions regarding minors and sexually oriented businesses.
   It shall be unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he or she
operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of
whether or not a permit has been issued for the business under this chapter,
and knowingly, or with reasonable cause to know, permits, suffers or allows:
   (A)   Admittance of a person under 18 of age to the business premises;
   (B)   A person under 18 years of age to remain at the business premises;
   (C)   A person under 18 years of age to purchase goods or services at the
business premises;
   (D)   A person who is under 18 years of age to work at the businesses
premises as an employee; and
   (E)   The entrance to any sexually oriented business shall be designed in a
manner that obscures the view of the interior of the premises from minors
outside the premises so as to prohibit minors from viewing or seeing any
material, conduct or activities which depict, describe or display “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.
(1995 Code, § 5.88.180) (Ord. 01-1872, passed - -2001)
§ 5.88.190   Display regulations.
   (A)   No display or exhibit depicting or describing “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas” shall be placed in, or at the site
of the subject premises in such a manner as to be visible from the exterior of
the premises.
   (B)   The building entrance to a sexually oriented business shall be clearly
and legibly posted with a notice indicating that persons under 18 years of age
are precluded from entering the premises. The notice shall consist of letters
no less than one inch in height.
   (C)   The building entrance to a sexually oriented business shall be clearly
and legibly posted with a notice indicating that no alcoholic beverages are to
be served or consumed on the premises. The notice shall consist of letters no
less than one inch in height.
   (D)   The building entrance to a sexually oriented business shall be clearly
and legibly posted with a notice indicating business’ hours of operation.
(1995 Code, § 5.88.190) (Ord. 01-1872, passed - -2001)
§ 5.88.200   Additional requirements.
   The following additional requirements shall pertain to sexually oriented
business providing live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or
involving specified sexual activities.
   (A)   No person shall perform live entertainment for patrons of a sexually
oriented business except upon a stage at least 18 inches above the level of the
floor which is separated by a distance of at least ten feet from the nearest
area occupied by patrons, and no patron shall be permitted within ten feet of
the stage while the stage is occupied by an entertainer. ENTERTAINER shall mean
any person who is an  employee or independent contractor of the sexually
oriented business, or any person who, with or without any compensation or other
form of consideration, performs live entertainment for patrons of a sexually
oriented business.
   (B)   The sexually oriented business shall provide separate dressing room
facilities for entertainers which are exclusively dedicated to the
entertainers’ use.
   (C)   The sexually oriented business shall provide an entrance/exit for
entertainers which is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons.
   (D)   The sexually oriented business shall provide access for entertainers
between the stage and dressing rooms which is completely separated from the
patrons. If each separate access is not physically feasible, the sexually
oriented business shall provide a minimum three foot wide walk aisle for
entertainers, between the dressing room area and the stage, with a railing,
fence, or other barrier, separating the patrons and the entertainers, capable
of (and which actually results in) preventing any physical contact between
patrons and entertainers.
   (E)   No entertainer, either before, during or after performances, shall
have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical contact
with any entertainer either before, during or after performances by such
entertainer. This division shall only apply to physical contact on the premises
of the sexually oriented business.
   (F)   Fixed rail(s) at least 30 inches in height shall be maintained
establishing the separations between entertainers and patrons required by this
division.
   (G)   No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any entertainer
and no entertainer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron.
   (H)   No owner or other person with managerial control over a sexually
oriented business (as that term is defined herein) shall permit any person on
the premises of the sexually oriented business to engage in a live showing of
the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a
fully opaque coverage, and/or the female breast with less than a fully opaque
coverage over any part of the areola.
   (I)   Sexually oriented businesses featuring live entertainment shall
provide at least one security guard at all times while the business is open. If
the occupant limit of the premises is greater than 35 persons, an additional
security guard shall be on duty. Additional security guards may be required if
the occupancy limit of the premises is greater than 70 persons. Security guard
(s) shall be charged with preventing violations of law and enforcing compliance
by patrons of the requirements of these regulations. Security guards shall be
uniformed in such a manner so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard
by the public and shall be duly licensed as a security guard as required by
applicable provisions of state law. No security guard required pursuant of this
division shall act as a door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance
person or sole occupant of the manager’s station while acting as a security
guard.
   (J)   The foregoing applicable requirements of this section shall be deemed
conditions of sexually oriented business regulatory permit approvals, and
failure to comply with every such requirement shall be grounds for revocation
of the permit issued pursuant to these regulations.
   (K)   Every permittee of a sexually oriented business which provides live
entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified
sexual activities must maintain a register of all persons so performing on the
premises. The register shall be available for inspection during regular
business hours by any designee by the City of Tulare.
(1995 Code, § 5.88.200) (Ord. 01-1875, passed - -2001; Ord. 01-1872, passed - -
2001)
§ 5.88.210   Exemptions.
   (A)   It is a defense to prosecution for any violation of this chapter that
a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
      (1)   By a college, junior college or university supported entirely or
partly by taxation;
      (2)   By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; and
      (3)   In a structure:
         (a)   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and
no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing;
         (b)   Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll
at least three days in advance of the class; and/or
         (c)   Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one
time.
   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution for a violation of this chapter that an
employee of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not is
permitted under this chapter, exposed any specified anatomical area during the
employee’s bonafide use of a restroom, or during the employee’s bonafide use of
a dressing room which is accessible only to employees.
(1995 Code, § 5.88.210) (Ord. 01-1872, passed - -2001)
§ 5.88.220   Criminal penalties and additional legal, equitable and injunctive
relief.
   (A)   If any person fails or refuses to obey or comply with or violates any
of the provisions of this chapter, the person, upon conviction of the offense,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed
$500 or by imprisonment not to exceed 60 days in the jail, or both, in the
discretion of the court. Each violation or noncompliance shall be considered a
separate and distinct offense. Further, each day of continued violation or
noncompliance shall be considered as a separate offense.
   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent or restrict the city from
taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation or noncompliance Such other lawful actions shall include, but shall
not be limited to, a nuisance abatement proceeding pursuant to
Chapter 7.28 of the Tulare Municipal Code, a civil nuisance abatement or
equitable action for injunctive relief or an action at law for damages in any
court of competent jurisdiction.
   (C)   All remedies and penalties provided for in this chapter shall be
cumulative and independently available to the city, and the city shall be
authorized to pursue any and all remedies set forth in this section to the full
extent allowed by law.
   (D)   The city shall be entitled to recover all attorneys’ fees and costs
incurred in the filing or prosecution of any action or administrative
proceeding brought to enforce any provision(s) of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 5.88.220) (Ord. 01-1872, passed - -2001)
§ 5.88.230   Suspension or revocation of permit.
   (A)   After an investigation, notice and hearing, the City Manager of his or
her designee shall suspend or revoke an existing permit, or impose such
conditions upon the retention of the permit as shall be found to be necessary
to assure the preservation of the public health and safety, if the evidence
presented established that one of the following conditions exists:
      (1)   The building, structure, equipment, location or manner of operation
of such business does not comply with the requirements of or fails to meet the
standards of the health, zoning, fire and safety laws of the State of
California and ordinances of the City of Tulare applicable to such business
operations.
      (2)   The permittee, his or her employee, agent, partner, director,
officer, stockholder or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading or
fraudulent statements of material fact in the application for sexually oriented
business permit, or in any report or record required to be filed with the city
pertaining to the permit for the sexually oriented business, or has violated
any rule or regulation duly adopted by the city relating to sexually oriented
business, including those set out in this chapter.
      (3)   A court of competent jurisdiction has found that the permittee, his
or her employee, agent, partner, director, manager or stockholder has knowingly
engaged in, allowed or permitted to be committed any unlawful act of sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or distribution of
obscenity, on or in the subject premises.
      (4)   A court of competent jurisdiction has found that the permittee, his
or her employee, agent, partner, director, manager or stockholder has knowingly
engaged in, allowed, or permitted or allowed to occur unlawful solicitations
for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or distribution
of obscenity, on or in the subject premises.
      (5)   A court of competent jurisdiction has found that the permittee, his
or her employee, agent, partner, director, manager or stockholder has knowingly
engaged in, or permitted or allowed, in or on the premises, the unlawful
possession, use or sale of a controlled substance, as defined by the California
Uniform Controlled Substance Act, Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 11000 et seq.,
as amended from time to time.
      (6)   More than 30 days have elapsed since a tax, fee, fine, any form of
regulatory assessment or judgement for monetary damages, irrespective of any
other form of relief set out in the judgement, which is to be paid to the city
has been imposed against a sexually oriented business, and the sum remains
owing.
   (B)   In the event that a permit for a sexually oriented business is revoked
pursuant to any applicable law, the premises shall be closed and shall not be
used as a sexually oriented business of any classification for a period of one
year commencing on the date of revocation. Further, the operators of the
sexually oriented business so closed shall be disqualified from operating any
other sexually oriented business established thereafter within the city for a
period of one year commencing on the date that the permit was revoked.
   (C)   In the event that a permit for a sexually oriented business suspended
pursuant to any applicable law, the operators of the subject sexually oriented
business from operating the subject sexually oriented business as well as any
other sexually oriented business established thereafter within the city during
the entire period of such suspension.
(1995 Code, § 5.88.230) (Ord. 01-1872, passed - -2001)
§ 5.88.240   Immunity from prosecution.
   The city and its designee, the Chief of Police’s Office and all other
departments and agencies, and all other city officers, agents and employees,
charged with enforcement of state and local laws and codes shall be immune from
prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good-faith trespass upon a
sexually oriented business while acting within the scope of authority conferred
by this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 5.88.240) (Ord. 01-1872, passed - -2001)
§ 5.88.250   Severability.
   If any section, division, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase in this
chapter or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or
invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, the decision
shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of
this chapter or any part thereof. The City Council hereby declares that it
would have passed each section, division, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more divisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective.
(1995 Code, § 5.88.250) (Ord. 01-1872, passed - -2001)
CHAPTER 5.92: MOBILE VENDING
Section
   
5.92.010   Purpose and findings.
   
5.92.020   Definitions.
   
5.92.030   Permit required.
   
5.92.040   Vendor’s permit required.
   
5.92.050   Operator’s permit required.— Application for operator’s permit;
contracts; required fee.
   
5.92.060   Issuance of permit.
   
5.92.070   Denial of permit.
   
5.92.080   Revocation of permit.
   
5.92.090   Notice of revocation.
   
5.92.100   Appeals.
   
5.92.110   Enforcement.
   
5.92.120   Temporary special events permit.
   
5.92.130   Trash receptacles and removal.
   
5.92.140   Hours of operation.
   
5.92.150   Insurance provisions.
   
5.92.160   Noise level.
   
5.92.170   Prohibited conduct.
   
5.92.180   Pre-existing businesses.
   
5.92.190   Nuisance.
   
5.92.200   Penalty.
   
5.92.210   Exemptions.
   
5.92.220   Severability.
§ 5.92.010   Purpose and findings.
   The City Council of the City of Tulare finds that mobile vending vehicles
pose traffic hazards, public health hazards and impact the safety of residents
within the City of Tulare. The intent of the ordinance is to provide clear and
concise regulations to insure public safety and prevent traffic and health
hazards. This chapter is also intended to preserve the peace, and welfare of
the residents of Tulare.
(1995 Code, § 5.92.010) (Ord. 02-1908, passed 11-19-2002)
§ 5.92.020   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The Police Chief or his or her designee.
   CITY ATTORNEY. The City Attorney or his or her designee.
   FINANCE DIRECTOR/TREASURER. The City Finance Director/Treasurer or his or
her designee.
   GOODS or MERCHANDISE. Includes items and products of every kind and
description, including all foods, produce and beverage items.
   HUMAN POWERED DEVICE. Any device moved by human power including but not
necessarily limited to any pushcart, wagon, bicycle, tricycle, grocery cart or
other wheeled container or conveyance.
   ICE CREAM TRUCK(S) BB. A motor vehicle engaged in the curbside vending or
sale of frozen or refrigerated desserts, confections or novelties commonly
known as ice cream, or prepackaged candies, prepackaged snack foods or soft
drinks.
   MOBILE VENDING VEHICLE. Any vehicle, as defined below, which is equipped or
primarily used for retail sales of fruits, vegetables or produce, and/or
prepared, pre-packaged or unprepared, unpackaged food of any kind on any public
street, alley or highway or private street or alley within the City of Tulare.
The inventory of these vehicles is not necessarily limited to edible items and
may include non-food sundries. A human powered device is not a MOBILE VENDING
VEHICLE.
   MOBILE VENDOR. Any person, as defined in this section, who:
      (1)   Owns, controls, manages and/or leases a vending vehicle; and/or
      (2)   Contracts with a person(s) to drive, operate, prepare foods and/or
vend from a food-vending vehicle.
   OPERATOR. Any and all person(s) who drive, operate, prepare foods and/or
vend from a food-vending vehicle.
   PERMIT. A permit issued by the Police Department, the Fire Department or a
tax certificate issued by the Finance Department.
   PERSON. Any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or
other entity of any kind or nature.
   PLANNING AND BUILDING DIRECTOR. The Director of the Planning and Building
Departments or his or her designee.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any real property, or interest therein, owned, leased,
operated or otherwise controlled by the City of Tulare other than a street,
alley, parkway or sidewalk.
   RESTOCKING. Any transfer of goods or merchandise to a mobile vending vehicle
from any other person or vehicle and includes, but is not limited to loading
and delivery.
   RISK MANAGER. The city’s Risk Manager or his or her designee.
   VEHICLE. Pursuant to Cal. Vehicle Code § 670, vehicle shall mean a device by
which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway,
excepting a device moved exclusively by human power or used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks.
   VEND or VENDING. Soliciting, displaying or offering produce, fruits,
vegetables, prepared food, pre-packaged food or non-food sundries of any kind
for sale or barter or exchange from a vehicle on a public or private street,
alley, highway or public place within the City of Tulare and includes the
movement or standing of a vending vehicle for the purpose of searching for,
obtaining or soliciting retail sales of produce, fruits, vegetables, prepared
food, pre-packaged food or non-food sundries, including but not limited to
goods, wares or merchandise.
   VENDOR. Any person who engages in the act of vending from a vehicle or who
drives or otherwise operates any such vehicle for the purpose of vending
therefrom.
(1995 Code, § 5.92.020) (Ord. 02-1908, passed 11-19-2002)
§ 5.92.030   Permit required.
   No person shall own, control, manage, lease or contract with other persons
for the operation of a vending vehicle in the City of Tulare without the
appropriate valid permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter in
addition to any other license or permit required by the City of Tulare, the
County of Tulare and the State of California.
(1995 Code, § 5.92.030) (Ord. 02-1908, passed 11-19-2002)
§ 5.92.040   Vendor’s permit required.
   (A)   Any person desiring to obtain a vendor’s permit to engage in the
vending of goods or merchandise from a vehicle, or driving of such vehicle
shall, pursuant to this section, submit an application to the city’s Finance
Department. Such application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable
application fee in such amount established by resolution of the City Council.
The permit shall be subject to renewal on a semi-annual basis.
   (B)   An application for a permit under this section shall furnish the
following information and documentation as part of or in conjunction with such
application:
      (1)   The present or proposed address from which the business is or is to
be conducted, including the location for, restocking and overnight parking of
the mobile vending unit;
      (2)   The full and true name under which the business will be conducted;
      (3)   The full and true name and any other names used by the applicant;
      (4)   The present residence address and telephone number of the
applicant;
      (5)   California driver’s license number of the applicant;
      (6)   Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of
age;
      (7)   The applicant’s height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date of
birth;
      (8)   The business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for
the three-year period immediately preceding the date of the application;
      (9)   The permit history of the applicant, for the three-year period
immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including
whether such applicant, in previously operating in this or any other city,
county, state or territory, has ever had any similar license or permit, or
franchise revoked or suspended, and if so, the circumstances of such suspension
or revocation;
      (10)   Written proof of insurance pursuant to requirements of §
5.92.150 of this chapter shall be provided to the City Attorney or Risk
Manager;
      (11)   When any change occurs regarding the written information required
in this chapter, prior to issuance of a permit, the applicant shall give
written notification of the change to the city’s Finance Department within two
weeks after the change; and
      (12)   Where the applicant intends to or owns, operates and drives his or
her own vehicle, an operator’s permit application and permit fee must be
submitted. However an owner-operator need not remit a separate vender’s fee.
(1995 Code, § 5.92.040) (Ord. 02-1908, passed 11-19-2002)
§ 5.92.050   Operator’s permit required— Application for operator’s permit;
contracts; required fee.
   Any person desiring to obtain an operator’s permit to conduct or otherwise
operate the business of vending goods or merchandise from a vehicle pursuant to
this section shall make application to the City Finance Director/Treasurer or
his or her designated representative. The application shall be accompanied by a
non-refundable application fee in an amount as established by resolution of the
City Council. Application fees shall be paid and applications for permit
renewal shall be made on a semi-annual basis. Application fees are non-
refundable. Each applicant for an operator’ s permit shall furnish the
following information and documentation as part of or in conjunction with the
application:
   (A)   The present or proposed address from which the business is to be
conducted;
   (B)   The full and true name under which the business will be conducted;
   (C)   The full and true name and any other names used by the applicant;
   (D)   The present residence and business addresses and telephone numbers of
the applicant;
   (E)   A description of the goods or merchandise, which the business will
vend;
   (F)   The number of vehicles to be owned, operated or controlled by the
applicant and the makes, body styles, years, serial and engine numbers, state
license plate numbers and names and addresses of the registered and/or legal
owners of each vehicle; and
   (G)   A description of the logo, color scheme, insignia and any other
distinguishing characteristics of the applicant’s vehicles.
(1995 Code, § 5.92.050) (Ord. 02-1908, passed 11-19-2002)
§ 5.92.060   Issuance of permit.
   The City of Tulare Finance Department shall issue the vendor’s permit within
14 days after receiving the completed application, providing all of the
following requirements have been met:
   (A)    The required fees have been paid;
   (B)    The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this
section;
   (C)    The applicant has not made a material misrepresentation of fact in
the application;
   (D)    The applicant has not had a similar permit denied or revoked by the
City of Tulare within a period of one year prior to the date of such
application; and
   (E)    The applicant does not have any outstanding debt owed to the City of
Tulare.
(1995 Code, § 5.92.060) (Ord. 02-1908, passed 11-19-2002)
§ 5.92.070   Denial of permit.
   (A)   All conditions of §
9.52.060 must be met before the vender or operator permit is issued. Written
notice of denial will be provided by the City of Tulare and will indicate
grounds for denial. Notice of denial shall be deemed served on the date of
personal service or when the notice is deposited in the United States mail,
postage prepaid, and addressed to the applicant at his or her address as set
forth in the permit application.
   (B)   Any applicant whose application for a vendor’s or operator’s permit
has been denied by the City of Tulare may appeal the denial to the City Manager
by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Manager’s office no later
than ten days following service of this notice of the decision. Notice of
appeal must be accompanied by the appeal fee and is deemed filed with the city
on the date of receipt by the City of Tulare. The appeal fee shall be set by
resolution of the City Council.
   (C)   No person or entity whose permit request is denied on appeal shall be
eligible to re-apply for a period of one year from the date of the denial of
his or her permit request.
(1995 Code, § 5.92.070) (Ord. 02-1908, passed 11-19-2002)
§ 5.92.080   Revocation of permit.
   Any vendor’s or operator’s permit may be revoked by the City of Tulare upon
a showing of good cause. Good cause may be found, but is not limited to, any of
the following:
   (A)   Providing false information as a basis for permit issuance;
   (B)   Failure of the permittee, or any employees or subcontractors of the
permittee, to comply with the regulations set forth in this chapter;
   (C)   Conviction of a violation, or plea of guilty or nolo contendere, by
the permittee, or any employee, subcontractor or independent contractor of the
permittee, of any state law or municipal ordinance while in the course of
conducting vending operations from a vehicle pursuant to the permit; and
   (D)   Conviction of a violation, or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, by
the permittee of any applicable provision or requirement of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 5.92.080) (Ord. 02-1908, passed 11-19-2002)
§ 5.92.090   Notice of revocation.
   (A)   Notification of the permit holder shall be made either by personal
delivery or by regular mail, addressed to the permit holder at the permit
holder’s residence address as set forth on the application for a permit.
Service shall be deemed made on the permit holder on the date personally
delivered or on the date of mailing. A permit holder may appeal the revocation
to the City Manager by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Manager
within ten days following the date of service of the decision and payment of
the appeal fee as prescribed by resolution of the City Council. The date of
filing of the notice of appeal shall be the date the notice and appeal fee are
received by the City of Tulare. If a timely appeal is filed, the revocation
shall be stayed pending the decision of the City Manager. Otherwise the
suspension or revocation shall become effective immediately upon expiration of
the appeal period.
    (B)   No person or entity whose permit is revoked shall be eligible to
apply for a new permit for a period of one year following the revocation.
(1995 Code, § 5.92.080.1) (Ord. 02-1908, passed 11-19-2002)
§ 5.92.100   Appeals.
   Revocation shall not be effective until expiration of the appeal period.
Upon receipt of a timely request for a hearing on appeal, the City Manager or
his or her designated representative shall hear the appeal within 20 days of
the request and shall provide the appellant not less than five-days’ advance
notice of the hearing. The decision of the City Manager shall be based upon
those criteria as set forth in this chapter, which is applicable to the
issuance or revocation of the permit. The appellant shall be notified of the
decision of the City Manager by mailed, written notice. The decision of the
City Manager shall be final. No revocation of a permit pursuant to this chapter
shall be deemed effective during the pendency of a timely filed appeal until
the date of mailing of the City Manager’s decision; provided, however, no
permit holder shall operate during any period of time in which the insurance
coverage required by this chapter is not in full force and effect.
(1995 Code, § 5.92.090) (Ord. 02-1908, passed 11-19-2002)
§ 5.92.110   Enforcement.
   The Planning and Building Director, the Finance Director, the Fire Chief and
the Chief of Police and their designees have the authority to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 5.92.100) (Ord. 02-1908, passed 11-19-2002)
§ 5.92.120   Temporary special events permit.
   Peddlers and vendors wishing to conduct business at any special event shall
apply to the city for a temporary vending license. Application for such a
license must be made at least 30 days prior to the beginning of the event.
Applicants must meet the same application requirements as other peddlers and
vendors. The license is valid only for the duration of the special event.
Peddlers and vendors granted a temporary license are subject to the same
operating regulations as other vendors, except where otherwise specified.
(1995 Code, § 5.92.110) (Ord. 02-1908, passed 11-19-2002)
§ 5.92.130   Trash receptacles and removal.
   (A)   All mobile vending vehicles shall be equipped with refuse receptacles
large enough to contain all refuse generated by the operation of such vehicle.
   (B)   The operator of the mobile vending vehicle shall pick up all refuse
generated by the operation within a 50-foot radius of the vehicle before the
vehicle is moved, all refuse shall be disposed of at an approved solid waste
facility.
(1995 Code, § 5.92.120) (Ord. 02-1908, passed 11-19-2002)
§ 5.92.140   Hours of operation.
   (A)   No vehicle or stand used for vending shall remain on public property
during non-operating hours. Overnight parking of mobile vending vehicle on a
public street or alley is prohibited.
   (B)   No vending shall be permitted by any operator or conducted by a vendor
except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
(1995 Code, § 5.92.130) (Ord. 02-1908, passed 11-19-2002)
§ 5.92.150   Insurance provisions.
   All operations shall have liability insurance in accordance with the laws of
the State of California.
(1995 Code, § 5.92.140) (Ord. 02-1908, passed 11-19-2002)
§ 5.92.160   Noise level.
   (A)   Any use of amplified sound making devices, including vehicle horns, to
advertise, draw attention to, or announce the presence of any such vehicle
shall comply with the limitations and provisions set forth in the Tulare
Municipal Code.
   (B)   Non-amplified sound making devices shall not be used while the vehicle
is stopped, parked or otherwise in a stationary position, on any public street
in an area zoned for residential use within the city. When used in a
residential area, non-amplified sound shall not be audible to a person of
normal sensitivity for a distance of more than 500 feet.
(1995 Code, § 5.92.150) (Ord. 02-1908, passed 11-19-2002)
§ 5.92.170   Prohibited conduct.
   (A)   No person shall vend from a mobile vending unit, except an ice cream
truck, which is stopped, parked or standing on any public street, alley or
highway in any of the following situations:
      (1)   Within 500 feet of any active public school property, park,
playground or recreational facility;
      (2)   Within 300 feet of any other mobile vending vehicle which is
engaged in the operation of vending;
      (3)   Within 100 feet of an intersection (including public alleys);
      (4)   When the posted speed limit on the public street, alley or highway
is greater than 35 mph;
      (5)   When the mobile vending vehicle is parked in violation of any other
provision of this code or the California Vehicle Code;
      (6)   When the mobile vending vehicle is duly registered and licensed by
the State of California with an unladed weight exceeding 6,000 pounds;
      (7)   When service is provided on the mobile vending unit exposed to the
street and/or traffic;
      (8)   When the mobile vending unit is not stopped or parked adjacent to
the right side of the roadway;
      (9)   When the prospective customer is standing or sitting in another
vehicle;
      (10)   When the prospective customer is located in that portion of the
street, alley or highway, which is open to vehicular traffic; or
      (11)   When the mobile vending vehicle is within any parkway, alley,
sidewalk or within a no parking area as defined by Tulare Municipal Code
Chapter 9.48, or other public property.
   (B)   Re-stocking of a mobile vending vehicle is prohibited on a public
street or alley.
   (C)   No mobile vending vehicle shall attach to or receive any utilities
from private or public property.
   (D)   No additional lighting other than that required by the California
Vehicle Code may be installed or operated on a mobile vending vehicle.
   (E)   Mobile vending units may operate on private property (such as
construction sites) for a period of not more than 30 minutes in order to
provide meals/snacks for employees. Mobile vending units are not permitted on
private property for any other purpose.
   (F)   No vehicle shall be parked, stopped or left standing in any manner,
which blocks or impedes vehicular access to any driveway or restricts the free
movement of other vehicles upon the public street.
   (G)   Mobile vending unit operators may not provide tables and/or seating
for their customers.
   (H)   No vehicle shall be parked or stored when not in use in any manner
other than as defined in the California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law, §
114287.
(1995 Code, § 5.92.160) (Ord. 02-1908, passed 11-19-2002)
§ 5.92.180   Pre-existing businesses.
   This section applies to all businesses or activities regardless of when the
business or activity was established. Businesses existing prior to enactment of
this section shall file a completed application for a vendor or operator permit
or tax certificate within 30 days of enactment of the chapter.
(1995 Code, § 5.92.170) (Ord. 02-1908, passed 11-19-2002)
§ 5.92.190   Nuisance.
   Operators of a mobile vending units in any manner contrary to the provisions
of this chapter is unlawful and constitutes a public nuisance. In addition to
or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action, the City Attorney may commence an
action or proceeding for the abatement, or removal of the nuisance as provided
in Title 7 of the Tulare City Code. The City Attorney may also apply to a court
of jurisdiction for abatement or removal of the nuisance, or to restrain or
enjoin operation of a mobile vending unit in a manner contrary to the
provisions of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 5.92.180) (Ord. 02-1908, passed 11-19-2002)
§ 5.92.200   Penalty.
   (A)   Every violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to
be a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment not exceeding six months or by fine
not exceeding $1,000, or by both fine and imprisonment. Notwithstanding the
classification of a violation of this chapter as a misdemeanor, at the time an
action is commenced to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the trial court,
upon recommendation of the City Attorney, may reduce the charged offense from
misdemeanor to an infraction. Any person convicted of an infraction under this
chapter shall be punished by:
      (1)   A fine not exceeding $100 for a first violation;
      (2)   A fine not exceeding $200 for the second violation of this chapter
within one year; and
      (3)   A fine not exceeding $500 for each additional violation of this
chapter within one year.
   (B)   Each day a violation continues shall be regarded as a new and separate
offense.
(1995 Code, § 5.92.190) (Ord. 02-1908, passed 11-19-2002)
§ 5.92.210   Exemptions.
   The requirements of this section shall not apply to:
   (A)   Any person delivering goods or merchandise by vehicle pursuant to an
advance order by a business located at a permanent location, regardless of the
intended point of sale.
   (B)   Any person engaged in vending of goods or merchandise on public
property pursuant to authorization by the City of Tulare. The authorization
shall be premised upon a permit, lease, real property license, agreement or
other entitlements issued by the city for such a purpose.
(1995 Code, § 5.92.200) (Ord. 02-1908, passed 11-19-2002)
§ 5.92.220   Severability.
   If any section, division, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase in this
chapter or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or
invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, the decision
shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of
this chapter or any part thereof. The City Council hereby declares that it
would have passed each section, division, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more divisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective.
(1995 Code, § 5.92.210) (Ord. 02-1908, passed 11-19-2002)
CHAPTER 5.96: COMMERCIAL CANNABIS BUSINESSES
Section
   
5.96.010   Purpose.
   
5.96.020   Cannabis permitted uses and zoning.
   
5.96.030   Commercial cannabis business minimum operational requirements and
restrictions.
   
5.96.040   Mobile deliveries and business license.
   
5.96.050   Regulatory permit and retail license required.
   
5.96.060   Employee permit required.
   
5.96.070   Application fees.
   
5.96.080   Investigation and action on application.
   
5.96.090   Term of permits and renewals.
   
5.96.100   Grounds for denial of regulatory permit.
   
5.96.110   Grounds for denial of employee permit.
   
5.96.120   Notice of decision and final action.
   
5.96.130   Suspension and revocation of regulatory permit or employee permit.
   
5.96.140   Effect of denial or revocation.
   
5.96.150   Abandonment.
   
5.96.160   Water availability.
   
5.96.170   Other licenses, permits, taxes, fees, or charges.
   
5.96.180   Violation deemed misdemeanor.
   
5.96.190   Actions to collect.
   
5.96.200   Severability.
   
5.96.210   Remedies cumulative.
   
5.96.220   Amendment or repeal.
   
5.96.230   Penalties.
   
5.96.240   Definitions.
   
5.96.250   Packaging, design and marketing.
§ 5.96.010   Purpose.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this chapter to allow retail sales, with a
regulatory permit and a retail license, of recreational and medicinal cannabis
from persons or entities that are duly licensed and authorized under state and
local law in the City of Tulare.
   (B)   Manufacturing, cultivation, distribution, or any other activity
required to have a state license, besides a retail license, is not permitted in
any zone within the city.
(1995 Code, § 5.96.010) (Ord. 19-12, passed 4-21-2020; Ord. 17-11, passed 12-
19-2017; Ord. 15-13, passed 1-19-2016; Ord. 05-1998, passed - -2005)
§ 5.96.020   Cannabis permitted uses and zoning.
   Retail sales shall only be allowed in a storefront, in an area zoned C-4 or
C-3, at least 600 feet away from any school, or any other cannabis storefront,
and in compliance with all other state and local laws. (See Title 10 for zoning
designations.) No distinction shall be made between medicinal and recreational
storefronts in this chapter.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 10-5-2021; Ord. 19-12, passed 4-21-2020)
§ 5.96.030   Commercial cannabis business minimum operational requirements and
restrictions.
   The following operational requirements and restrictions shall apply to all
commercial cannabis businesses:
   (A)   State law. The commercial cannabis business shall at all times be in
compliance with state law and the implementing regulations, as they may be
amended from time to time, as well as all required state licenses under state
law, and any other applicable state law. The operator shall obtain required
licenses under state law prior to opening for business. If the operator uses
the approved cannabis operations for commercial recreational cannabis, the
operator shall meet or exceed the health and safety requirements of state law
in any operations relating to recreational cannabis.
   (B)   Register of employees. The operator shall maintain a current register
of the names of persons required to have employee permits. The register shall
be available to the City Manager or their designee at all times, and
immediately upon request.
   (C)   Signage. Signage which advertises the business shall be allowed.
However, there shall be no signage, markings, text, logos, artwork, etc., on
the premises, or off-site, which in any way evidences that commercial cannabis
businesses are occurring on the property. Interior building signage evidencing
commercial cannabis business is occurring on the property is permissible
provided the signage is not visible outside of the building. Signage must
comply with all other city requirements for signage.
   (D)   Cannabis consumption. No cannabis shall be smoked, ingested or
otherwise consumed on the premises. Adequate signage of this prohibition shall
be displayed throughout the facility.
   (E)   Alcoholic beverages. Alcohol for personal consumption shall not be
provided, stored, kept, located, sold, dispensed, or used on the premises.
   (F)   Distribution. Distribution of cannabis into city limits to a cannabis
business shall be conducted according to state law.
   (G)   Minors. It shall be unlawful for any operator to employ any person who
is not at least 21 years of age, or any older age if set by the state.
   (H)   Distance separation from schools and residences. Commercial cannabis
business shall comply with the distance separation requirements from residences
and schools as required by state law. In addition, a cannabis operation shall
not be located within 600 feet from any existing residence, school, or proposed
school site as identified in the general plan. Measurements shall be from
property boundary to property boundary. For purposes of this section, school
means any public or private school providing instruction in kindergarten or
grades 1 through 12, inclusive, but does not include any private school in
which education is primarily conducted in private homes.
   (I)   Hours of operation. Commercial cannabis operations shall be allowed to
operate between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Deliveries to the commercial cannabis
business may only take place, and must be completed, during regular business
hours.
   (J)   Building and related codes. Commercial cannabis operations shall be
subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   The premises in which the cannabis business occurs shall comply
with all applicable local, state and federal laws, rules, and regulations
including, but not limited to, building codes and the Americans with
Disabilities Act, as certified by the Building Official of the city. The
operator shall obtain all required building permits and comply with all
applicable city standards.
      (2)   The responsible party shall ensure that the premises has sufficient
electrical load for the storage of cannabis. The use of generators is
prohibited other than for temporary emergency use.
      (3)   Employee training records and safety equipment must be maintained,
and all equipment must be compliant with state safety regulations in §§ 40100
through 41099, as they may be amended. The Tulare Police Department shall
inspect and approve the premises for use of the products prior to city's
issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or otherwise prior to opening for
business, to ensure compliance with this requirement.
   (K)   Odor control. Cannabis businesses shall provide a sufficient odor
absorbing ventilation and exhaust system so that odor generated inside the
facility that is distinctive to its operation is not detected outside the
premises, outside the building housing the cannabis business, or anywhere on
adjacent property or public rights-of-way. As such, Cannabis businesses must
install and maintain the following equipment or any other equipment which the
City Building Official determines has the same or better effectiveness, if a
smell extends beyond a property line:
      (1)   An exhaust air filtration system with odor control that prevents
internal odors and pollen from being emitted externally; or
      (2)   An air system that creates negative air pressure between the
cannabis facility's interior and exterior so that the odors generated inside
the cannabis facility are not detectable outside the cannabis facility.
   (L)   Secure building. All commercial cannabis operations shall occur
entirely inside of a building that shall be secure, locked, and fully enclosed,
with a ceiling, roof or top. The building shall include a burglar alarm
monitored by an alarm company or private security company. The building,
including all walls, doors, and the roof, shall be of solid construction
meeting the minimum building code requirements for industrial structures
(including, without limitation, commercial greenhouse structures), and include
material strong enough to prevent entry except through an open door.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the roof may be of solid translucent material
provided other security measures exist to ensure that the cannabis operation
cannot be seen, heard or smelled beyond the property line. The precise building
construction and material to be used shall be identified and provided to the
city prior to construction and provided with the application.
   (M)   Premises security. The City Council shall set premises security
requirements by resolution and the Chief of Police shall enforce.
(Ord. 19-12, passed 4-21-2020)
§ 5.96.040   Mobile deliveries and business license.
   (A)   Mobile deliveries from a commercial cannabis business with a
regulatory permit shall be allowed within the city limits. Commercial cannabis
businesses located outside of city limits and who deliver into the city limits
must obtain a City of Tulare business license and pay all appropriate fees and
taxes when due.
   (B)   All deliveries shall be conducted in accordance with regulations and
standards approved by the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 19-12, passed 4-21-2020)
§ 5.96.050   Regulatory permit and retail license required.
   (A)   All commercial cannabis businesses shall be required to have a
regulatory permit issued by the City of Tulare and a retail license issued by
the state. The City Council may set additional regulatory permit requirements
by resolution and the Chief of Police shall enforce said regulations.
   (B)   The total number of regulatory permits issued shall be no more than
five. The City Manager shall develop an application process for issuance of
regulatory permits.
   (C)   Any commercial cannabis businesses in operation at the time of
enactment of this section shall be required to comply with this chapter in
order to sell recreational cannabis.
   (D)   Regulatory permits are granted to, and are held in the name of, the
responsible party. Regulatory permits are not transferrable or assignable.
(Ord. 19-12, passed 4-21-2020)
§ 5.96.060   Employee permit required.
   (A)   Every employee or independent contractor working at a commercial
cannabis business or involved in transportation/delivery related services for a
cannabis business shall obtain an employee permit. It shall be the duty of the
commercial cannabis business to ensure that employee permits are obtained from
the Tulare Police Department prior to the employee or independent contractor
commencing work. Persons who are listed as a business owner on a regulatory
permit shall not be required to obtain an employee permit if such person also
serves as an employee or contractor. All responsible parties, except the
business owner, shall be required to obtain an employee permit.
   (B)   Each employee and independent contractor shall be required to provide
the following information under penalty of perjury, so that the Tulare Police
Department can perform a background check:
      (1)   Name, current resident address, and telephone number;
      (2)   Date of birth;
      (3)   Tax identification number;
      (4)   Height, weight, color of eyes, and hair;
      (5)   Photographs for identification purposes;
      (6)   Be fingerprinted by the Police Department;
      (7)   Such other identification and information as deemed necessary by
the Chief of Police and pertinent to the employee permit;
      (8)   Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek
verification of the information contained within the application;
      (9)   The name of the business owner holding the regulatory permit and
the operator for which such person is proposed to work.
(Ord. 19-12, passed 4-21-2020)
§ 5.96.070   Application fees.
   Every new application for a regulatory permit, employee permit, or renewal
shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee, as established by resolution of
City Council. This fee shall be in addition to any other business license, tax,
or permit fee imposed by this code or other governmental agencies. The fee
shall include an amount to cover the costs of fingerprinting, photographing,
background checks as well as general ongoing monitoring for compliance and
processing of the application.
(Ord. 19-12, passed 4-21-2020)
§ 5.96.080   Investigation and action on application.
   (A)   Upon the filing of a properly completed application for a regulatory
or employee permit and the payment of the fee, the Chief of Police shall
conduct an investigation of the application, including a background check of
the applicant and all employees and independent contractors. All applicants for
a regulatory permit and employee permit shall be required to submit to a
fingerprint-based criminal history records check conducted by the Tulare Police
Department.
   (B)   For regulatory permits, after the background checks and investigation
are complete, and in no case later than 90 days after receipt of a properly
completed application, the city shall issue a recommendation that the City
Council approve or deny a regulatory permit in accordance with the provisions
of this section. The recommendation for approval shall include conditions the
city deems reasonable under the circumstances to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare of the community. The recommendation shall be forwarded to
the City Council for action following any required noticing and public hearings
and may be processed concurrently with any other entitlements necessary for the
cannabis operation.
   (C)   For employee permits, after the background checks and investigation
are complete, and in no case later than 30 days after receipt of a properly
completed application, the Chief of Police shall either approve or deny an
employee permit. At the discretion of the Chief of Police, employee permits may
be conditionally approved pending the background investigation.
(1995 Code, § 5.96.080) (Ord. 19-12, passed 4-21-2020; Ord. 17-11, passed 12-
19-2017; Ord. 15-13, passed 1-19-2016; Ord. 05-1998, passed - -2005)
§ 5.96.090   Term of permits and renewals.
   Regulatory and employee permits issued under this chapter shall expire on
December 31 each year. Applications for renewal shall be made at least 45 days
prior to the expiration date of the permit and shall be accompanied by the
nonrefundable fee referenced in this chapter. When made less than 45 days
before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit will not be stayed.
Applications for renewal shall be acted on similar to applications for permits
except that the Chief of Police shall renew annual permits for additional one-
year periods if the circumstances and information provided with the initial
application have not materially changed. Fees, or portions thereof, shall not
be adjusted on a pro-rata basis.
(Ord. 19-12, passed 4-21-2020)
§ 5.96.100   Grounds for denial of regulatory permit.
   The grounds for denial of a regulatory permit shall be one or more of the
following:
   (A)   The business or conduct of the business at a particular location is
prohibited by any local or state law, statute, rule or regulation.
   (B)   The business owner or operator has been issued a local or state permit
related to cannabis operations at any other location in California, or another
state, and that permit was suspended or revoked, or the business owner or
operator has had disciplinary action relating to the permit.
   (C)   The business owner or operator has knowingly made a false statement of
material fact or has knowingly omitted to state a material fact in the
application.
   (D)   Consistent with state law or other applicable state law, the business
owner or operator, or any responsible person has:
      (1)   Been convicted of a serious or violent offense as listed under Cal.
Penal Code §§ 667.5 and 1192.7(c);
      (2)   Been convicted of any of the offenses listed in Cal. Business and
Professions Code § 19323;
      (3)   Been convicted of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude as
defined under state law (generally crimes relating to theft and dishonesty)
within the five years preceding the date of the application;
      (4)   Been convicted of a felony involving the illegal use, possession,
transportation, distribution or similar activities related to controlled
substances, as defined in the Federal Controlled Substances Act, unless the
individual has received a certificate of rehabilitation as defined in the act;
or
      (5)   Engaged in misconduct related to the qualifications, functions or
duties of a permittee, such as lying on an application, falsifying legal
documents, or anything that would otherwise ban the permittee from obtaining a
state license under state law.
   (E)   Consistent with state law or other applicable state law, the business
owner or operator has engaged in unlawful, fraudulent, unfair, or deceptive
business acts or practices.
   (F)   The business owner or operator is under 21 years of age, or any older
other age set by the state.
   (G)   The cannabis operation does not comply with the zoning ordinance
standards of the City of Tulare or the development standards set forth in this
title.
   (H)   The required annual business license fee, annual regulatory fee or
revenue raising fee has not been paid.
   (I)   The number of regulatory permits authorized by this chapter has been
reached.
(1995 Code, § 5.96.090) (Ord. 19-12, passed 4-21-2020; Ord. 17-11, passed 12-
19-2017; Ord. 15-13, passed 1-19-2016; Ord. 05-1998, passed - -2005)
§ 5.96.110   Grounds for denial of employee permit.
   The grounds for denial of an employee permit shall be one or more of the
following:
   (A)   The applicant has been issued a local or state permit related to
cannabis production at any other location in California, or another state, and
that permit was suspended or revoked, or the applicant has had disciplinary
action relating to the permit.
   (B)   Consistent with state law or other applicable law, the applicant has
been:
      (1)   Convicted of a serious or violent offense as listed under Cal.
Penal Code §§ 667.5 and 1192.7(c);
      (2)   Convicted of any of the offenses listed in Cal. Business and
Professions Code § 19323;
      (3)   Convicted of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude as defined
under State law (generally crimes relating to theft and dishonesty) within the
five years preceding the date of the application;
      (4)   Convicted of a felony involving the illegal use, possession,
transportation, distribution or similar activities related to controlled
substances, as defined in the Federal Controlled Substances Act, unless the
individual has received a certificate of rehabilitation as defined in state
law; or has engaged in misconduct related to the qualifications, functions or
duties of a permittee.
   (C)   Consistent with state law or other applicable state law, the applicant
has engaged in unlawful, fraudulent, unfair, or deceptive business acts or
practices.
   (D)   The applicant has committed any act, which, if done by a permittee,
would be grounds for suspension or revocation of a permit.
   (E)   An applicant is under 21 years of age, or any older age set by the
state.
(Ord. 19-12, passed 4-21-2020)
§ 5.96.120   Notice of decision and final action.
   (A)   Regulatory permit. Action on the regulatory permit shall be as
follows:
      (1)   The Chief of Police shall cause a written notice of his or her
recommendation on the issuance or denial of a regulatory permit, and the date
and time when the City Council will consider action on the regulatory permit,
to be personally delivered or mailed to the applicant by certified United
States mail, postage prepaid.
      (2)   Following a public hearing before the City Council, the Council may
grant the regulatory permit subject to such conditions as it deems reasonable
under the circumstances to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of
the community, or it may deny the issuance of the regulatory permit for any of
the grounds specified in this section. The decision of the Council shall be
final, subject to judicial review.
   (B)   Employee permit. Action on the employee permit shall be as follows:
The Chief of Police shall cause a written notice of his or her determination on
the issuance or denial of an employee permit to be personally delivered or
mailed to the applicant by certified United States mail, postage prepaid. The
Chief of Police decision on an employee permit shall be final, subject to
judicial review.
(Ord. 19-12, passed 4-21-2020)
§ 5.96.130   Suspension and revocation of regulatory permit or employee permit.
   (A)   Regulatory permit. The City Council may suspend or revoke the
regulatory permit of a commercial cannabis operation when any of the following
occur:
      (1)   The cannabis operation is conducted in violation of any provision
of this chapter, state law, or any other applicable state law;
      (2)   The cannabis operation is conducted in such a manner as to create a
public or private nuisance;
      (3)   A failure to pay the regulatory fee or revenue raising fee required
by this section;
      (4)   A failure to take reasonable measures to control patron conduct,
where applicable, resulting in disturbances, vandalism, or crowd control
problems occurring inside of or outside the premises, traffic control problems,
or obstruction of the operation of another business;
      (5)   A failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the regulatory
permit;
      (6)   Any act which would be considered grounds for denial of the
regulatory permit in the first instance.
   (B)   Employee permit. The Chief of Police may suspend or revoke an employee
permit when the permittee or the employee has committed any one or more of the
following acts:
      (1)   Any act which would be considered a ground for denial of the permit
in the first instance;
      (2)   Violates any provision of this chapter, state law, or any other
applicable law relating to the cannabis operation;
      (3)   Violates or fails to comply with the terms and conditions of the
employee permit.
   (C)   Procedures for revoking regulatory permits. For regulatory permits,
the procedures and timelines for revoking a permit shall be the same as stated
inChapter 10.70 of this code, except that all matters shall be heard by the
City Council in the first instance, and there shall be no further appeal
following the City Council's decision.
   (D)   Procedures for revoking employee permits. Prior to suspension or
revocation of an employee permit, the Chief of Police shall conduct a hearing.
Written notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be served upon the
permittee at least five calendar days prior to the date set for such hearing.
The notice shall contain a brief statement of the grounds to be relied upon for
revoking or suspending the permit. Notice may be given either by personal
delivery or by certified United States mail, postage prepaid. Any permittee
aggrieved by the decision of the Chief of Police in suspending or revoking an
employee permit shall have no appeal rights and the Chief of Police decision
shall be final, subject to judicial review as set forth in this section.
   (E)   Immediate suspension. The Chief of Police may immediately suspend or
revoke a regulatory permit and an employee permit without notice or a hearing,
subject to the appeal rights set forth herein, under either of the following
circumstances:
      (1)   The business owner or operator is convicted of a public offense in
any court for the violation of any law which relates to the cannabis operation,
or in the case of an employee permit, the employee is convicted of a public
offense in any court for the violation of any law which relates to the permit.
      (2)   The Chief of Police determines that immediate suspension is
necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the community.
The Chief of Police shall articulate the grounds for the immediate suspension
in writing and the suspension shall only be for as long as necessary to address
the circumstances which led to the immediate suspension.
(1995 Code, § 5.96.110) (Ord. 19-12, passed 4-21-2020; Ord. 17-11, passed 12-
19-2017; Ord. 15-13, passed 1-19-2016; Ord. 05-1998, passed - -2005)
§ 5.96.140   Effect of denial or revocation.
   When the City Council shall have denied a regulatory permit or revoked a
regulatory permit, or the Chief of Police shall have denied or revoked an
employee permit, no new application for a regulatory permit and no new
application for an employee permit shall be accepted and no regulatory permit
or employee permit shall be issued to such person or to any corporation in
which he or she shall have any beneficial interest for a period of one year
after denying or revoking the regulatory permit or employee permit.
(1995 Code, § 5.96.130) (Ord. 19-12, passed 4-21-2020; Ord. 17-11, passed 12-
19-2017; Ord. 15-13, passed 1-19-2016; Ord. 05-1998, passed - -2005)
§ 5.96.150   Abandonment.
   In addition to the suspension or revocation of a regulatory permit, a
regulatory permit shall be deemed abandoned if cannabis business ceases for a
period of more than 90 consecutive days. Before restarting operations, a new
regulatory permit shall be secured. The 90-day period shall be tolled during
periods of force majeure, which shall be defined as follows: war; insurrection;
strikes; lock-outs; riots; floods; earthquakes; fires; casualties; supernatural
causes; acts of the "public enemy"; epidemics; quarantine restrictions; freight
embargoes; lack of transportation; unusually severe weather; inability to
secure necessary labor, materials or tools; delays of any contractor,
subcontractor or supplier; or any other causes beyond the reasonable control of
the permittee.
(Ord. 19-12, passed 4-21-2020)
§ 5.96.160   Water availability.
   As a condition of opening for business, the premises owner, business owner,
operator, and all responsible parties shall be deemed to have acknowledged and
agreed to the following if the cannabis operation is connected to the city's
water system:
   (A)   The city cannot provide any guarantees that city water will be
available for operations. Under circumstance where the city cannot or elects to
not provide water, the cannabis operation may be required to find alternative
sources of water supply. The premises owner, business owner, and operator
assume all risk associated with water supply to the site, including all costs
associated therewith.
   (B)   The premises owner, business owner, operator, and all responsible
parties shall hold harmless, release, indemnify, and defend the city, its
officers, employees, and agents, from any liability associated with the
curtailment of water because of the foregoing. This release includes any
damages to the premises owner, business owner, operator, and all responsible
parties, its employees and contractors, and third parties, and includes the
risk of lost revenue, profits and consequential damages.
   (C)   If the premises owner, business owner, operator, or responsible party
procures their own source of water they must comply with all state and federal
water reporting laws and procedures.
(Ord. 19-12, passed 4-21-2020)
§ 5.96.170   Other licenses, permits, taxes, fees, or charges.
   Except as expressly provided in this chapter, nothing contained in this
chapter shall be deemed to repeal, amend, be in lieu of, replace or in any way
affect any requirements for any permit or license required by, under or by
virtue of any provision of any other title or chapter of this code or any other
ordinance or resolution of the city, nor be deemed to repeal, amend, be in lieu
of, replace or in any way affect any tax, fee or other charge imposed, assessed
or required by, under or by virtue of any other title or chapter of this code
or any other ordinance or resolution of the city. Any references made or
contained in any other title or chapter of this code to any permits, licenses,
taxes, fees, or charges, or to any schedule of license fees, shall be deemed to
refer to the permits, licenses, taxes, fees or charges, or schedule of license
fees, provided for in other titles or chapters of the Tulare City Code unless
otherwise expressly provided.
(Ord. 19-12, passed 4-21-2020)
§ 5.96.180   Violation deemed misdemeanor.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or who other than by a
sworn statement, knowingly or intentionally misrepresents to any officer or
employee of the city any material fact herein required to be provided is guilty
of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in § 5.04.490 of this code. A person
who on a sworn statement states as true a material fact that he or she knows to
be false is guilty of perjury.
(1995 Code, § 5.96.190) (Ord. 19-12, passed 4-21-2020; Ord. 17-11, passed 12-
19-2017; Ord. 15-13, passed 1-19-2016; Ord. 05-1998, passed - -2005)
§ 5.96.190   Actions to collect.
   The amount of any tax, fee, penalty and/or interest imposed pursuant to this
chapter shall be deemed a debt owed to the city. An action may be commenced in
the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction, for the amount of
any delinquent tax, fees, penalties and interest thereon.
(Ord. 19-12, passed 4-21-2020)
§ 5.96.200   Severability.
   If any provision of this chapter, or its application to any person or
circumstance, is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be
unlawful, unenforceable or otherwise void, that determination shall have no
effect on any other provision of this chapter or the application of this
chapter to any other person or circumstance and, to that end, the provisions
hereof are severable.
(1995 Code, § 5.96.200) (Ord. 19-12, passed 4-21-2020; Ord. 17-11, passed 12-
19-2017; Ord. 15-13, passed 1-19-2016; Ord. 05-1998, passed - -2005)
§ 5.96.210   Remedies cumulative.
   All remedies prescribed under this chapter shall be cumulative and the use
of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy
for the purpose of enforcing the provisions hereof.
(Ord. 19-12, passed 4-21-2020)
§ 5.96.220 Amendment or repeal.
   This chapter may be repealed or amended by ordinance of the Tulare City
Council.
(Ord. 19-12, passed 4-21-2020)
§ 5.96.230 Penalties.
   Any entity that fails to pay the fees required by this chapter within 15
days after the due date shall pay in addition to the taxes a penalty for
nonpayment in the sum equal to 25% of the total amount due. Additional
penalties will be assessed in the following manner: 10% shall be added on the
first day of each calendar month following the month of the imposition of the
25% penalty if the fee remains unpaid—up to a maximum of 100% of the fee
payable on the due date. Receipt of the fee payment by the city shall govern
the determination of whether the fee is delinquent. Postmarks will not be
accepted as adequate proof of a timely payment.
(Ord. 19-12, passed 4-21-2020)
§ 5.96.240 Definitions.
The following definitions apply to this chapter:
   APPLICANT. A person who is required to file an application for a permit
under this chapter.
   BUSINESS OWNER. The owner(s) of the cannabis business. For publicly traded
companies, owner means the chief executive officer or any person or entity with
an aggregate ownership interest of 5% or more. For all other businesses, other
than publicly traded companies, an owner is an individual that has an aggregate
ownership of interest other than a lien or encumbrance, of 20% or more in the
commercial cannabis business.
   CANNABIS. All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica,
or Cannabis ruderalis, or any other strain or varietal of the genus Cannabis
that may exist or hereafter be discovered or developed that has psychoactive or
medicinal properties, whether growing or not, including the seeds thereof.
CANNABIS also means 1) CANNABIS as defined by § 11018 of the Cal. Health and
Safety Code as enacted by Chapter 1407 of the Statutes of 1972, and amended by
the California Control, Regulate and Tax Adult Use of Cannabis Initiative; 2)
INDUSTRIAL HEMP as defined by § 11018.5 of the Cal. Health and Safety Code; and
3) CANNABIS as defined by other applicable state law. CANNABIS shall not mean
cannabidiol (CBD) or hemp products (of 0.03% per weight or less of THC), such
as creams or lotions, so long as those products cannot be inhaled, or
manufactured as edible food products.
   CANNABIS BUSINESS or CANNABIS INDUSTRY. Any business activity in the city
relating to cannabis, including but not limited to cultivation (including
nurseries), transportation, distribution, manufacture, compounding, conversion,
processing, preparation, testing, storage, packaging, delivery and sales
(wholesale and/or retail sales) of cannabis or cannabis products, whether or
not carried on for gain or profit. A cannabis business does not include any
business whose only relationship to cannabis or cannabis products is the
production or sale of cannabis accessories.
   CANNABIS CULTIVATION AREA. The total aggregate area(s) of cannabis
cultivation by a cannabis business as measured around the outermost perimeter
of each separate and discrete area of cannabis cultivation at the dripline of
the canopy expected at maturity and includes, but is not limited to, the space
between plants within the cultivation area, the exterior dimensions of garden
beds, garden plots, hoop houses, green houses, and each room or area where
cannabis plants are grown, excluding non-production areas, as determined by the
City Manager or his or her designee.
   CANNABIS PRODUCT. Any product containing cannabis, including, but not
limited to, flowers, buds, oils, tinctures, concentrates, extractions, edibles
and those products described in § 11018.1 of the Cal. Health and Safety Code.
   CANOPY. All areas occupied by any portion of a cannabis plant, inclusive of
all vertical planes, whether the areas are contiguous or noncontiguous. The
plant canopy need not be contained to a single parcel of land in determining
the total square footage that will be subject to tax under this chapter. If
mature plants are being cultivated using a shelving system, the surface area of
each level shall be included in the total canopy calculation.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The Chief of the Tulare Police Department or his or her
designee.
   CITY. The City of Tulare, either the entity or its territorial limits, as
the context requires.
   CITY COUNCIL or COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Tulare.
   COLLECTOR. The city's Director of Finance or Chief Financial Officer or his
or her designee.
   COMMERCIAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION. Cultivation conducted by, for, or as part
of a cannabis business. Commercial cannabis cultivation does not include
personal medical cannabis cultivation, or cultivation for personal recreational
use as authorized under the Control, Regulate and Tax Adult Use of Marijuana
Act approved by the state's voters on November 8, 2016, for which the
individual receives no compensation whatsoever.
   COMMERCIAL CANNABIS BUSINESS or CANNABIS BUSINESS or CANNABIS OPERATION. Any
commercial cannabis activity allowed under state law and the implementing
regulations, as state law and the implementing regulations may be amended from
time to time, and all uses permitted under any subsequently enacted state law
pertaining to the same or similar uses for recreational cannabis.
   CANNABIS OPERATOR. The person or persons responsible for the commercial
cannabis business regardless of the type of entity; e.g. partnership,
corporation, etc.
   CANNABIS PRODUCTION. The processes associated with the processing,
extraction, manufacturing, testing, distribution and transportation of medical
and non-medical cannabis products.
   COMMERCIAL CANNABIS REGULATORY PERMIT or REGULATORY PERMIT. The permit
required under this chapter to have a cannabis business.
   COMMINGLING. The physical aggregation of harvest batches or nonmanufactured
cannabis products by a licensee.
   CULTIVATION. Any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting,
drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis. CULTIVATION also includes
nurseries. In addition, and without limiting the foregoing, CULTIVATION
includes CULTIVATION as defined in Cal. Business and Professions Code § 19300.5
and any successor statute, as may be adopted and amended from time to time.
   DELIVERY. The commercial transfer of marijuana cannabis or marijuana
cannabis products to a customer. DELIVERY also includes the use by a retailer
of any technology platform owned and controlled by the retailer, or
independently licensed under this chapter, that enables customers to arrange
for or facilitate the commercial transfer by a licensed retailer of marijuana
or marijuana products.
   DELIVERY EMPLOYEE. An individual employed by a licensed dispensary who
delivers cannabis goods from the licensed dispensary premises to a physical
address.
   DISPENSARY. A facility where cannabis or cannabis products, are offered,
either individually or in combination, for retail sale, including an
establishment that engages in delivery of cannabis or cannabis products as part
of a retail sale. In addition, and without limiting the foregoing, DISPENSARY
includes DISPENSARY as defined in Cal. Business and Professions Code § 19300.5
and any successor statute, as may be adopted or amended from time to time.
   DISTRIBUTOR. A person engaged in procuring cannabis from a cultivator, and/
or procuring cannabis products from a manufacturer, for sale to a licensed
commercial cannabis business. In addition, and without limiting the foregoing,
DISTRIBUTOR includes DISTRIBUTOR as defined in Cal. Business and Professions
Code § 19300.5 and any successor statute, as may be adopted or amended from
time to time.
   DISTRIBUTION. The procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis or cannabis
products between licensees.
   EMPLOYEE. Each and every person engaged in the operation or conduct of any
cannabis business, whether as owner, member of the owner's family, partner,
associate, agent, manager or solicitor, and each and every other person
employed or working in such cannabis business for a wage, salary, commission,
barter or any other form of compensation.
   GROSS RECEIPTS. Except as otherwise specifically provided, means, whether
designated a sales price, royalty, rent, commission, dividend, or other
designation, the total amount (including all receipts, cash, credits and
property of any kind or nature) received or payable for sales of goods, wares
or merchandise or for the performance of any act or service of any nature for
which a charge is made or credit allowed (whether such service, act or
employment is done as part of or in connection with the sale of goods, wares,
merchandise or not), without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of
the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or service costs, interest
paid or payable, losses or any other expense whatsoever. However, the following
shall be excluded from GROSS RECEIPTS:
      (1)   Cash discounts where allowed and taken on sales;
      (2)   Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase
price and collected from the consumer or purchaser;
      (3)   Such part of the sale price of any property returned by purchasers
to the seller as refunded by the seller by way of cash or credit allowances or
return of refundable deposits previously included in gross receipts;
      (4)   Receipts derived from the occasional sale of used, obsolete or
surplus trade fixtures, machinery or other equipment used by the taxpayer in
the regular course of the taxpayer's business;
      (5)   Cash value of sales, trades or transactions between departments or
units of the same business;
      (6)   Whenever there are included within the gross receipts amounts which
reflect sales for which credit is extended and such amount proved uncollectible
in a subsequent year, those amounts may be excluded from the gross receipts in
the year they prove to be uncollectible; provided, however, if the whole or
portion of such amounts excluded as uncollectible are subsequently collected
they shall be included in the amount of gross receipts for the period when they
are recovered;
      (7)   Receipts of refundable deposits, except that such deposits when
forfeited and taken into income of the business shall not be excluded when in
excess of one dollar;
      (8)   Amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an
agent or trustee and to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom
collected. These agents or trustees must provide the finance department with
the names and the addresses of the others and the amounts paid to them. This
exclusion shall not apply to any fees, percentages, or other payments retained
by the agent or trustees;
      (9)   Retail sales of t-shirts, sweaters, hats, stickers, key chains,
bags, books, posters or other personal tangible property which the Tax
Administrator has excluded in writing by issuing an administrative ruling per §
5.98.140 shall not be subject to the cannabis business tax under this chapter.
However, any retail sales not subject to this chapter as a result of the
administrative ruling shall be subject to the appropriate business tax under
Chapter 5.08 or any other chapter or title as determined by the Tax
Administrator.
   INDOOR CULTIVATION. The cultivation of cannabis within a structure using
artificial light, at a rate greater than 25 watts per square foot.
   MANUFACTURER. A person who conducts the production, preparation,
propagation, or compounding of cannabis or cannabis products either directly or
indirectly or by extraction methods, or independently by means of chemical
synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis, or that
packages or repackages cannabis or cannabis products or labels or relabels its
container. In addition, and without limiting the foregoing, MANUFACTURER
includes MANUFACTURER as defined in Cal. Business and Professions Code §
19300.5 and any successor statute, as may be adopted or amended from time to
time.
   MIXED-LIGHT CULTIVATION. The cultivation of cannabis using light deprivation
and/or artificial lighting below a rate of 25 watts per square foot.
   NURSERY. A person who produces cannabis clones, immature plants, and/or
seeds for wholesale distribution, used specifically for the planting,
propagation, and cultivation of cannabis. In addition, and without limiting the
foregoing, NURSERY includes NURSERY as defined in Cal. Business and Professions
Code § 19300.5 and any successor statute, as may be adopted or amended from
time to time.
   OPERATOR. The business owner and any other person designated by the business
owner as responsible for the day to day cannabis business operation.
   PERSONAL MEDICAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION. Cultivation, by either a qualified
patient who cultivates cannabis exclusively for his or her personal medical use
or by a caregiver who cultivates cannabis exclusively for medical use by
qualified patients and who is exempt from State licensing requirements under
the State Medical Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act.
   PREMISES. The designated structure or structures and land specified in the
application that is owned, leased, or otherwise held under the control of the
applicant or licensee where the commercial cannabis activity will be or is
conducted. The premises shall be a contiguous area and shall only be occupied
by one licensee.
   REGULATORY PERMIT. A permit issued by the City of Tulare that is required to
be obtained prior to any operation of a commercial cannabis business.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. The business owner, operator, manager(s), and any
employee having significant control over the cannabis businesses operations.
   RETAIL LICENSE. A storefront retailer (Type 10) licensee, issued by the
California Bureau of Cannabis Control, which sells cannabis goods to customers
at its premises or by delivery. A storefront retailer must have a licensed
physical location (premises), including address, where commercial cannabis
activities are conducted.
   STATE. The State of California.
   STATE LAW. All regulations and laws in the State of California.
   STATE LICENSE. A state license issued pursuant to Cal. Business and
Professions Code §§ 19300, et seq. or other applicable state law.
   TESTING. A laboratory, facility, or entity in the state, that offers or
performs tests of cannabis or cannabis products and that is both of the
following:
      (1)   Accredited by an accrediting body that is independent from all
other persons involved in commercial marijuana cannabis activity in the state;
      (2)   Registered and licensed by the State Department of Public Health.
   TRANSPORT. The transfer of cannabis or cannabis products from the permitted
business location of one licensee to the permitted business location of another
licensee, for the purposes of conducting commercial cannabis activity
authorized pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 11-8-2022; Ord. 2020-09, passed 9-15-2020; Ord. 19-12,
passed 4-21-2020)
§ 5.96.250 Packaging, design and marketing.
   Businesses shall not be permitted to sell any cannabis or CBD products,
which may be attractive to children by packaging, design, or marketing.
(Ord. 2020-09, passed 9-15-2020)
CHAPTER 5.98: CANNABIS BUSINESS TAX
Section
   
5.98.010   Title.
   
5.98.020   Authority and purpose.
   
5.98.030   Intent.
   
5.98.040   Definitions.
   
5.98.050   Tax imposed.
   
5.98.060   Reporting and remittance of tax.
   
5.98.070   Payments and communications—timely remittance.
   
5.98.080   Payment—when taxes deemed delinquent.
   
5.98.090   Notice not required by the city.
   
5.98.100   Penalties and interest.
   
5.98.110   Refunds and credits.
   
5.98.120   Refunds and procedures.
   
5.98.130   Personal cultivation not taxed.
   
5.98.140   Administration of the tax.
   
5.98.150   Appeal procedure.
   
5.98.160   Enforcement—action to collect.
   
5.98.170   Apportionment.
   
5.98.180   Constitutionality and legality.
   
5.98.190   Audit and examination of premises and records.
   
5.98.200   Other licenses, permits, taxes or charges.
   
5.98.210   Payment of tax does not authorize unlawful business.
   
5.98.220   Deficiency determinations.
   
5.98.230   Failure to report—nonpayment, fraud.
   
5.98.240   Tax assessment—notice requirements.
   
5.98.250   Tax assessment—hearing, application, and determination.
   
5.98.260   Relief from taxes—disaster relief.
   
5.98.270   Conviction for violation—taxes not waived.
   
5.98.280   Violation deemed misdemeanor.
   
5.98.290   Severability.
   
5.98.300   Remedies cumulative.
   
5.98.310   Amendment or repeal.
§ 5.98.010 Title.
   This chapter shall be known as the Cannabis Business Tax Ordinance.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 5.98.020 Authority and purpose.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to adopt a tax, for revenue purposes,
pursuant to Cal. Government Code §§ 37101 and 37100.5, upon cannabis businesses
that engage in business in the city. The cannabis business tax is levied based
upon business gross receipts and square footage of plant canopy. It is not a
sales and use tax, a tax upon income, or a tax upon real property.
   (B)   The cannabis business tax is a general tax enacted solely for general
governmental purposes of the city and not for specific purposes. All of the
proceeds from the tax imposed by this chapter shall be placed in the city's
general fund and be available for any legal municipal purpose.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 5.98.030 Intent.
   The intent of this chapter is to levy a tax on all cannabis businesses that
operate in the city, regardless of whether such business would have been legal
at the time this chapter was adopted. Nothing in this chapter shall be
interpreted to authorize or permit any business activity that would not
otherwise be legal or permissible under laws applicable to the activity at the
time the activity is undertaken.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 5.98.040 Definitions.
   The following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below when
used in this chapter:
   BUSINESS. All activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in within the
city, including any commercial or industrial enterprise, trade, profession,
occupation, vocation, calling, or livelihood, whether or not carried on for
gain or profit, but shall not include the services rendered by an employee to
his or her employer.
   CALENDAR YEAR. January 1 through December 31 of the following calendar year.
   CANNABIS. As used herein shall follow the definition in §
5.96.240.
   CANNABIS BUSINESS. As used herein shall follow the definition in §
5.96.240.
   CANNABIS BUSINESS TAX or BUSINESS TAX. The tax due pursuant to this chapter
for engaging in cannabis business in the city.
   CANNABIS PRODUCT. As used herein shall follow the definition in §
5.96.240.
   CANOPY. As used herein shall follow the definition in §
5.96.240.
   CITY PERMIT. A permit issued by the city to a person to authorize that
person to operate or engage in a cannabis business.
   COMMERCIAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION. As used herein shall follow the definition
in §
5.96.240.
   CULTIVATION. As used herein shall follow the definition in §
5.96.240.
   EMPLOYEE. As used herein shall follow the definition in §
5.96.240.
   ENGAGED IN BUSINESS AS A CANNABIS BUSINESS.
      (1)   The commencing, conducting, operating, managing or carrying on of a
cannabis business, whether done as owner, or by means of an officer, agent,
manager, employee, or otherwise, whether operating from a fixed location in the
city or coming into the city from an outside location to engage in such
activities. A person shall be deemed engaged in business within the city if:
         (a)   Such person or person's employee maintains a fixed place of
business within the city for the benefit or partial benefit of such person;
         (b)   Such person or person's employee owns or leases real property
within the city for business purposes;
         (c)   Such person or person's employee regularly maintains a stock of
tangible personal property in the city for sale in the ordinary course of
business;
         (d)   Such person or person's employee regularly conducts solicitation
of business within the city; or
         (e)   Such person or person's employee performs work or renders
services in the city.
      (2)   The foregoing specified activities shall not be a limitation on the
meaning of ENGAGED IN BUSINESS.
   EVIDENCE OF DOING BUSINESS. Evidence such as, without limitation, use of
signs, circulars, cards or any other advertising media, including the use of
internet or telephone solicitation, or representation to a government agency or
to the public that such person is engaged in a cannabis business in the city.
   GROSS RECEIPTS. As used herein shall follow the definition in §
5.96.240.
   LIGHTING. A source of light that is primarily used for promoting the
biological process of plant growth. Lighting does not include sources of light
that primarily exist for the safety or convenience of staff or visitors to the
facility, such as emergency lighting, walkway lighting, or light admitted via
small skylights, windows or ventilation openings.
   NURSERY. As used herein shall follow the definition in §
5.96.240.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust,
receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit,
whether organized as a nonprofit or for-profit entity, and includes the plural
as well as the singular number.
   SALE. Includes any sale, exchange, or barter.
   STATE. The State of California.
   STATE LICENSE, LICENSE, OR REGISTRATION. A state license issued pursuant to
Cal. Business & Professions Code §§ 19300, et seq. or other applicable state
law.
   TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The Finance Director of the City of Tulare or his or her
designee.
   TESTING LABORATORY. A cannabis business that (i) offers or performs tests of
cannabis or cannabis products; (ii) offers no service other than such tests;
(iii) sells no products, excepting only testing supplies and materials; (iv) is
accredited by an accrediting body that is independent from all other persons
involved in the cannabis industry in the state; and (v) is registered with the
State Department of Public Health.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 5.98.050 Tax imposed.
   (A)   Beginning January 1, 2023, there is imposed upon each person who is
engaged in business as a cannabis business a cannabis business tax regardless
if the business has been issued a permit to operate lawfully in the city or is
operating unlawfully.
   (B)   The City Council may, by resolution or ordinance, adjust the rate of
the cannabis business tax. However, in no event may the City Council set any
adjusted rate that exceeds the maximum rate calculated pursuant to division (C)
of this section for the date on which the adjusted rate will commence.
   (C)   The maximum rate shall be calculated as follows:
      (1)   For every person who is engaged in commercial cannabis cultivation
in the city:
         (a)   Through January 1, 2023, the maximum rate shall be:
            1.   Ten dollars annually per square foot of canopy space in a
facility that uses exclusively artificial lighting.
            2.   Ten dollars annually per square foot of canopy space in a
facility that uses a combination of natural and supplemental artificial
lighting.
            3.   Ten dollars annually per square foot of canopy space in a
facility that uses no artificial lighting.
            4.   Ten dollars annually per square foot of canopy space for any
nursery.
         (b)   On January 1, 2024, and on each January 1 thereafter, the
maximum annual tax rate per square foot of each type of canopy space shall
increase by the percentage change between January of the calendar year prior to
such increase and January of the calendar year of the increase in the consumer
price index (“CPI”) for all urban consumers in the Tulare County area as
published by the United States Government Bureau of Labor Statistics if
available, or the closest geographically available data as determined by
Council. However, no CPI adjustment resulting in a decrease of any tax imposed
by this subsection shall be made.
      (2)   For every person who engages in the operation of a testing
laboratory, the maximum tax rate shall not exceed 10% of gross receipts.
      (3)   For every person who engages in the retail sales of cannabis as a
retailer (dispensary) or non-store front retailer (delivery business), or
microbusiness (retail sales activity) the maximum tax rate shall not exceed 10%
of gross receipts.
      (4)   For every person who engages in a cannabis distribution business,
the maximum tax rate shall not exceed 10% of gross receipts.
      (5)   For every person who engages in a cannabis manufacturing,
processing, or microbusiness (non-retail activity) or any other type of
cannabis business not described in division (C)(1), (2), (3) or (4), the
maximum tax rate shall not exceed 10% of gross receipts.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 5.98.060 Reporting and remittance of tax.
   (A)   The cannabis business tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid, in
arrears, on a quarterly basis. For commercial cannabis cultivation, the tax due
for each calendar quarter shall be based on the square footage of the
business's canopy space during the quarter and the rate shall be 25% of the
applicable annual rate. For all other cannabis businesses activities, the tax
due for each calendar quarter shall be based on the gross receipts for the
quarter.
   (B)   Each person owing cannabis business tax for a calendar quarter shall,
no later than the last day of the month following the close of the calendar
quarter, file with the Tax Administrator a statement of the tax owed for that
calendar quarter and the basis for calculating that tax. The Tax Administrator
may require that the statement be submitted on a form prescribed by the Tax
Administrator. The tax for each calendar quarter shall be due and payable on
that same date as the statement for the calendar quarter is due.
   (C)   Upon cessation of a cannabis business, tax statements and payments
shall be immediately due for all calendar quarters up to the calendar quarter
during which cessation occurred.
   (D)   The Tax Administrator may, at his or her discretion, establish shorter
report and payment periods for any taxpayer as the Tax Administrator deems
necessary to ensure collection of the tax. The Tax Administrator may also
require that a deposit, to be applied against the taxes for a calendar quarter,
be made by a taxpayer at the beginning of that calendar quarter. In no event
shall the deposit required by the Tax Administrator exceed the tax amount he or
she projects will be owed by the taxpayer for the calendar quarter. The Tax
Administrator may require that a taxpayer make payments via a cashier's check,
money order, wire transfer, or similar instrument.
   (E)   For purposes of this section, the square feet of canopy space for a
business shall be rebuttably presumed to be no less than the maximum square
footage of canopy allowed by the business's city permit for commercial cannabis
cultivation, or, in the absence of a city permit, the square footage shall be
the maximum square footage of canopy for commercial cannabis cultivation
allowed by the state license type. In no case shall canopy square footage which
is authorized by the permit or license but not utilized for cultivation be
excluded from taxation unless the Tax Administrator is informed in writing,
prior to the period for which the space will not be used, that such space will
not be used.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 5.98.070 Payments and communications—timely remittance.
   Whenever any payment, statement, report, request or other communication is
due, it must be received by the Tax Administrator on or before the final due
date. A postmark will not be accepted as timely remittance. If the due date
would fall on a Saturday, Sunday or a holiday, the due date shall be the next
regular business day on which the city is open to the public.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 5.98.080 Payment—when taxes deemed delinquent.
   Unless otherwise specifically provided under other provisions of this
chapter, the taxes required to be paid pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed
delinquent if not received by the Tax Administrator on or before the due date
as specified in §§
5.98.060 and
5.98.070.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 5.98.090 Notice not required by the city.
   The city may as a courtesy send a tax notice to the business. However, the
Tax Administrator is not required to send a delinquency or other notice or bill
to any person subject to the provisions of this chapter. Failure to send such
notice or bill shall not affect the validity of any tax or penalty due under
the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 5.98.100 Penalties and interest.
   (A)   Any person who fails or refuses to pay any cannabis business tax
required to be paid pursuant to this chapter on or before the due date shall
pay penalties and interest as follows:
      (1)   A penalty equal to 10% of the amount of the tax, in addition to the
amount of the tax, plus interest on the unpaid tax calculated from the due date
of the tax at the rate of 1% per month.
      (2)   If the tax remains unpaid for a period exceeding one calendar month
beyond the due date, an additional penalty equal to 25% of the amount of the
tax, plus interest at the rate of 1% per month on the unpaid tax and on the
unpaid penalties.
      (3)   Interest shall be applied at the rate of 1% per month on the first
day of the month for the full month and will continue to accrue monthly on the
tax and penalty until the balance is paid in full.
   (B)   Whenever a check or electronic payment is submitted in payment of a
cannabis business tax and the payment is subsequently returned unpaid by the
bank for any reason, the taxpayer will be liable for the tax amount due plus
any fees, penalties and interest as provided for in this section, and any other
amount allowed under state law.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 5.98.110 Refunds and credits.
   (A)   No refund shall be made of any tax collected pursuant to this chapter,
except as provided in § 5.98.120.
   (B)   No refund of any tax collected pursuant to this chapter shall be made
because of the discontinuation, dissolution, or other termination of a
business.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 5.98.120 Refunds and procedures.
   (A)   Whenever the amount of any cannabis business tax, penalty or interest
has been overpaid, paid more than once, or has been erroneously collected or
received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded to the claimant who
paid the tax provided that a written claim for refund is filed with the Tax
Administrator within one year of the date the tax was originally due and
payable.
   (B)   The Tax Administrator, his or her designee or any other city officer
charged with the administration of this chapter shall have the right to examine
and audit all the books and business records of the claimant in order to
determine the eligibility of the claimant to the claimed refund. No claim for
refund shall be allowed if the claimant refuses to allow such examination of
claimant's books and business records after request by the Tax Administrator to
do so.
   (C)   In the event that the cannabis business tax was erroneously paid, and
the error is attributable to the city, the city shall refund the amount of tax
erroneously paid up to one year from when the error was identified.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 5.98.130 Personal cultivation not taxed.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to personal cannabis
cultivation as defined in the "Medicinal and Adult Use Cannabis Regulation and
Safety Act". This chapter shall not apply to personal use of cannabis that is
specifically exempted from state licensing requirements, that meets the
definition of personal use or equivalent terminology under state law, and for
which the individual receives no compensation whatsoever related to that
personal use.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 5.98.140 Administration of the tax.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Tax Administrator to collect the taxes,
penalties, fees, and perform the duties required by this chapter.
   (B)   For purposes of administration and enforcement of this chapter
generally, the Tax Administrator may from time to time promulgate such
administrative interpretations, rules, and procedures consistent with the
purpose, intent, and express terms of this chapter as he or she deems necessary
to implement or clarify such provisions or aid in enforcement.
   (C)   The Tax Administrator may take such administrative actions as needed
to administer the tax, including but not limited to:
      (1)   Provide to all cannabis business taxpayers forms for the reporting
of the tax;
      (2)   Provide information to any taxpayer concerning the provisions of
this chapter;
      (3)   Receive and record all taxes remitted to the city as provided in
this chapter;
      (4)   Maintain records of taxpayer reports and taxes collected pursuant
to this chapter;
      (5)   Assess penalties and interest to taxpayers pursuant to this
chapter;
      (6)   Determine amounts owed and enforce collection pursuant to this
chapter.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 5.98.150 Appeal procedure.
   Any taxpayer aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Administrator with respect
to the amount of tax, interest, penalties and fees, if any, due under this
chapter may appeal to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal with the
City Clerk within 30 days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax
due. The City Clerk, or his or her designee, shall fix a time and place for
hearing such appeal, and the City Clerk, or his or her designee, shall give
notice in writing to such operator at the last known place of address. The
finding of the City Council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served
upon the appellant in the manner prescribed by this chapter for service of
notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and
payable upon the service of the notice.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 5.98.160 Enforcement—action to collect.
   Any taxes, penalties and/or fees required to be paid under the provisions of
this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed to the city. Any person owing money to
the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable in an action
brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such debt. The provisions
of this section shall not be deemed a limitation upon the right of the city to
bring any other action including criminal, civil and equitable actions, based
upon the failure to pay the tax, penalties and/or fees imposed by this chapter
or the failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 5.98.170 Apportionment.
   If a business subject to the tax is operating both within and outside the
city, it is the intent of the city to apply the cannabis business tax so that
the measure of the tax fairly reflects the proportion of the taxed activity
actually carried on in the city. To the extent federal or state law requires
that any tax due from any taxpayer be apportioned, the taxpayer may indicate
said apportionment on his or her tax return. The Tax Administrator may
promulgate administrative procedures for apportionment as he or she finds
useful or necessary.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 5.98.180 Constitutionality and legality.
   This tax is intended to be applied in a manner consistent with the United
States and California Constitutions and state law. None of the tax provided for
by this chapter shall be applied in a manner that causes an undue burden upon
interstate commerce, a violation of the equal protection or due process clauses
of the Constitutions of the United States or the State of California or a
violation of any other provision of the California Constitution or state law.
If a person believes that the tax, as applied to him or her, is impermissible
under applicable law, he or she may request that the Tax Administrator release
him or her from the obligation to pay the impermissible portion of the tax.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 5.98.190 Audit and examination of premises and records.
   (A)   For the purpose of ascertaining the amount of cannabis business tax
owed or verifying any representations made by any taxpayer to the city in
support of his or her tax calculation, the Tax Administrator shall have the
power to inspect any location where commercial cannabis cultivation occurs and
to audit and examine all books and records (including, but not limited to
bookkeeping records, state and federal income tax returns, and other records
relating to the gross receipts of the business) of persons engaged in cannabis
businesses. In conducting such investigation, the Tax Administrator shall have
the power to inspect any equipment, such as computers or point of sale
machines, that may contain such records.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of every person liable for the collection and
payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve,
for a period of at least three years, all records as may be necessary to
determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the
collection of and payment to the city, which records the Tax Administrator or
his/her designee shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 5.98.200 Other licenses, permits, taxes, fees or charges.
   (A)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to repeal, amend, be
in lieu of, replace or in any way affect any requirements for any permit or
license required by, under or by virtue of any provision of any other chapter
of this code or any other ordinance or resolution of the city, nor be deemed to
repeal, amend, be in lieu of, replace or in any way affect any tax, fee or
other charge imposed, assessed or required by, under or by virtue of any other
chapter of this code or any other ordinance or resolution of the city. Any
references made or contained in any other chapter of this code to any licenses,
license taxes, fees, or charges, or to any schedule of license fees, shall be
deemed to refer to the licenses, license taxes, fees or charges, or schedule of
license fees, provided for in other chapter of this code.
   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A) of this section a cannabis business shall
not be required to pay the license fee required by
Chapter 5.08 of Title 5 of this code so long as all of business's activities
within the city that would require payment of a license fee are activities
subject to the cannabis business tax.
   (C)   The Tax Administrator may revoke or refuse to renew the license
required by
Chapter 5.08 of this Code for any business that is delinquent in the payment of
any tax due pursuant to this chapter or that fails to make a deposit required
by the Tax Administrator pursuant to §
5.98.060.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 5.98.210 Payment of tax does not authorize unlawful business.
   (A)   The payment of a cannabis business tax required by this chapter, and
its acceptance by the city, shall not entitle any person to carry on any
cannabis business unless the person has complied with all of the requirements
of this code and all other applicable state laws.
   (B)   No tax paid under the provisions of this chapter shall be construed as
authorizing the conduct or continuance of any illegal or unlawful business, or
any business in violation of any local or state law.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 5.98.220 Deficiency determinations.
   If the Tax Administrator is not satisfied that any statement filed as
required under the provisions of this chapter is correct, or that the amount of
tax is correctly computed, he or she may compute and determine the amount to be
paid and make a deficiency determination upon the basis of the facts contained
in the statement or upon the basis of any information in his or her possession
or that may come into his or her possession within three years of the date the
tax was originally due and payable. One or more deficiency determinations of
the amount of tax due for a period or periods may be made. When a person
discontinues engaging in a business, a deficiency determination may be made at
any time within three years thereafter as to any liability arising from
engaging in such business whether or not a deficiency determination is issued
prior to the date the tax would otherwise be due. Whenever a deficiency
determination is made, a notice shall be given to the person concerned in the
same manner as notices of assessment are given under §
5.98.240.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 5.98.230 Failure to report—nonpayment, fraud.
   (A)   Under any of the following circumstances, the Tax Administrator may
make and give notice of an assessment of the amount of tax owed by a person
under this chapter at any time:
      (1)   If the person has not filed a complete statement required under the
provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   If the person has not paid the tax due under the provisions of this
chapter;
      (3)   If the person has not, after demand by the Tax Administrator, filed
a corrected statement, or furnished to the Tax Administrator adequate
substantiation of the information contained in a statement already filed, or
paid any additional amount of tax due under the provisions of this chapter; or
      (4)   If the Tax Administrator determines that the nonpayment of any
business tax due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of 25% of the
amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to penalties and interest
otherwise stated in this chapter and any other penalties allowed by law.
   (B)   The notice of assessment shall separately set forth the amount of any
tax known by the Tax Administrator to be due or estimated by the Tax
Administrator, after consideration of all information within the Tax
Administrator's knowledge concerning the business and activities of the person
assessed, to be due under each applicable section of this chapter, and shall
include the amount of any penalties or interest accrued on each amount to the
date of the notice of assessment.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 5.98.240 Tax assessment—notice requirements.
   The notice of assessment shall be served upon the person either by personal
delivery, or by a deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage
prepaid thereon, addressed to the person at the address of the location of the
business or to such other address as he or she shall register with the Tax
Administrator for the purpose of receiving notices provided under this chapter;
or, should the person have no address registered with the Tax Administrator for
such purpose, then to such person's last known address. For the purposes of
this section, a service by mail is complete at the time of deposit in the
United States mail.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 5.98.250 Tax assessment—hearing, application and determination.
   Within 30 days after the date of service the person may apply in writing to
the Tax Administrator for a hearing on the assessment. If application for a
hearing before the city is not made within the time herein prescribed, the tax
assessed by the Tax Administrator shall become final and conclusive. Within 30
days of the receipt of any such application for hearing, the Tax Administrator
shall cause the matter to be set for hearing before him or her no later than 30
days after the receipt of the application, unless a later date is agreed to by
the Tax Administrator and the person requesting the hearing. Notice of such
hearing shall be given by the Tax Administrator to the person requesting such
hearing not later than five days prior to such hearing. At such hearing said
applicant may appear and offer evidence why the assessment as made by the Tax
Administrator should not be confirmed and fixed as the tax due. After such
hearing the Tax Administrator shall determine and reassess the proper tax to be
charged and shall give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed in
§
5.98.240 for giving notice of assessment.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 5.98.260 Relief from taxes—disaster relief.
   (A)   If a business is unable to comply with any tax requirement due to a
disaster, the business may notify the Tax Administrator of this inability to
comply and request relief from the tax requirement;
   (B)   The Tax Administrator, in its sole discretion, may provide relief from
the cannabis business tax requirement for businesses whose operations have been
impacted by a disaster of such tax liability does not exceed $5,000. If such
tax liability is $5,001 or more than such relief shall only be approved by the
City Council;
   (C)   Temporary relief from the cannabis tax may be relieved for a
reasonable amount of time as determined by the Tax Administrator in order to
allow the cannabis business time to recover from the disaster;
   (D)   The Tax Administrator may require that certain conditions be followed
in order for a cannabis business to receive temporary relief from the cannabis
business tax requirement;
   (E)   A cannabis business shall not be subject to an enforcement action for
a violation of a cannabis business requirement in which the licensee has
received temporary relief from the Tax Administrator;
   (F)   For purposes of this section, "disaster" means fire, flood, storm,
tidal wave, earthquake, or similar public calamity, whether or not resulting
from natural causes.
      (1)   The cannabis business must notify the Tax Administrator in writing
a request for temporary relief from imposition of the tax requirement pursuant
to division (A) of this section of such disaster clearly indicates why relief
is requested from, the time period for which the relief is requested, and the
reasons relief is needed for the specified amount of time;
      (2)   The cannabis business agrees to grant the tax collector or his/her
designee access to the location where the cannabis business has been impacted
due to a disaster.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 5.98.270 Conviction for violation—taxes not waived.
   The conviction and punishment of any person for failure to pay the required
tax shall not excuse or exempt such person from any civil action for the tax
debt unpaid at the time of such conviction. No civil action shall prevent a
criminal prosecution for any violation of the provisions of this chapter or of
any state law requiring the payment of all taxes.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 5.98.280 Violation deemed misdemeanor.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 5.98.290 Severability.
   If any provision of this chapter, or its application to any person or
circumstance, is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be
unlawful, unenforceable or otherwise void, that determination shall have no
effect on any other provision of this chapter or the application of this
chapter to any other person or circumstance and, to that end, the provisions
hereof are severable.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 5.98.300 Remedies cumulative.
   All remedies and penalties prescribed by this chapter or which are available
under any other provision of the Tulare Municipal Code and any other provision
of law or equity are cumulative. The use of one or more remedies by the city
shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 5.98.310 Amendment or repeal.
   This chapter may be repealed or amended by the City Council without a vote
of the people to the extent allowed by law. However, as required by Article
XIII C of the California Constitution, voter approval is required for any
amendment that would increase the rate of any tax levied pursuant to this
chapter. The people of the City of Tulare affirm that the following actions
shall not constitute an increase of the rate of a tax:
   (A)   The restoration of the rate of the tax to a rate that is no higher
than that set by this chapter, if the City Council has acted to reduce the rate
of the tax;
   (B)   An action that interprets or clarifies the methodology of the tax, or
any definition applicable to the tax, so long as interpretation or
clarification (even if contrary to some prior interpretation or clarification)
is not inconsistent with the language of this chapter; or
   (C)   The collection of the tax imposed by this chapter even if the city
had, for some period of time, failed to collect the tax.
(Ord. 2022-15, passed 11-8-2022)
CHAPTER 5.100: ADMINISTRATIVE FINES
Section
   
5.100.010   Administrative Fine Schedule.
§ 5.100.010 Administrative Fine Schedule.
   The City Council of the City of Tulare in an effort to more efficiently
administer all fines, as referenced within each chapter of the Tulare Municipal
Code and associated with its administrative citation process hereby sets forth
an Administrative Fine Schedule to be established and adopted by resolution.
(Ord. 10-15, passed 4-20-2010)
CHAPTER 5.104: MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND SERVICES
Section
   
5.104.010   Purpose and intent.
   
5.104.020   Definitions.
   
5.104.030   CAMTC certification and local certification required.
   
5.104.040   Massage business registration.
   
5.104.050   Business license required; other permits required.
   
5.104.060   Operating requirements.
   
5.104.070   Inspection by officials.
   
5.104.080   Notifications.
   
5.104.090   Exemptions.
   
5.104.100   Existing massage businesses.
   
5.104.110   Unlawful business practices may be enjoined; remedies cumulative.
   
5.104.120   Administrative citation.
   
5.104.130   Suspension and revocation of city registration certificates.
   
5.104.140   Public nuisance.
§ 5.104.010 Purpose and intent.
   (A)   In enacting this chapter, the City Council recognizes that commercial
massage therapy is a professional pursuit that can offer the public valuable
health and therapeutic services. The City Council further recognizes that,
unless properly regulated, the practice of massage therapy and the operation of
massage businesses may be associated with unlawful activity and pose a threat
to the quality of life in the local community. Accordingly, it is the purpose
and intent of this chapter to protect the public health, safety, and welfare by
providing for the orderly regulation of businesses providing massage therapy
services, discouraging prostitution, sex trafficking and related illegal
activities carried on under the guise of massage therapy, and establishing
certain sanitation, health, and operational standards for massage businesses.
   (B)   Furthermore, it is the purpose and intent of this chapter to address
the negative impacts identified in the City Council’s findings to reduce or
prevent neighborhood blight and to protect and preserve the quality of city
neighborhoods and commercial districts; and to enhance enforcement of criminal
statutes relating to the conduct of operators and employees of massage
businesses.
   (C)   It is the Council’s further purpose and intent to rely upon the
uniform statewide regulations applicable to massage practitioners and
establishments that were enacted by the State Legislature in 2008 as Cal.
Business and Professions Code §§ 4600 et seq., by Senate Bill 731, and amended
in 2011 by Assembly Bill 619, and in 2014 by Assembly Bill 1147, to restrict
the commercial practice of massage in the city to those persons duly certified
to practice by the California Massage Therapy Council, and to provide for the
registration and regulation of massage businesses for health and safety
purposes to the extent allowed by law.
(Ord. 19-02, passed 6-18-2019)
§ 5.104.020 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise clearly required by the
particular provision or the context, the definitions in this section shall
govern the construction, meaning, and application of words and phrases used in
this chapter.
   BUSINESS. Includes, but not by way of limitation, everything about which a
person can be employed, and means that which occupies the time, attention, and
labor of men and women for the purpose of producing a livelihood or profit, and
connotes the efforts of men and women by varied and diverse methods of dealing
with each other, to improve their individual economic conditions, and for the
purposes of this chapter shall include, without limitation, the advertising and
soliciting of massages. The term BUSINESS includes, but is not limited to, a
massage practitioner who is the sole owner, operator and employee of a massage
business operating as a sole proprietorship, as well as a massage establishment
that employs massage practitioners and therapists.
   CALIFORNIA MASSAGE THERAPY COUNCIL or CAMTC. The massage therapy
organization formed pursuant to Cal. Business and Professions Code § 4600.5.
   CERTIFIED MASSAGE PRACTITIONER. Any individual certified by the California
Massage Therapy Council as a certified massage therapist or as a certified
massage practitioner pursuant to Cal. Business and Professions Code §§ 4600 et
seq.
   CLIENT. The customer or patron who pays for or receives massage services.
   COMPENSATION. The payment, loan, advance, donation, contribution, deposit,
exchange, or gift of money or anything of value,
   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager of the City of Tulare, and his or her
authorized representatives or designees.
   CITY REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE. A registration certificate issued by the
Chief of Police, upon submission of satisfactory evidence that a massage
business employs or uses only certified massage practitioners pursuant to this
chapter.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The Chief of Police of the City of Tulare, and his or her
authorized representatives or designees.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person employed by a massage business who may render any
service to the business, and who receives any form of compensation from the
business.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The person appointed by the City of Tulare pursuant to the
California Health and Safety Code, or his or her authorized representatives or
designees.
   MASSAGE or MASSAGE THERAPY. Any method of treating the external parts of the
body for remedial, health, or hygienic purposes for any form of compensation by
means of pressure on or friction  against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing,
tapping, pounding, or stimulating the external parts of the body, with or
without the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances; or
with or without supplementary aids, such as rubbing alcohol, liniments,
antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar
preparations commonly used in this practice; or by baths, including, but not
limited to Turkish, Russian, Swedish, Japanese, vapor, shower, electric tub,
sponge, mineral, fomentation, or any other type of bath.
   MASSAGE BUSINESS. Any business that offers massage therapy in exchange for
compensation, whether at a fixed place of business or at a location designated
by the customer or client through outcall massage services. Any business that
offers any combination of massage therapy and bath facilities—including, but
not limited to, showers, baths, wet and dry heat rooms, pools and hot
tubs—shall be deemed a MASSAGE BUSINESS under this chapter. The term MASSAGE
BUSINESS includes a certified massage practitioner who is the sole owner,
operator and employee of a massage business operating as a sole proprietorship.
   OPERATOR or MASSAGE BUSINESS OPERATOR. Any and all owners of a massage
business.
   OUTCALL MASSAGE. The engaging in or carrying on of massage therapy for
compensation in a location other than the business operation’s address set
forth in the massage business’s city registration certificate.
   OWNER or MASSAGE BUSINESS OWNER. Any of the following persons:
      (1)   Any person who is a general partner of a general or limited
partnership that owns a massage business.
      (2)   Any person who has five percent or greater ownership interest in a
corporation that owns a massage business.
      (3)   Any person who is a member of a limited liability company that owns
a massage business.
      (4)   Any person who has a five percent or greater ownership interest in
any other type of business association that owns a massage business.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, joint
venture, limited liability company, or combination of individuals.
   PRACTITIONER or MASSAGE PRACTITIONER. Used interchangeably, any person who
administers massage to another person, for any form of consideration (whether
for the massage, as part of other services or a product, or otherwise).
   RECEPTION AND WAITING AREA. An area immediately inside the front door of the
massage business dedicated to the reception and waiting of patrons of the
massage business and visitors, and which is not a massage therapy room or
otherwise used for the provision of massage therapy services.
   REGISTRATION. The registration required by this chapter to operate a massage
business.
   SCHOOL OF MASSAGE. Any school or institution of learning that is recognized
as an approved school pursuant to Cal. Business and Professions Code Div. 2,
Ch. 10.5, as currently drafted or as may be amended,
   SOLE PROPRIETORSHIP. Any legal form of business organization where the
business owner (sometimes referred to as the SOLE PROPRIETOR) is the only
person employed by that business to provide massage services.
   SOLICIT. To request, ask, demand or otherwise arrange for the provision of
services.
(Ord. 19-02, passed 6-18-2019)
§ 5.104.030 CAMTC certification and local registration required.
   (A)   Individuals. It shall be unlawful for any individual to practice
massage therapy for compensation as a sole proprietorship or employee of a
massage business, or in any other capacity within the city, unless that
individual is a certified massage practitioner and has provided evidence to the
city of certification from the California Massage Therapy Council (CAMTC).
   (B)   Businesses. It shall be unlawful for any business to provide massage
for compensation within the city unless all individuals employed by the massage
business to perform massage, whether as an employee, independent contractor, or
sole proprietorship, are certified massage practitioners, and the business has
obtained a valid city registration certificate as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 19-02, passed 6-18-2019)
§ 5.104.040 Massage business registration.
   (A)   Application. The registration application for a city registration
certificate shall include all of the following:
      (1)   Legal name of the massage business.
      (2)   Address and telephone number of the massage business.
      (3)   Legal names of all owners of the massage business.
      (4)   A list of all of the massage business’s employees and independent
contractors who are performing massage and their CAMTC certification.
      (5)   Residence address and telephone number of all owners of the massage
business.
      (6)   Business address and telephone number of all owners of the massage
business.
      (7)   The form of business under which the massage business will be
operating (i.e., corporation, general or limited partnership, limited liability
company, or other form).
      (8)   Each owner operator of the massage business who is not a CAMTC-
certified massage practitioner shall submit an application for a background
check, including the following: the individual’s business, occupation, and
employment history for the five years preceding the date of the application;
the inclusive dates of that employment history; the name and address of any
massage business or similar business owned or operated by the individual,
whether inside or outside the County of Tulare and its incorporated cities.
      (9)   For all owners, a valid and current driver’s license and/or
identification issued by a state or federal governmental agency, or other
photographic identification bearing a bona fide seal by a foreign government.
      (10)   For all owners, a signed statement that all of the information
contained in the application is true and correct; that all owners shall be
responsible for the conduct of the business’s employees or independent
contractors providing massage services; and acknowledging that failure to
comply with the Cal. Business and Professions Code §§ 4600 et seq., and local,
state, or federal law, or the provisions of this chapter may result in
revocation of the business’s city registration certificate.
   (B)   Issuance. Upon provision by the massage business of the foregoing
documentation, the Chief of Police shall, within 30 business days, issue the
massage business a city registration certificate, which shall be valid for two
years from the date of issuance. No re-application will be accepted within one
year after an application or renewal is denied or a certificate is revoked.
City registration certificates shall not be issued to a massage business
seeking to operate at a particular location if:
      (1)   Another massage business is or was operating at that particular
location, and that massage business is currently serving a suspension or
revocation pursuant to Section
5.104.110, during the pendency of the suspension or two years following
revocation.
      (2)   Another massage business is or was operating at that particular
location, and that massage business has received a notice of suspension,
revocation or fine issued pursuant to Sections
5.104.100 and
5.104.110, during the ten-day period following receipt of the notice or while
any appeal of a suspension, revocation or fine is pending.
      (3)   Another massage business is or was operating at that particular
location, and that massage business has outstanding fines issued pursuant to
Section
5.104.100 that have not been paid.
      (4)   After December 31, 2019, there shall be no more than two massage
businesses per 10,000 persons living the city limits, based on the most current
State of California Department of Finance population estimate. Further, there
shall be a 1,000-foot minimum separation between massage businesses, with
massage businesses only permitted in commercial zones as allowed by Title 10 of
the Tulare Municipal Code. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as
prohibiting multiple, independent, CAMTC-certified, massage therapists from
working under a single established massage business that is in compliance with
all other sections of this chapter.
      (5)   Prior to the issuance of any new business license for a new massage
business, the Director of Community and Economic Development, or his or her
designee, shall provide written verification that the new massage business does
not exceed the number of massage businesses allowed citywide, and that no other
massage businesses are located within 1,000 feet of the proposed location.
   (C)   Amendment. A massage business shall apply to the city to amend its
city registration certificate within 30 days after any change in the
registration information, including, but not limited to, the hiring or
termination of certified massage practitioners, the change of the business’s
address, or changes in the owner’s addresses and/or telephone numbers.
   (D)   Renewal. A massage business shall apply to the city to renew its city
registration certificate at least 30 days prior to its expiration. If an
application for renewal of a city registration certificate and all required
information is not timely received and the certificate expires, no right or
privilege to provide massage shall exist.
   (E)   Fees. There shall be no fee for the registration application or
certificate, or any amendment or renewal thereof. The provisions of this
section shall not prevent the city from establishing fees for safety
inspections, as may be conducted from time to time by the Chief of Police, and
for the background checks, fingerprinting, and subsequent arrest notification
for owners of a massage business who are not CAMTC-certified and who are
subject to such background checks pursuant to this chapter. There are certain
fees for appeals as described below.
   (F)   Transfer. A city registration certificate shall not be transferred
except with the prior written approval of the Chief of Police. A written
request for such transfer shall contain the same information for the new
ownership as is required for applications for registration pursuant to this
section. In the event of denial, notification of the denial, and the reasons
therefor, shall be provided in writing, and shall be provided to the applicant
by personal delivery or by registered or certified mail. A city registration
certificate may not be transferred during any period of suspension or one year
following revocation pursuant to Section
5.104.110 , during the ten-day period following a massage business’s receipt of
a notice of suspension, revocation or fine issued pursuant to Sections
5.104.100 and
5.104.110, or while any appeal of a suspension, revocation or fine is pending.
Further, a city registration certificate may not be transferred until all
outstanding fines issued pursuant to Section
5.104.100 have been paid.
(Ord. 19-02, passed 6-18-2019)
§ 5.104.050 Business license required; other permits required.
   (A)   Nothing herein relieves an individual or business from obtaining a
city business license, a conditional use permit required under this code, or
other permit if otherwise required by law.
   (B)   Any individual applying for a business license as a massage
practitioner or a massage therapist shall provide proof of a current CAMTC
certificate before being issued a business license.
(Ord. 19-02, passed 6-18-2019)
§ 5.104.060 Operating requirements.
   No person shall engage in, conduct, carry on, or permit any massage within
the city unless all of the following requirements are met.
   (A)   CAMTC certification shall be worn by and clearly visible on the
massage practitioner’s person during working hours, and at all times when the
massage practitioner is inside a massage business or providing outcall massage.
   (B)   Massage shall be provided or given only between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m. No massage business shall be open and no massage shall be
provided between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. A massage commenced prior to 9:00 p.m.
shall nevertheless terminate at 9:00 p.m., and, in the case of a massage
business, all clients shall exit the premises at that time. It is the
obligation of the massage business to inform clients of the requirement that
services must cease at 9:00 p.m.
   (C)   A list of the services available and the cost of such services shall
be posted in the reception area within the massage premises, and shall be
described in readily understandable language. Outcall service
providers shall provide such a list to clients in advance of performing any
service. No owner, manager, operator, or responsible managing employee shall
permit, and no massage practitioner shall offer or perform, any service other
than those posted or listed as required herein, nor shall an operator or a
massage practitioner request or charge a fee for any service other than those
on the list of services available and posted in the reception area or provided
to the client in advance of any outcall services.
   (D)   A copy of the CAMTC certificate of each and every massage practitioner
employed in the business shall be displayed in the reception area or similar
open public place on the premises. CAMTC certificates of former employees and/
or contractors shall be removed as soon as those massage practitioners are no
longer employed by or offering services through the massage business.
   (E)   For each massage service provided, every massage business shall keep a
complete and legible written record of the following information: the date and
hour that service was provided; the service received; the name or initials of
the employee entering the information; and the name of the massage practitioner
administering the service. Such records shall be open to inspection and copying
by police officers, or used by any massage practitioner or operator for any
purpose other than as records of service provided, and may not be provided to
other parties by the massage practitioner or operator unless otherwise required
by law. Such records shall be retained on the premises of the massage business
for a period of two years and shall be immediately available for inspection
during business hours.
   (F)   Massage businesses shall at all times be equipped with an adequate
supply of clean sanitary towels, coverings and linens. Clean towels, coverings,
and linens shall be stored in enclosed cabinets. Towels and linens shall not be
used on more than one client, unless they have first been laundered and
disinfected. Disposable towels and coverings shall not be used on more than one
client. Soiled linens and paper towels shall be deposited in separate, approved
receptacles.
   (G)   Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms or cabinets, toilet
rooms, shower and bath rooms, tanning booths, whirlpool baths and pools shall
be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected as needed, and at least once each day the
premises are open, with a disinfectant approved by the Health Officer. Bathtubs
shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use with a disinfectant approved by the
Health Officer. All walls, ceilings, floors, and other physical facilities for
the business must be in good repair, and maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition.
   (H)   Instruments utilized in performing massage shall not be used on more
than one client unless they have been sterilized, using approved sterilization
methods.
   (I)   All massage business operators and their employees, including massage
practitioners, shall wear clean, non-transparent outer garments. These garments
shall not expose their genitals, pubic areas, buttocks, or chest, and shall not
be worn in such manner as to expose the genitals, pubic areas, buttocks, or
chest. For the purposes of this section, OUTER GARMENTS means garments worn
over other garments, and does not include underwear, bras, lingerie or
swimsuits.
   (J)   No person shall enter, be, or remain in any part of a massage business
while in possession of an open container of alcohol, or consuming or using any
alcoholic beverage or drugs except pursuant to a prescription for such drugs.
The owner, operator, responsible managing employee, or manager shall not permit
any such person to enter or remain upon such premises.
   (K)   No massage business shall operate as a school of massage, or use the
same facilities as that of a school of massage.
   (L)   No massage business shall place, publish or distribute, or cause to be
placed, published or distributed any advertising matter that depicts any
portion of the human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective clients
that any service is available other than those services listed as an available
service pursuant to Section
5.104.050(C), nor shall any massage business employ language in the text of
such advertising that would reasonably suggest to a prospective client that any
service is available other than those services as described in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter.
   (M)   No massage shall be given unless the client’s genitals are, at all
times, fully covered. A massage practitioner shall not, in the course of
administering any massage, make physical contact with the genitals or private
parts of any other person, regardless whether the contact is over or under the
person’s clothing.
   (N)   Where the business has staff available to assure security for clients
and massage staff are behind closed doors, the entry to the reception area of
the massage business shall remain unlocked during business hours when the
business is open for business or when clients are present.
   (O)   No massage business located in a building, or structure with exterior
windows fronting a public street, highway, walkway, or parking area shall,
during business hours, block visibility into the interior reception and waiting
area through the use of curtains, closed blinds, tints, or any other material
that obstructs, blurs, or unreasonably darkens the view into the premises. For
the purpose of this division, there is an irrebuttable presumption that the
visibility is impermissibly blocked if more than ten percent of the interior
reception and waiting area is not visible from the exterior window.
   (P)   All signs shall be in conformance with current city ordinances.
   (Q)   Minimum lighting, consisting of at least one artificial light of not
less than 40 watts, shall be provided, and shall be operating in each room or
enclosure where massage services are being performed on clients, and in all
areas where clients are present.
   (R)   Ventilation shall be provided in accordance with applicable building
codes and regulations.
   (S)   Hot and cold running water shall be provided at all times.
   (T)   Adequate dressing, locker and toilet facilities shall be provided for
clients.
   (U)   A minimum of one wash basin for employees shall be provided at all
times. The basin shall be located within or as close as practicable to the area
devoted to performing of massage services. Sanitary towels shall also be
provided at each basin.
   (V)   All massage businesses shall comply with all state and federal laws
and regulations for handicapped clients.
   (W)   A massage practitioner shall operate only under the name specified in
his or her CAMTC certificate. A massage business shall operate only under the
name specified in its city registration certificate.
   (X)   No massage business shall allow any person to reside within the
massage business or in attached structures owned, leased or controlled by the
massage business.
   (Y)   Other than custodial or maintenance staff, no persons shall be
permitted within the premises of a massage business between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(Ord. 19-02, passed 6-18-2019)
§ 5.104.070 Inspection by officials.
   The investigating and enforcing officials of the city, including, but not
limited to, the police, Health Officer and Director of Building and Planning,
or their designees, shall have the right to enter the premises from time to
time during regular business hours for the purpose of making reasonable
inspections to observe and enforce compliance with building, fire, electrical,
plumbing or health regulations, and to enforce compliance with applicable
regulations, laws, and statutes, and with the provisions of this chapter. The
massage business may be charged a fee for any safety inspections.
(Ord. 19-02, passed 6-18-2019)
§ 5.104.080 Notifications.
   (A)   A massage business shall notify the Chief of Police of any changes
described in Section
5.104.040 pursuant to the timelines specified therein.
   (B)   A registrant shall report to Chief of Police any of the following
within 96 hours of the occurrence:
      (1)   Arrests of any employees or owners of the registrant’s massage
business for an offense other than a misdemeanor traffic offense;
      (2)   Resignations, terminations, or transfers of practitioners employed
by the registrant’s massage business;
      (3)   Any event involving the registrant’s massage business, or the
massage practitioners employed therein, that constitutes a violation of this
chapter or state or federal law.
   (C)   This provision requires reporting to the Chief of Police even if the
massage business believes that the Chief of Police has or will receive the
information from another source.
(Ord. 19-02, passed 6-18-2019)
§ 5.104.090 Exemptions.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following classes of
individuals or businesses while engaged in the performance of their duties.
   (A)   Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, nurses or any
physical therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective
professions in the State of California, and persons working directly under the
supervision of or at the direction of such licensed persons, working at the
same location as the licensed person, and administering massage services
subject to review or oversight by the licensed person.
   (B)   Barbers and cosmetologists, duly licensed under the laws of the State
of California, while engaging in practices within the scope of their licenses,
except that this provision shall apply solely to the massaging of the neck,
face and/or scalp, hands or feet of their clients.
   (C)   Hospitals, nursing homes, mental health facilities, or any other
health facilities duly licensed by the State of California, and employees of
these licensed institutions, while acting within the scope of their employment.
   (D)   Accredited high schools, junior colleges, and colleges or universities
whose coaches and trainers are acting within the scope of their employment.
   (E)   Trainers of amateur, semi-professional or professional athletes or
athletic teams while engaging in their training responsibilities for and with
athletes; and trainers working in conjunction with a specific athletic event.
   (F)   Individuals administering massages or health treatment involving
massage to persons participating in single-occurrence athletic, recreational or
festival events, such as health fairs, road races, track meets, triathlons and
other similar events; provided, that all of the following conditions are
satisfied:
      (1)   The massage services are made equally available to all participants
in the event;
      (2)   The event is open to participation by the general public or a
significant segment of the public, such as employees of sponsoring or
participating corporations;
      (3)   The massage services are provided at the site of the event, either
during, immediately preceding or immediately following the event;
      (4)   The sponsors of the event have been advised of and have approved
the provisions of massage services;
      (5)   The persons providing the massage services are not the primary
sponsors of the event.
(Ord. 19-02, passed 6-18-2019)
§ 5.104.100 Existing massage businesses.
   (A)   All persons currently holding a valid massage establishment permit
shall have 60 days following the enactment of this chapter in which to comply
with its requirements. If a permittee does not attain compliance with this
chapter within the prescribed time limits, the Chief of Police shall
immediately suspend or revoke the permittee’s permit(s).
   (B)   The Chief of Police may issue a provisional permit to any massage
establishment, for a period not to exceed six months, if the applicant is able
to show that substantial compliance with the requirements of this chapter has
been met, and that the remaining compliance can be achieved within the period
of the provisional permit. This six-month provisional permit shall not be
renewed.
   (C)   Any business that holds itself out as a massage establishment in any
way will be subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 19-02, passed 6-18-2019)
§ 5.104.110 Unlawful business practices may be enjoined; remedies cumulative.
   Any massage business operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the
provisions of this chapter shall constitute an unlawful business practice
pursuant to Cal. Business and Professions Code §§ 17200 et seq. In the exercise
of discretion, in addition to or in lieu of taking any other action permitted
by this chapter, the City Attorney or District Attorney may commence an action
or actions, proceeding or proceedings in the Superior Court of Tulare County,
seeking an injunction prohibiting the unlawful business practice, and/or any
other remedy available at law, including, but not limited to, fines, attorneys
fees and costs. All remedies provided for in this chapter are cumulative.
(Ord. 19-02, passed 6-18-2019)
§ 5.104.120 Administrative citation.
   (A)   Violations. Upon a finding by the Chief of Police that a business has
violated any provision of this chapter, the Chief of Police may issue an
administrative citation as permitted by
Chapter 1.61 of this code.
   (B)   Separate violations. Each violation of any provision of this chapter
shall constitute a separate violation. Each client to whom massage is provided
or offered in violation of this chapter shall also constitute a separate
violation. Each day upon which a massage business remains open for business in
violation of this chapter shall also constitute a separate violation.
(Ord. 19-02, passed 6-18-2019)
§ 5.104.130 Suspension and revocation of city registration certificates.
   (A)   Reasons. Certificates of registration may be suspended or revoked by
the Chief of Police upon finding any of the following grounds:
      (1)   A massage practitioner is no longer in possession of current and
valid CAMTC certification. This division shall apply to a sole proprietor or a
person employed or used by a massage business to provide massage.
      (2)   An owner or sole proprietor fails to register under the provisions
of Cal. Penal Code § 290 (sex offender registration), is convicted of Cal.
Penal Code §§ 266i (pandering), 315 (keeping or residing in a house of ill-
fame), 316 (keeping disorderly house), 318 (prevailing upon person to visit a
place for prostitution), 647(b) (engaging in or soliciting prostitution),
653.22 (loitering with intent to commit prostitution), 653.23 (supervision of
prostitute); has a business permit or license denied, revoked, restricted, or
suspended by any agency, board, city, county, territory, or state; is subject
to an injunction for nuisance pursuant to Cal. Penal Code §§ 11225—11235 (red
light abatement); is convicted of a felony offense involving the sale of a
controlled substance; is convicted of any crime involving dishonesty, fraud,
deceit, violence, or moral turpitude; or is convicted in any other state of an
offense that, if committed in this state, would have been punishable as one or
more referenced offenses in this division.
      (3)   The city determines that a material misrepresentation was included
on the application for a certificate of registration or renewal.
      (4)   Violations of any of the following occurred on the premises of a
massage business or were committed by a massage practitioner: Cal. Business and
Professions Code Sections 4600 et seq.; any local, state, or federal law; or
the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Procedures. Written notice of the suspension or revocation shall be
served on the sole proprietor or owners by personal service or certified mail,
with the legal violation and supporting facts. The notice shall contain an
advisement of the right to request an appeal hearing before the Chief of
Police.
   (C)   Time period of suspension of permit. The Chief of Police may suspend a
registration for a period between five days and the end of the license term, at
his or her discretion.
   (D)   Effective date of suspension or revocation. Suspension or revocation
issued pursuant to division (B) of this section will be effective ten days from
the date appearing on the order, unless a timely appeal is filed in accordance
with division (E) of this section.
   (E)   Appeal.
      (1)   The decision of the Chief of Police is appealable to the City
Council.
      (2)   An appeal must be in writing, and hand-delivered or mailed to the
City Manager’s office.
      (3)   An appeal must be received by the City Manager on or before the
effective date of suspension or revocation provided by division (D) of this
section.
      (4)   The filing of a timely appeal will stay a suspension or revocation
pending a decision on the appeal by the City Council.
      (5)   A hearing shall be scheduled before the City Council within 30
days. Either the appellant or the Police Chief may request, in writing directed
to the City Council, a continuance of the hearing. Such requests must be
supported by good cause. The decision whether to grant a continuance is at the
discretion of the City Council, which shall consider whether granting the
continuance poses a threat to public health or safety in light of the severity
of the violations alleged.
      (6)   The decision of the City Council shall be final, with no further
administrative right of appeal or reconsideration. The City Council may sustain
a suspension or revocation, overrule a suspension or revocation, reduce a
revocation to a suspension, and/or reduce the length of a suspension. Further,
the City Council may stay the effective date of any suspension for a reasonable
time following a hearing.
   (F)   Re-application. No re-application will be accepted within one year
after a certificate is revoked.
   (G)   Evidence. The following rules shall apply to any hearing required by
this section. All parties involved shall have the right to offer testimonial,
documentary, and tangible evidence bearing on the issues, to be represented by
counsel, and to confront and cross-examine witnesses. Any relevant evidence may
be admitted if it is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are
accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Formal rules of evidence
and discovery do not apply to proceedings governed by this chapter. Unless
otherwise specifically prohibited by law, the burden of proof is on the
registrant in any hearing or other matter under this chapter.
(Ord. 19-02, passed 6-18-2019)
§ 5.104.140 Public nuisance.
   It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for a massage business to be
operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
The city may exercise its discretion, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting
a criminal action, to commence proceedings for the abatement, removal, and
enjoinment of that business in any manner provided by law.
(Ord. 19-02, passed 6-18-2019)
TITLE 6: POLICE REGULATIONS
Chapter
   
6.04.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
   
6.08.   GENERAL OFFENSES
   
6.12.   TULARE ANIMAL ORDINANCE
   
6.14.   [REPEALED BY ORD. 17-13]
   
6.16.   [REPEALED BY ORD. 17-13]
   
6.20.   WEAPONS; FIREARMS
   
6.24.   GAMBLING
   
6.28.   MINORS
   
6.32.   STREET RACES AND RECKLESS DRIVING EXHIBITIONS PROHIBITED
   
6.36.   BINGO
   
6.40.   NOISE
   
6.44.   OPEN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTAINERS
   
6.48.   CURFEW FOR MINORS
   
6.52.   GRAFFITI
   
6.56.   DESIGNATING CITY PARKS AND LIBRARIES AS DRUG FREE ZONES
   
6.60.   ADMINISTRATIVE FINES
   
6.70.   SOCIAL HOST LIABILITY
   
6.80.   CHARGES FOR SPECIAL SECURITY SERVICES AT LOUD AND UNRULY GATHERINGS
CHAPTER 6.04: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
6.04.010   Training of police officers.
   
6.04.020   Special officers—Appointment.
   
6.04.030   Status of special officers—Bond.
   
6.04.040   Compensation of special officers.
   
6.04.050   Unclaimed property defined.
   
6.04.060   Sale of unclaimed property—Notice.
   
6.04.070   Destruction of property.
   
6.04.080   Training of public safety dispatchers.
   
6.04.090    Code enforcement.
§ 6.04.010   Training of police officers.
   The city declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the State
of California under the provisions of Cal. Penal Code Chapter 1 of Title 4,
Part 4. Pursuant to Cal. Penal Code § 13522 of said Chapter 1, the city, while
receiving aid from the state pursuant to said Chapter 1, will adhere to the
standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission
on Peace Officer Standards and Training.
(1995 Code, § 6.04.010)
§ 6.04.020   Special officers—Appointment.
   The Chief of Police, with the written approval of the Manager, is hereby
authorized and empowered to appoint such special police officers as, in his or
her judgment, may be necessary or proper, which special police officers shall
have the powers and duties of regular police officers of the city.
(1995 Code, § 6.04.020)
§ 6.04.030   Status of special officers—Bond.
   Any special police officer who shall be appointed at the request of any
person to be employed by such person as a watchperson, or for like purposes,
shall be under the supervision and direction of the Chief of Police and must
comply with the regulations governing police officers of this city and shall
furnish a bond for the protection of the city in an amount not less than
$1,000.
(1995 Code, § 6.04.030)
Editor’s note:
   For the most recent fee, please see the Rates and Fees Resolution passed by
the city and on file in the city offices.
§ 6.04.040   Compensation of special officers.
   No special police officer shall receive compensation from the city except
when employed as an extra police officer or engaged in the services of the
city, in which event, the compensation shall be fixed by the Council.
(1995 Code, § 6.04.040)
§ 6.04.050   Unclaimed property defined.
   In this chapter, UNCLAIMED PROPERTY shall mean any and all property in the
possession of the Police Department for which no claim or demand has been made
and property for which no owner has been found.
(1995 Code, § 6.04.050)
§ 6.04.060   Sale of unclaimed property—Notice.
   The Police Department is hereby authorized to sell, at public auction, to
the highest bidder all unclaimed property which has been in the possession of
the Department for a period of more than six months, upon notice of the sale
given by the Chief of Police at least five days before the time fixed therefor
by publishing once in a newspaper of general circulation, published in the
city.
(1995 Code, § 6.04.060)
§ 6.04.070   Destruction of property.
   Any unclaimed property which is not sold or which is in a dilapidated or
deteriorated condition may be summarily destroyed by the Department after the
public auction sale.
(1995 Code, § 6.04.070)
§ 6.04.080   Training of public safety dispatchers.
   (A)   The city declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the
State of California under the provisions of Cal. Penal Code § 13522, Chapter 1
of Title 4, Part 4.
   (B)   Pursuant to Cal. Penal Code § 13510(c), Chapter 1, the Police
Department will adhere to standards for recruitment and training established by
the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training (POST).
   (C)   Pursuant to Cal. Penal Code § 13512, Chapter 1, the POST Commission
and its representatives may make such inquiries as deemed appropriate by the
Commission to ascertain that Police Department public safety dispatcher
personnel adhere to standards for selection and training established by the
Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training.
(1995 Code, § 6.04.080)
§ 6.04.090 Code Enforcement.
   All authority and responsibility previously granted by this Code to the Fire
Chief or the Fire Department pertaining to Code Enforcement activities, will be
granted to the Police Chief or his or her designee and the Tulare Police
Department. Code Enforcement shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of
all applicable state and city codes including, but not limited to, the City of
Tulare Municipal Code, the California Health and Safety Code, Uniform Fire
Code, Uniform Building Code, Uniform Housing Code and Uniform Code for the
Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, as the codes may, from time to time, be
amended.
(Ord. 14-02, passed 3-18-2014)
CHAPTER 6.08: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
   
6.08.010   Damaging fountains or hydrants.
   
6.08.020   Disorderly conduct.
   
6.08.030   Selling in public places.
   
6.08.040   Soliciting at depots.
   
6.08.050   Tampering with fire hydrants.
   
6.08.060   Unlawful presence on school grounds or related facilities.
   
6.08.070   Public nudity.
§ 6.08.010   Damaging fountains or hydrants.
   No person shall injure, cause to be injured or, in any manner, molest any
public fountain or hydrant where water is furnished for drinking purposes,
whether the same be donated to the public by individuals or societies or
maintained at the public expense.
(1995 Code, § 6.08.010)
§ 6.08.020   Disorderly conduct.
   Any person who shall engage in any disorderly or boisterous conduct; or
disturb the peace of others by assaulting, striking or fighting; or be found in
an intoxicated or drunken condition upon any street, thoroughfare, alley,
sidewalk or other place dedicated to or in general use of the public; or who
shall expose his or her person or any part thereof in any indecent or lewd
manner in any public place within the city where there are other persons to be
offended or annoyed thereby, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1995 Code, § 6.08.020)
§ 6.08.030   Selling in public places.
   No person shall occupy or obstruct any public street, alley or sidewalk,
with or without any stand, box or other equipment, for the purpose of selling
or soliciting the sale of any goods, wares or merchandise, or for the purpose
of giving any demonstration or exhibition in connection with the sale or
solicitation of the sale of any goods, wares or merchandise. No person shall be
deemed to be occupying or obstructing any street, alley or sidewalk within the
meaning thereof, while traveling and in motion thereon.
(1995 Code, § 6.08.030)
§ 6.08.040   Soliciting at depots.
   No person shall solicit patronage for any hotel, vehicle or other business
upon the depot platform of any railroad within the city, nor within 40 feet of
the main track of the railroad without permission in writing to do so from the
owner or managing agent or superintendent of the road, and then only under such
restrictions as may be imposed.
(1995 Code, § 6.08.040)
§ 6.08.050   Tampering with fire hydrants.
   No person, unless duly authorized to do so, shall, in any manner, molest,
injure or interfere with any hydrant, fireplug or other water connection in the
city.
(1995 Code, § 6.08.050)
§ 6.08.060   Unlawful presence on school grounds or related facilities.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, not a student of the school involved,
to return to any school grounds, school buildings or streets, sidewalks or
public ways adjacent thereto, without lawful business therein, within a period
of 90 days if the person has been asked, during school hours or during school
functions, to leave the school grounds, school buildings or streets, sidewalks
or public ways adjacent thereto, by the Chief Administrative Officer of the
school, or by any certified school employee designated as the agent of the
Chief Administrative Officer or by any peace officer for any of the following
reasons:
   (A)   Misconduct on or about any of the above-described premises (misconduct
is to be defined by local school regulations regarding conduct on campus, or by
Cal. Penal Code § 415);
   (B)   Conviction of any offense requiring registration under Cal. Penal Code
§ 290;
   (C)   Conviction of any offense included in Cal. Health and Safety Code
Division 10 or Division 10.5; or
   (D)   Repeated or frequent loitering in or about the above-described
premises, without having lawful business at the premises.
(1995 Code, § 6.08.060)
§ 6.08.070   Public nudity.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally
appear in public in a state of nudity. NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY means:
      (1)   The appearance or display of the human bare buttock, anus, male
genitals, female genitals or the areola or nipple of the female breast; or
      (2)   A state of dress which fails to opaquely and fully cover a human
buttock, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region or areola or nipple of the
female breast.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to children under ten years of age.
(1995 Code, § 6.08.070)
CHAPTER 6.12: TULARE ANIMAL ORDINANCE
Section
   
6.12.010   Short title.
   
6.12.020   Purpose—Construction.
   
6.12.030   Relationship to other laws.
   
6.12.040   Authority to set fees and charges.
   
6.12.050   Definitions.
   
6.12.060   Jurisdiction.
   
6.12.070   Corrective action plan.
   
6.12.080   Administrative citation, hearing, appeals and penalties process.
   
6.12.090   Legal effect of license.
   
6.12.100   Licensing of dogs.
   
6.12.110   Unlicensed dogs.
   
6.12.120   Vaccinations..
   
6.12.130   Duty of veterinarians to furnish rabies vaccination certificates.
   
6.12.140   Unlicensed vaccinated dogs.
   
6.12.150   Animal ownership.
   
6.12.160   Proper care.
   
6.12.170   Implantation of microchip.
   
6.12.180   Prohibited conduct.
   
6.12.190   Animals in vehicles.
   
6.12.200   Tethering and chaining of dogs.
   
6.12.210   Animal nuisances prohibited.
   
6.12.220   Kennel and breeder permitting.
   
6.12.230   Transfer of kennel and breeder permit.
   
6.12.240   Kennel and breeder permitting standards.
   
6.12.250   Kennel and breeder records.
   
6.12.260   Records of dogs sold.
   
6.12.270   Kennel inspections.
   
6.12.280   Kennel and breeder violations.
   
6.12.290   Breeder permit and advertising for commercial kennels.
   
6.12.300   Swap meets and yard sales within Tulare City
   
6.12.310   Dogs at large.
   
6.12.320   Dogs at large causing injury.
   
6.12.330   Livestock or equine at large.
   
6.12.340   Animals subject to impoundment.
   
6.12.350   Rabies quarantine.
   
6.12.360   Potentially dangerous and vicious animals.
   
6.12.370   Potentially dangerous and vicious animals hearings and appeals.
   
6.12.380   Spay and neuter of Tulare City dogs and cats—Findings.
   
6.12.390   Care of feral cats.
   
6.12.400   Spaying and neutering.
   
6.12.410   Unaltered animal certification—Administration.
   
6.12.420   Impoundment of unaltered dog or cat.
   
6.12.430   Unaltered animal penalty for violation.
   
6.12.440   Severability.
§ 6.12.010   Short title.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Tulare City Animal
Ordinance.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.020   Purpose—Construction.
   This chapter is intended to regulate, control, and protect domestic animals
within the incorporated area of the City of Tulare City. It is the policy of
the city to secure and maintain such levels of animal control as necessary to
protect human health and safety, to prevent property damage to the greatest
extent practicable, and to prevent injury or cruelty to animal life.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.030   Relationship to other laws.
   This chapter is not intended to, nor shall it be construed or given effect
in a manner that causes it to apply to any activity which is regulated by
federal or state law. This chapter shall be interpreted to be compatible with
federal and state enactments, and in furtherance of the public purposes which
those enactments express. Tulare City will uphold the laws of the State of
California. Where the ordinances are silent, Tulare City will enforce the laws
of the State of California related to the health and welfare of animals, as
amended from time to time.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.040   Authority to set fees and charges.
   Fees shall be established by the Tulare City Council including but not be
limited to, fees for impoundment, licensing, kenneling, adoption, disposal, and
boarding of animals. The fees and charges established by the city are designed
to recover the reasonable cost of providing said services, including
administrative costs as related to said services and allowable by law.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.050   Definitions.
   Unless the provision or context requires otherwise, the definitions
contained in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter. Where
a definition is not given or where a question of interpretation arises, the
definition that shall control is the normal meaning of the word within the
context of its use.
   ABANDON. To leave an animal upon any public street or other public place, or
upon any private property or premises with no intention of returning to care
for that animal.
   ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION. A notice provided by the Animal Services Manager or
an Animal Services Officer outlining behaviors in violation of this chapter and
in accordance with Tulare City Municipal Code
Chapter 1.61, titled Administrative Citations.
   ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW OFFICER. The Chief of Police or his or her designee.
The Chief of Police may contract with a qualified provider to conduct
administrative reviews or process administrative citations.
   ADOPTABLE. Pursuant to Cal. Penal Code § 599d(a), animals eight weeks of age
or older that, at or subsequent to the time they are impounded or otherwise
taken into possession, have manifested no sign of a behavioral or temperamental
defect that could pose a health or safety risk or otherwise make the animal
unsuitable for placement as a pet, and have manifested no sign of disease,
injury, congenital or hereditary condition that is anticipated to adversely
affect the animal’s health in the future.
   ANIMAL. Any mammal, reptile, avian or fish.
   ANIMAL SERVICES DIVISION or ANIMAL SERVICES. The Division, and its duly
authorized staff, within the Tulare Police Department, which has been
established to oversee the city’s Animal Services and licensing functions and
the day-to-day operations of the city’s Animal Services Facility.
   ANIMAL SERVICES OFFICER. A person duly appointed by the Animal Services
Manager or Chief of Police to carry out the activities and programs of Animal
Services.
   ANIMAL NUISANCE. Such actions or behaviors of an animal which interfere with
the rights of persons to the enjoyment of life or property by creating chronic
annoyance, disturbance, or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity
to the premises where the animal is kept, harbored or maintained, and shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Causing fouling of the air by the unpleasant odor of accumulated
fecal waste or urine. Such fouling of the air must be detected from a location
or locations other than the property in question;
      (2)   Causing unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings;
      (3)   Making a chronic, continuous excessively loud or disturbing noise
of more than a 15-minute duration per incident, that prevents the resident or
residents of any property from enjoying the full use of that property for any
lawful purpose including but not limited to sleep or rest.
      This does not include periodic barking or other utterances of short
duration. This list excludes agricultural operations in compliance with zoning
ordinances and/or special use permits.
   ANIMAL OWNER, OWNER or CUSTODIAN. Any person who owns an animal or who has
charge, care, custody or control of, or has a right to control an animal for 14
or more consecutive calendar days, except a veterinarian caring for an animal
in the regular practice of veterinary medicine.
   ANIMAL RESCUE. Any person or organization, operating as a recognized 501(c)
(3) non-profit, that provides housing and care for domestic animals with the
purpose of placing those animals with a new and permanent guardian, or
providing hospice (end-of-life care) to terminally ill animals, or sanctuary to
animals which cannot be adopted out.
   ANIMAL SERVICES MANAGER or MANAGER. The person, appointed by the Chief of
Police, who is tasked with the management of the Animal Services Division.
   ANIMAL SERVICES PERSONNEL. Any person working at the Animal Shelter and
tasked with carrying out the activities and programs of Animal Services.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. The city-owned shelter, operated for the purposes of
impounding, caring for, adopting out, and placing seized, stray, distressed,
homeless, abandoned, or unwanted animals.
   AT LARGE. An animal off the premises of its owner or custodian and:
      (1)   If livestock, not properly fenced, or not under the control and in
the immediate presence of the owner or custodian; or
      (2)   If a dog, not under physical restraint.
   BITING ANIMAL. Any animal, other than a law enforcement service dog, that
bites a person or other animal in the incorporated areas of the City of Tulare;
provided however, that the person or animal bitten was not at the time either
provoking or teasing the animal without cause. The records of animal bites kept
by Animal Services shall be deemed official records and shall establish the
number of bites recorded.
   BREEDING PERMIT. A permit issued by Animal Services to commercial kennels
engaging in the breeding of animals.
   CAT. Any domestic cat (Felis catus).
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Tulare, California.
   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager of the City of Tulare or his or her designee
and acting within the scope of the City Manager’s authority.
   CITY PROPERTY. Any building, land or water owned, leased, managed, or
controlled by the city.
   CORRECTIVE ACTION PLAN. A directive from the Animal Services Manager, or
similarly situated person, compliance with which will result in return of an
animal and/or cessation of any pending matters with Animal Services.
   DOG. Any domestic dog (Canis familiaris).
   DOG LICENSE. A tag, which will be firmly affixed to the animal’s collar on
which is imprinted the phone number and name of the issuing agency, and a
serial number unique to the individual tag.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Dogs and cats, except as limited in the definition of
“feral animal” in this section.
   EQUINE. Any horse, pony, mule, or burro.
   EXOTIC ANIMAL. Any wild animal which the California Fish and Game Commission
has declared to be a prohibited wild animal and the importation, transportation
or possession of which is unlawful except under authority of a revocable permit
issued by the California Department of Fish and Game.
   FERAL ANIMAL. Any domestic animal that is known to live in a wild or semi-
wild state without benefit of an owner, or any domestic animal that has escaped
for a substantial period of time from the care of its owner or custodian and is
existing in a wild state, without benefit of domestication.
   FERAL CAT COLONY. A group of two of more feral animals (cats) living in a
wild or semi-wild state without benefit of an owner.
   GUIDE DOG. Any guide dog or seeing eye dog which has been trained by a
person licensed under Chapter 9.5 (commencing with § 7200) of the Cal. Business
and Professions Code.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The Health Officer of the county or his or her designee.
   HEARING. Means the process prescribed in §
6.12.360 for the redress of issues relating to or arising from the enforcement
of this chapter including, but not limited to, potentially dangerous and
vicious animals, permits, or such other administrative matters  for which a
person is entitled to an impartial third party decision maker.
   HEARING OFFICER. The person designated by the Police Chief, or his or her
designee, to preside at and render judgments from hearings transacted under the
authority of this chapter. The person may be an employee of the city who is not
assigned to Animal Services or otherwise subordinate to the Manager thereof, or
a person who is not an employee but is retained to provide such services. Any
such Hearing Officer shall be qualified by training or experience or shall be
an attorney or an administrative law judge. The person shall be impartial and
make a decision based on the evidence presented at the hearing.
   HEARING OFFICER, APPEAL. A person designated by the Police Chief, or his or
her designee, to preside at any appeal hearing. The appeal hearing does not
render judgment as a Hearing Officer but rather confirms or denies the decision
made at the hearing. The Animal Services Manager may act as the Appeal Officer.
   IMPOUND. The physical restraint and transport of an animal to the Animal
Shelter by Animal Services personnel, another agency, or the general public. An
animal confined and returned to the owner or custodian, prior to transport to
the Animal Shelter, is considered to be impounded.
   IMPOUNDMENT. The taking up and confining of an animal, by Animal Services,
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or other applicable law or
regulation.
   KENNEL—COMMERCIAL or COMMERCIAL KENNEL. Any lot or premises on which five or
more dogs over four months of age are kept by the owner or occupant for
commercial purposes, including, but not limited to, boarding, breeding, buying,
selling, renting, or training.
   KENNEL—NON-COMMERCIAL or NON-COMMERCIAL KENNEL. Any lot or premises on which
five or more dogs over four months of age are owned and kept by the owner or
occupant for personal, noncommercial purposes, including, but not limited to,
hunting, tracking, exhibiting at shows, exhibitions, field trials,
competitions, or perpetuating a given breed, or the fostering of dogs on behalf
of Animal Services. Breeding, buying and selling of animals by a NON-COMMERCIAL
KENNEL is prohibited.
   KENNEL—NON-PROFIT or RESCUE KENNEL. Any lot or premises on which five or
more dogs are kept by a person or organization operating as a 501(c)(3) that
provides housing and care for domestic animals with the purpose of placing
those animals with a new and permanent guardian, or providing hospice (end-of-
life care) to terminally ill animals, or sanctuary to animals which cannot be
adopted out.
   LICENSED PREMISES. Any lot or premises on which a commercial kennel or non-
commercial kennel is maintained by the person owning or occupying such lot or
premises.
   LIVESTOCK. Any cattle, sheep, swine or goats, or any llamas or other
camelidae, or any domestic fowl or rabbits.
   MICROCHIP. An identifying integrated circuit placed under the skin of an
animal.
   NONLETHAL FORCE. Capture guns, counter-assault agents (pepper spray,
citronella based deterrents, etc.), blowguns, carbon dioxide operated rifles
and pistols, air guns, and electronic control devices.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, association, organization, partnership, joint
venture, business trust, corporation or company.
   PETS, PET STORE PETS. Dogs, cats, rabbits, birds, guinea pigs, hamsters,
mice, snakes, iguanas, turtles and any other species of animal which can be
legally sold or retained for the purpose of being kept as a household pet.
   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMAL. Any of the following:
   (A)   Any animal which behaves in such a manner that the owner or custodian
thereof knows or should know that the animal poses a threat to public safety;
   (B)   Any animal which because of its size, training, behavior, physical
nature, or vicious propensity would threaten public safety were it not
controlled as prescribed in this chapter;
   (C)   Any animal which threatens or attacks any person in a manner which
requires substantial defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury;
   (D)   Any animal which threatens or attacks any other animal belonging to
another when such other animal is confined upon private property or otherwise
lawfully restrained and controlled.
   PREMISES. Any property owned, leased or rented by any person.
   SECURE ENCLOSURE. A fence or structure suitable to prevent the entry of
young children, and which is suitable to confine a potentially dangerous or
vicious animal in conjunction with other measures which may be taken by the
owner of the animal. The enclosure shall be designed to prevent the animal from
escaping. The animal shall be housed pursuant to Cal. Penal Code § 597(t).
   SERVICE DOG. Any dog that is individually trained to do work or perform
tasks for people with disabilities. Examples of such work or tasks include
guiding people who are blind, alerting people who are deaf, pulling a
wheelchair, alerting and protecting a person who is having a seizure, reminding
a person with mental illness to take prescribed medications, calming a person
with Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) during an anxiety attack, or
performing other duties. Service animals are working animals, not pets. The
work or task a dog has been trained to provide must be directly related to the
person's disability. Dogs whose sole function is to provide comfort or
emotional support do not qualify as service animals under the ADA.
   SEVERE INJURY. Any physical injury to a human being that results in muscle
tears or disfiguring lacerations or requires multiple sutures or corrective or
cosmetic surgery.
   SUBSTANTIAL LEASH. Any substantial chain, cord, rope, strap or other
restraint which is held or otherwise controlled by a person capable of and
actually controlling the animal to which such restraint is attached.
   VETERINARIAN. Any person licensed to practice veterinary medicine in
California.
   VETERINARY FACILITY. A clinic or hospital for the provision of inpatient or
outpatient medical services to domestic and exotic animals. Animals may be
kenneled on site.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL. Any of the following:
   (A)   Any animal seized under Cal. Penal Code § 599aa and upon the
sustaining of a conviction of the owner under subdivision (a) of Cal. Penal
Code § 597.5;
   (B)   Any animal which, when unprovoked, in an aggressive manner, inflicts
severe injury on or kills a human being or other animal;
   (C)   Any animal previously determined to be, and currently listed as, a
potentially dangerous animal which, after its owner or custodian has been
notified of this determination, continues the behavior described in the
definition of “potentially dangerous animal” set out above, or is maintained in
violation of Tulare City ordinances.
   WILD ANIMAL. Any animal identified in Cal. Fish and Game Code § 2116.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.060   Jurisdiction.
   The Animal Services Manager shall supervise the Animal Shelter and all
Animal Services personnel.
   (A)   Responsibility. The Animal Services Manager is responsible for the
regulation and the enforcement of this chapter and all other laws dealing with
animals existing within the incorporated area of the city and any other
incorporated areas which may contract with the city for such services. The
duties of the Animal Services Manager shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
      (1)   To administer the Animal Shelter and keep such records as may be
required;
      (2)   To take up and impound animals which are in violation of this
chapter;
      (3)   To quarantine animals and to cooperate with the County Health
Officer;
      (4)   To administer licensing programs as provided for in this chapter
and in compliance with state and federal laws; and
      (5)   To abate animal nuisances.
      (6)   To provide a suitable building or enclosure to keep and safely hold
all animals impounded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Rules and regulations. The Animal Services Manager may formulate rules
and regulations in conformity with, and for the purpose of carrying out the
intent of, this chapter. Such rules and regulations will be approved by the
Tulare City Council by resolution. Compliance with such rules and regulations
shall be a prerequisite to the issuance and continued validity of any license
provided for herein. Documents that one must submit in order to comply with
this code will be readily available at Animal Services and/or the Tulare City
Hall.
   (C)   Animal Services Officers. Animal Services Officers qualified pursuant
to § 830.9 of the Cal. Penal Code shall enforce the provisions of this chapter,
including:
      (1)   Take up and impound all animals found to be in violation of the
provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   Provide all impounded animals with sufficient shelter, food and
water;
      (3)   Keep such records as may be required by the Tulare City Council or
any other authority;
      (4)   Carry out the provisions of this chapter and all applicable
statutes of the state.
   (D)   Animal Services Officers shall have the power to issue citations
pursuant to §
1.61.030 of Title 1 of the Tulare Municipal Code.
   (E)   Authority to pursue on foot. In the performance of his or her duties,
the Animal Services Manager and each Animal Services Officer shall have the
authority, when in pursuit of an animal, which is in violation of a provision
of this code, to go upon the outdoor property of the owner or a third person
for the purpose of impounding the animal; provided, that in the course of such
pursuit he or she shall exercise reasonable care to avoid causing damage to the
property.
   (F)   Animal Services Officers, in the performance of their duties, shall
have the authority to enter upon private property when exigent circumstances
exist to prevent serious injury or death to animal or human.
   (G)   Authority to use specialized equipment. Upon satisfactory completion
of a Peace Officer Standards and Training Course pursuant to Cal. Penal Code §
832, in the performance of his or her duties, the Animal Services Manager and
Animal Services Officer(s) shall have the authority to employ the use of
specialized equipment, as defined in these ordinances and Cal. Penal Code §
830.9 , and all other animal control devices commonly used by other animal
control agencies located within the State of California. The Animal Services
Manager may authorize trained and certified Animal Services Personnel to use
specialized self-protection equipment such as an expanding baton or other non-
lethal device or chemical agent to prevent personal injury while on duty.
   (H)   Authority to humanely euthanize.
      (1)   The Animal Services Manager or Animal Services Officer shall have
the authority, when a clear and present danger to public safety exists and
reasonable means of capture have failed, or if the animal is irremediably ill,
wounded or suffering, to direct the humane euthanization of an animal in the
field.
      (2)   In such cases of humane euthanization, reasonable efforts will be
made to notify the owner or custodian of the animal, if one exists.
   (I)   Obstruction. Any person who prevents, resists, threatens, or obstructs
an attempt by the Animal Services Manager or Animal Services Officer to perform
his or her lawful duties pursuant to this chapter or any person who conceals or
secrets any animal subject to inspection or impoundment or any owner who fails
to relinquish upon lawful demand any animal to be impounded shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor.
   (J)   Misrepresentation. No person shall willfully make a false or
misleading statement or representation to the Animal Services Manager or Animal
Services Officer acting in his or her official capacity regarding the ownership
or right to custody or control of an animal for which a license is required, or
regarding the ownership of an animal redeemed from, relinquished to, impounded
by, or taken up by the Animal Services Manager or Animal Services Officer
pursuant to this chapter. Such persons shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (K)   Abuse of services. The Animal Services Manager is authorized to charge
and collect a fee, as laid out in the Tulare City fee schedule, from any
person, including the animal’s owner or custodian, who calls Animal Services to
his or her residence requesting emergency assistance more than twice in a six-
month period when no action is taken by the Animal Services Officer upon their
arrival.
   (L)   Allowable animals. The keeping of animals at each physical address
(half addresses are considered a second residence on a property) within the
city limits shall not exceed two cats, three dogs over ten weeks of age, and
two “pet store pets” (those pets other than dogs and cats that are legally sold
at pet stores).
   (M)   Relief from fees. Upon the recommendation of the Animal Services
Manager to the Chief of Police and with the approval of the City Council by
resolution, the fees provided for by this chapter may be waived when animals
have been impounded because of civic disorganization, disruption, or other
conditions of civil emergency, or because of devastation due to fire, flood,
earthquake, storm or other natural calamity.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.070   Corrective action plan.
   At the discretion of the Animal Services Manager, in lieu of a formal
hearing and in conjunction with the animal’s owner, a corrective action plan
may be put in place to abate animal related issues. The animal owner will be
served with the corrective action plan signed by the Animal Services Manager
outlining a plan of action, including but not limited to actions involving
animals running-at-large, minimum shelter requirements, veterinarian care,
animals worrying livestock or other animals, animal nuisance complaints, or
licensing, regarding the animal or animals in question. If the owner or
custodian complies with the requirements of the corrective action plan within
the prescribed time period, no further action on the animal or animals will be
taken and any pending action by Animal Services will cease. If the owner or
custodian fails to comply with the requirements of the corrective action plan
within the prescribed period, Animal Services shall resume any pending action.
   Should an owner or custodian dispute the action taken by Animal Services for
the owner or custodian’s failure to comply with the corrective action plan, the
owner or custodian may request a hearing and pay the applicable hearing fees.
Animal Services shall schedule the hearing and provide notice to the owner or
custodian, via first class mail or personal service, of the date, time and
place of the hearing. Failure to appear at the hearing at the designated time
and place will be deemed a forfeiture of the animal.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.080   Administrative citations, hearing, appeals, and penalties process.
   In addition to the remedies and penalties contained in this chapter, and in
accordance with Cal. Government Code § 53069.4, an administrative citation may
be issued for any violation of Tulare City animal ordinances. The process for
the hearing, appeals and penalties are outlined in the Tulare City Municipal
Code, Title 1,
Chapter 1.61 .
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.090   Legal effect of license.
   (A)   The issuance by Animal Services and the acceptance by the owner of any
license to keep an animal as provided for herein is prima facie evidence that
the owner agrees to comply with the terms and conditions set forth in this
chapter and that the owner has satisfied the basic licensing requirements under
this chapter. Such issuance shall be given no evidentiary weight to indicate
that the owner has conformed to zoning regulations, building regulations,
health and safety regulations or to any other applicable rule, regulation or
statute. For purposes of the administration of this chapter, if, pursuant to
the issuance of official written notice, approval has been given by the office
or agency responsible for the administration of the rule, regulation or statute
in question, such approval shall be deemed prima facie evidence that the matter
approved is in conformance with the rule, regulation or statute in question.
   (B)   Exemptions. The licensing regulations in this chapter are not
applicable to the following:
      (1)   Owners of animals kept as all or part of the stock of (a) nonprofit
zoological gardens open to the public; (b) circuses; or (c) animal exhibits
when such enterprises are operated under business licenses granted by the city.
      (2)   Service dogs as defined in §
6.12.050 of this chapter.
      (3)   Public safety animals such as police, rescue and drug enforcement
dogs.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.100   Licensing of dogs.
   (A)   Every dog meeting the minimum age requirements to receive a rabies
vaccination shall be subject to a dog license fee, due and payable by its owner
or custodian within 30 calendar days of the acquisition of the dog, or entry
into the city. Thereafter, such license fee shall become due and payable on the
date of expiration on any license previously issued to the owner or custodian
for the dog. The amount of such fee shall be established in accordance with §
6.12.040 of this chapter. No license shall be issued without evidence of a
valid rabies vaccination.
   (B)   Upon the written certification of a veterinarian that a dog has been
surgically sterilized, the amount of the license fee shall be not more than one
half the fee established for intact dogs in accordance with Cal. Food and
Agricultural Code § 30804.5.
   (C)   No dog license shall be issued for any dog vaccinated with a vaccine
not authorized by the State of California. Should a rabies vaccination not be
valid for 12 months from the date of application the owner or custodian may
elect to either:
      (1)   Be issued a license at the regular one-year rate as outlined in
division (A) of this section that will expire upon expiration of the
vaccination and be due again in full; or
      (2)   Re-vaccinate and be issued a license which would be valid for at
least 12 months.
   (D)   A dog license fee shall become delinquent 30 calendar days after it
becomes due and payable, and upon delinquency, an additional delinquent fee, as
established by the City Council, shall be added to the regular fee. An unpaid
delinquent fee shall be added to the succeeding year's license fee.
   (E)   Animal Services shall issue serially numbered tags stamped with the
name of the city. This tag is a life time tag, which should not be removed, and
will be unique to the animal to which it was issued. The license tag shall only
be issued upon the application of owners who have complied with the vaccination
and fee provisions of this chapter.
   (F)   Every dog shall be provided by the owner or custodian with a suitable
collar, harness, or other device to which the dog tag can be affixed. The dog
owner or custodian shall ensure that the dog wears such license tag at all
times except when the dog is being prepared for an exhibit at a dog show.
   (G)   A license tag issued for one dog shall not be transferred or attached
to any other dog.
   (H)   Whenever a license tag is lost, stolen, or damaged the owner or
custodian shall apply for and obtain a replacement tag from Animal Services
upon payment of the prescribed replacement fee.
   (I)   Despite anything in this chapter to the contrary, when an owner or
custodian brings into the city a dog which has been licensed in another
jurisdiction, the dog shall be licensed within 30 calendar days as outlined in
this chapter. If the license from the other jurisdiction is valid for at least
12 months, a one-year license may be obtained for replacement tag fees upon the
surrender of the other jurisdiction's license and the proper completion of a
license application.
   (J)   Kennel permit exemption. Any person or place of business that has
properly applied for and received a valid kennel permit as outlined in §
6.12.220 is exempt from licensing each individual dog as described in this
section. This exemption does not relieve the permit holder of the
responsibility of vaccination as outlined in §
6.12.120.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.110   Unlicensed dogs.
   Every owner or custodian of an unlicensed or untagged dog shall be deemed to
be in violation of this chapter and is guilty of an infraction.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.120   Vaccinations.
   (A)   Every dog meeting the minimum age requirements to receive a rabies
vaccination shall receive a rabies vaccine approved by the California State
Department of Health Services.
   (B)   Every person who owns or comes to own an unvaccinated dog over four
months of age shall have 30 calendar days from the date the animal was obtained
to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Every veterinarian, after vaccinating a dog for rabies, shall issue a
certificate to the owner or custodian. The certificate shall include, but not
limited to, the following information:
      (1)   The owner's full name, address, and telephone number;
      (2)   The breed, age, sex, and color or markings of the animal;
      (3)   The date of immunization and expiration;
      (4)   The type of vaccine administered;
      (5)   The name of the vaccine manufacturer;
      (6)   The lot number of the vaccine used; and
      (7)   The signature of the veterinarian administering the vaccination and
their veterinary license number.
   (D)   A copy of the certificate must be kept on file with Animal Services if
the vaccination was issued at the Animal Shelter or low-cost vaccination
clinics held by Animal Services. A duplicate copy may be provided when
requested by the owner or custodian of the dog.
   (E)   The owner or custodian must maintain the certificate of vaccination,
or a copy thereof, and must, upon demand of a public or peace officer acting
within the course and scope of his or her employment, display said certificate
for examination.
   (F)   Upon written proof provided by a veterinarian that a dog has a medical
condition which would cause it to be endangered by receiving a rabies
vaccination, Animal Services may exempt the dog from the vaccination
requirements in this section so long as the dog is kept in strict confinement
and isolated at all times and so long as the medical condition is proven to
exist. The written proof must also contain an estimated date when the dog can
be safely vaccinated. Although temporarily exempt from the vaccination
requirements, the dog is still to be considered non-vaccinated and is not
exempt from other provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.130   Duty of veterinarians to furnish rabies vaccination certificates.
   Every veterinarian practicing veterinary medicine within the City of Tulare
shall furnish Animal Services with a copy of every rabies vaccination
certificate prepared by them or their staff. Such certificates must be mailed
to Animal Services no later than the fifth day of each month. The certificates
may also be picked up by designated Animal Services personnel if prior
arrangements are made by the veterinarian. A violation of this section is an
infraction.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.140   Unlicensed vaccinated dogs.
   Whenever any Animal Services personnel discovers through a vaccination
certificate obtained from any veterinarian that a dog named thereon is
unlicensed, the owner or custodian of such dog will be notified by mail that
such dog is unlicensed and that such dog must be licensed within 30 calendar
days of the date of the notice. The owner or custodian of any such dog which
has been previously licensed in Tulare City shall be subject to a delinquent
fee. The owner or custodian of any such dog which has never been previously
licensed in Tulare City who obtains a license within 30 calendar days of the
date of the notice shall be subject to an administrative fee plus the license
fee or any other applicable fee.
   The owner or custodian of such dog which has never been previously licensed
in Tulare City who does not obtain a license within 30 calendar days of the
date of said notice shall be subject to a delinquent fee, plus the license fee
or any other applicable fee.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.150   Animal ownership.
   Animal owner shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter. This
definition does not apply to government agencies, animal rescue organizations
which have demonstrated to the Department of Animal Services that they have
implemented an ongoing spay/neuter program as well as an adoption program, or
humane societies or societies for the prevention of cruelty to animals, or
persons who provide licensed boarding, kennel, training, or veterinarian
services for the owners of dogs.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.160   Proper care.
   The owner or custodian of any domestic animal shall provide proper and
adequate food, water, shelter, qualified medical care or attention and required
vaccinations, for such domestic animal at a level which insures the domestic
animal's safety, good health, and wellbeing. The owner or custodian shall
maintain any enclosures or surroundings where the domestic animal is kept in a
sanitary condition. A person in violation of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor. After a person has been given written notification that a
violation Cal. Penal Code § 597 and of this chapter exists, each day the
violation continues is to be considered a separate offense.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.170   Implantation of microchip.
   All dogs impounded in the city's Animal Shelter shall be implanted with an
identifying microchip prior to adoption or owner redemption; at the owner's
expense. The owner is required to provide the microchip number to Animal
Services and the national registry who provided the chip. Any change of
ownership of the dog or any change in the owner's contact information shall be
noticed to the national registry and Animal Services within 30 calendar days of
the change of ownership.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.180   Prohibited conduct.
   (A)   No owner or custodian of any animal, wild or domestic, shall permit or
suffer the animal to do any of the following:
      (1)   Be at large;
      (2)   Act or be kept in such a manner as to constitute an animal nuisance
within the meaning of this chapter, as described in §
6.12.210 et seq.;
      (3)   Endanger the life or health of others;
      (4)   Damage the property of others; or
      (5)   Be afflicted with and not be receiving medically accepted treatment
for any injury, zoonotic or other communicable disease.
   (B)   If found guilty of violating this section, the owner or custodian may
be ordered by the Animal Services Manager, Hearing Officer, or court to
relocate or otherwise remove the animal from the location where it is kept, to
prevent further violations. The Animal Services Manager, Hearing Officer, or
court may also prohibit the owner or custodian from owning animals for a period
of three years. These actions may be taken in addition to any other fine or
punishment the Animal Services Manager, Hearing Officer, or court deems
necessary.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to keep or permit to be kept any wild,
undomesticated or exotic animal, as defined in §
6.12.050, within the city limits of Tulare.
      (1)   This section shall not apply to any facility possessing or
maintaining exotic animals which are owned, operated or maintained by any city,
county, state or federal government agency, including but not limited to,
public zoos, museums, laboratories or research facilities maintained by
scientific or educational institutions, and/or animal sanctuaries approved by
the Department of Fish and Wildlife.
      (2)   At such time as any real property is annexed into the City of
Tulare, any exotic animal(s), as defined in this chapter, owned and located on
the property at the time of annexation, shall be entitled to remain in the care
and custody of its owner; notwithstanding the limitations of this chapter, so
long as it is not, in the determination of the Animal Services Division, a
danger to humans or other animals. An exception to this rule is as follows:
         (a)   Wild animals as defined and identified in Cal. Fish and Game
Code § 2116 are strictly prohibited.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.190   Animals in vehicles.
   (A)   No person other than individuals transporting working dogs within
agricultural or rural areas of the city shall transport or carry on any public
highway or public roadway, any animal, wild or domestic, in or by a motorized
vehicle unless the animal is as follows:
      (1)   Safely enclosed within the passenger compartment of the vehicle or
if carried in the area designated for load carrying, the area must be enclosed
or have side and tail racks at least 46 inches in height as measured from the
floor of the vehicle;
      (2)   Protected within a secured container carried within, upon, or by
such a vehicle; or
      (3)   Securely cross-tethered or secured to such vehicle by rope, chain,
or other device in a fashion which prevents injury to the animal from falling
from, being ejected from, or jumping from the vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall leave or confine an animal in any unattended motor
vehicle under conditions that endanger the health or well-being of an animal
due to heat, cold, lack of adequate ventilation, or lack of food or water, or
other circumstances that could reasonably be expected to cause suffering,
disability, or death to the animal.
      (1)   Nothing in this section shall prevent a Peace Officer, Humane
Officer, or an Animal Services Officer from removing an animal from a motor
vehicle if the animal's safety appears to be in immediate danger from heat,
cold, lack of adequate ventilation, lack of food or water, or other
circumstances that could reasonably be expected to cause suffering, disability,
or death to the animal.
      (2)   A Peace Officer, Humane Officer, or Animal Services Officer who
removes an animal from a motor vehicle shall take it to an animal shelter or
other place of safekeeping or, if the officer deems necessary, to a veterinary
hospital for treatment.
      (3)   A Peace Officer, Humane Officer, or Animal Services Officer is
authorized to take all steps that are reasonably necessary for the removal of
an animal from a motor vehicle, including, but not limited to, breaking into
the motor vehicle, after a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other
person responsible.
      (4)   A Peace Officer, Humane Officer, or Animal Services Officer who
removes an animal from a motor vehicle shall, in a secure and conspicuous
location on or within the motor vehicle, leave written notice bearing his or
her name and office, and the address of the location where the animal can be
claimed. The animal may be claimed by the owner only after payment of all
charges that have accrued for the maintenance, care, medical treatment, or
impoundment of the animal.
      (5)   This section does not affect in any way, the existing liabilities
or immunities in current law, or create any new immunities or liabilities.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.200   Tethering and chaining of dogs.
   The tethering and/or chaining of dogs shall be pursuant to Cal. Health and
Safety Code § 122335.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.210   Animal nuisances prohibited.
   (A)   No owner of any animal shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Permit such animal to obstruct the reasonable and comfortable use
of property in any neighborhood or community by chasing vehicles, molesting
passersby, barking, howling or making other noise;
      (2)   Permit such animal to damage or trespass on public or private
property;
      (3)   Permit unsanitary conditions to exist on the premises where such
animal is kept which would cause odors, attract flies or vermin, or which would
be otherwise injurious to the public health, offensive to the senses, or an
obstruction to the free use of property so as to interfere with the comfortable
enjoyment of life or property by members of the neighborhood or community or
any considerable number of other persons;
      (4)   Maintain a dangerous animal in a manner that creates a significant
threat to the public health, safety, and welfare.
   (B)   Any violation of this section is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance.
   (C)   Whenever the Manager or any Animal Services Officer has reasonable
cause to believe that a public nuisance as defined in this section exists, the
Manager may conduct an investigation of the alleged nuisance. Whenever it is
affirmed in writing by two or more persons residing in separate residences or
regularly employed in the neighborhood that a public nuisance as defined in
this section exists, the Manager shall investigate the alleged nuisance.
Provided, however, that where there is only one person residing or regularly
employed within 300 feet of the alleged public nuisance, written affirmation of
only that one person shall be required for the Manager to investigate the
alleged nuisance. If, upon investigation, the Manager determines that a public
nuisance exists, the Manager may issue an order to the owner of the offending
animal directing that such nuisance be abated. In the event that the owner does
not comply with the abatement order, the Manager may immediately refer the
matter to the district attorney for prosecution of the public nuisance.
   (D)   Any person may maintain an action under Cal. Civil Code § 3493 for
compliance with the requirements of this section.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any of the preceding, no animal which is part of an
agricultural operation exempt from being or becoming a nuisance by Cal. Civil
Code § 3482.5 shall be deemed to be a public nuisance under this section,
provided such animal is owned and kept in compliance with this chapter and
state law.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.220 Kennel and breeder permitting.
   No person shall operate a commercial, non-commercial, or rescue boarding
kennel without first obtaining a permit in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter and paying such fees as established by Animal Services. These
permits shall expire June 30 of every calendar year.
   All kennels must also operate in accordance with applicable zoning laws and
may require a special use permit from Tulare City's Building and Planning
Department. Any kennel not operating within the proper zone and/or with a
special use permit will be subject to the penalties of Code Enforcement. All
kennel applicants shall also include a letter of compliance issued by the
appropriate local building and planning official indicating conformity with the
provisions of zoning and building ordinances of the city.
   Any commercial kennel engaging in the breeding of animals shall be required
to obtain and maintain a breeding permit from Animal Services.
   Private or "back yard" breeding is strictly prohibited in the City of
Tulare.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.230 Transfer of kennel and breeder permit.
   A current kennel permit may be transferred if the transferee files an
application therefore and pays the related transfer fee as established by
Animal Services. No permit may be transferred unless the kennel meets the
standards prescribed by this chapter.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.240 Kennel and breeder permitting standards.
   (A)   Acknowledgment of standards. A copy of the applicable standards will
be supplied to the applicant with each request for an application for a permit,
and the applicant shall acknowledge receipt of such standards and agree to
comply with them and to allow inspections at reasonable times by signing the
application form.
   (B)   Demonstration of compliance with standards. Each applicant or kennel
operator must demonstrate that his or her premises and any facilities or
equipment used in his or her kennel complies with the standards. In addition,
each applicant or kennel operator shall correct any deficiencies noted within a
reasonable time as specified by designee. Upon request by Animal Services, the
applicant or kennel operator must make his or her premises, facilities, and
equipment available for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with said
standards.
   (C)   Conditions and restrictions. Animal Services may issue a permit under
any conditions and restrictions which are deemed necessary for the protection
of animal and/or public health, safety, or welfare, and shall specify such
conditions and restrictions on the permit.
   (D)   Denial of an application may include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Any person applying for an original permit who has not received
approval for the location from the appropriate planning/zoning department or
who has not obtained any necessary permit(s) and/or license(s) for its
operation; or
      (2)   Any person whose permit has been suspended, for the period during
which the order of suspension is in effect; or
      (3)   Any person who has been or is an officer, agent or employee of a
permitted establishment whose permit has been suspended or revoked and who was
responsible for or participated in the violation upon which the order of
suspension or revocation was based, for the period during which the order of
suspension is in effect and for a period of one year from the effective date of
a revocation, or if a revocation has been stayed, until one year from the
expiration of a stay; or
      (4)   Any person whose permit has been revoked, or any partnership, firm,
corporation, or legal entity in which any such person has substantial financial
interest for a period of one year from the effective date of such revocation,
or if a revocation has been stayed, until one year from the expiration of the
stay; or
      (5)   Any person who fails to comply with any provision of this chapter;
or
      (6)   Any person who has been convicted of the crime of cruelty to
animals, whether in this state or any other state.
      (7)   Any person with a prior record of animal abuse and/or defiance of
existing animal control codes. *This list is not exhaustive and other relevant
factors may be taken into consideration in approving or denying a kennel permit
application.
   (E)   Right to appeal denial of kennel permit. Should a kennel owner dispute
the denial by Animal Services of their application for a kennel permit, kennel
owner may request an administrative review and pay the applicable fees. Animal
Services shall schedule the administrative review and provide notice to the
kennel owner, via first class mail or personal service, of the date, time and
place of the administrative review. Failure to appear at the administrative
review at the designated time and place will be deemed a forfeiture of the
application for kennel permit and fees.
      Judicial review of a decision made after an appeal hearing pursuant to
this section shall be made pursuant to § 1094.6 of the Cal. Code of Civil
Procedure where and to the extent said section may be applicable.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.250 Kennel and breeder records.
   Kennel operators shall keep available for inspection on the premises records
that shall show the name, current address and telephone number of the owner of
each animal kept at the kennel, the description of the animal, including its
age (if known) or approximate age, breed, sex and color. As a part of such
record, a current valid rabies certificate or other written proof of
vaccination, verified in writing, shall be maintained for each dog required to
be vaccinated by this chapter, showing the dog owner's name, including breed,
color, sex, month and year of birth; the date of vaccination; and the name and
telephone number of the veterinarian who vaccinated the dog or telephone number
of the agency verifying vaccination. In addition, each kennel operator shall
have someone in attendance at the kennel able to identify each animal in the
kennel, except those animals under four months of age may be identified as a
litter.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.260 Records of dogs sold.
   All kennel operators shall maintain records of all dogs sold, of any age.
Records shall include the source of the animal, the new owner's name and
address, and a description of the animal including breed, color, sex, month and
year of birth, and veterinary records. These records may be accessed by the
Animal Control Officer or his or her designee as deemed necessary.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.270 Kennel inspections.
   Because of the need to adequately protect animals within kennels from
unhealthy conditions and practices and the interests of society in curbing and
preventing inhumane practices, reasonable inspection requirements dictate that
Animal Services shall have the right to inspect kennels at reasonable times,
though this may be done at unannounced times. As a condition of the issuance of
a kennel permit, each operator shall agree to allow such inspections; such
acknowledgment shall be made as part of the application and file.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.280 Kennel and breeder violations.
   Any act or omission by a kennel operator in contravention of this chapter's
requirements, or of any of the conditions or restrictions of the issued permit,
shall be grounds for and shall authorize the suspension and/or the revocation
of the kennel permit by the Animal Services Manager or designee; independent of
any criminal prosecution or the results thereof. Revocation of a kennel permit
will entitle the permit holder to request a hearing by a Hearing Officer.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.290 Breeder permit and advertising for commercial kennels.
   It is unlawful for any person to breed dogs for sale, for any profit
whatsoever, or to advertise the sale or availability for adoption of such
animals without first obtaining a breeder permit. The fees for a breeder permit
shall be set by the Tulare City Council and shall be paid to Animal Services.
   To obtain a permit, the applicant must fill out the appropriate license and
be approved by Animal Services. The applicant must agree that they may not sell
or adopt out any dogs until eight weeks of age and each has been vaccinated
against common diseases. The breeder must list the permit number when
advertising dogs for sale or adoption, must list the permit number as part of
the sale or adoption paperwork, and must disclose the permit number to all
potential purchasers or adopters of dogs.
   It is unlawful for any person to advertise for the sale or adoption of any
dogs without including in the advertisement a breeder permit number.
   A breeder permit shall be in addition to any other requirements and
conditions set forth in the city ordinances or by state law, including Cal.
Health and Safety Code §§ 122045 et seq.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.300 Swap meets and yard sales within the City of Tulare.
   Effective as of January 1, 2016, it shall be unlawful for any vendor to sell
animals at swap meets within the City of Tulare as set forth in §§ 122370
through 122374 of the Cal. Health and Safety Code.
   It is unlawful for any person to sell or give away any animal from a yard
sale.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.310 Dogs at large.
   No person shall permit a dog to stray from private property owned or legally
possessed by the dog owner or custodian unless the dog is restrained by a leash
or lead not exceeding eight feet in length, except in the following situations:
   (A)   When the dog is assisting a Peace Officer who is engaged in law
enforcement duties or when the dog is participating in a search and rescue
effort at the specific request of a law enforcement authority;
   (B)   When the dog is enrolled in and actually participating in a dog
training or obedience course, exhibition, or competition conducted by an
organization on private or public property with the permission of the owner or
operator of the grounds of facilities. Organizations sponsoring such activities
shall notify Animal Services no later than three business days prior to the
event;
   (C)   When the dog is assisting the owner or person in charge of livestock
in the herding or control of such livestock; or
   (D)   When the dog is accompanying and under the direction of a person
engaged in hunting on property where such activities are allowed, or on private
property with written permission of the owner.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.320 Dog at large, causing injury.
   Any owner or custodian of any dog, which is running at large, that causes
injury through indirect, or direct action, is guilty of a misdemeanor. Nothing
in this section precludes prosecution for any additional or more severe
applicable state or federal criminal liability that may apply as a result of
injuries, property damage, or death that resulted from the animal running at
large.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.330 Livestock or equine at large.
   (A)   No person shall keep or maintain within the city, without a permit in
writing issued by the Animal Services Manager, any equine or livestock.
      (1)   Any person requesting to keep or maintain any equine or livestock
within the city shall submit a written request for permission to the Animal
Services Manger outlining the circumstances for the need to place such animals
in the city, location where the animals will be kept and a plan to care for the
animals and sanitation. The request for permission must be submitted and
granted prior to placement of animal. The Animal Services Manager shall review
the request and either grant or deny it.
   (B)   No person owning or having control of any equine or livestock shall
permit the same to run or trespass upon the premises of any other person within
the city limits.
   (C)   Nothing in this section precludes prosecution for any additional or
more severe applicable state or federal criminal liability which may apply as a
result of injuries, property damage, or death which resulted from the livestock
or equine running at large.
   (D)   In addition to any other penalties imposed, the owner or custodian of
the livestock or equine shall be liable for the salaries, costs, and other
expenses incurred by the division in restraining, capturing, or rescuing such
livestock or equine.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.340 Animals subject to impoundment.
   (A)   Any animal shall be taken up and impounded at the Animal Shelter (or
at such other place as may be approved by the director) if, to the knowledge of
Animal Services, any of the following conditions exist, including but not
limited to:
      (1)   The animal is engaged in an activity or existing in a condition
prohibited by this chapter;
      (2)   The animal is, or will be, without proper care due to the injury,
illness, death, incarceration, or other involuntary absence of the owner or
person responsible for the care of such animal;
      (3)   The animal poses an immediate threat to public safety and/or
health; or
      (4)   The animal is required to be quarantined.
   (B)   Notice of impoundment. When an animal implanted with a microchip or
wearing a current Tulare City license is impounded, Animal Services shall make
a reasonable attempt to notify the owner or custodian of record of the date and
place of impoundment or removal, and the procedure whereby the owner or
custodian may apply to regain custody of the animal.
   (C)   Duration.
      (1)   All impounded animals shall be kept in the Animal Shelter or other
authorized place of Impoundment for the period as described in §§ 31108, 31752
and 31753 of the Cal. Food and Agricultural Code.
      (2)   During this holding period and prior to adoption or euthanasia, the
animal will be scanned for a microchip, license tag, tattoo or other form of
identification. If one is found and the owner can be determined, a reasonable
effort must be made to contact the owner of the animal.
      (3)   Except for stray animals experiencing irremediable suffering or
needing maternal care, any stray animal impounded shall, prior to the scheduled
euthanasia of that animal, be released to an animal rescue.
   (D)   Redemption.
      (1)   The owner or custodian of any animal impounded may, at any time
before the expiration of the period of impoundment, redeem the animal by paying
all civil penalties, fees and charges accrued. If the animal is subject to the
licensing or license provisions of this chapter, the licensing requirements
must be satisfied before the animal is released.
      (2)   Pursuant to § 31254 of the Cal. Food and Agricultural Code, the
refusal or failure of the owner or custodian of any impounded animal to pay the
fees and charges after due notification shall be held to be an abandonment of
the animal by the owner or custodian.
      (3)   All animals that have been impounded must be implanted with a
microchip at the owner's or custodian's expense prior to redemption.
      (4)   Refer to §
6.12.400, Spay and Neuter of City Dogs and Cats for redemption of unaltered
animals.
   (E)   Owner surrendered animals.
      (1)   Upon surrender of the animal to Animal Services, the owner or
custodian must present sufficient identification such as driver's license,
California identification card, bill of sale for the animal, adoption contract
or dog license, to establish his or her ownership of the animal and shall sign
a statement that he or she is the lawful owner of the animal. The owner or
custodian of the surrendered animal must pay all required fees.
      (2)   If the animal surrendered has a history of potentially dangerous or
vicious behavior, it may be immediately euthanized in accordance with § 31108.5
of the Cal. Food and Agricultural Code.
      (3)   All animals will be held for the length of time outlined in § 31754
of the Cal. Food and Agricultural Code.
   (F)   Disposition of impounded and surrendered animals.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, an impounded animal
which is not redeemed within the applicable holding period specified in this
chapter or an animal voluntarily surrendered to Animal Services for adoption,
except an animal that has been impounded for quarantine or is known to have
bitten a human or to have demonstrated potentially dangerous or vicious
propensities, may be offered for adoption as determined by Animal Services and
in accordance with the laws of the State of California.
      (2)   When an animal is adopted, the receipt issued by Animal Services
shall be valid proof of ownership to the adopter. All adoptions shall convey a
good and valid title to the adopter, and the previous animal owner or custodian
shall thereafter be barred from recovering said animal.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.350 Rabies quarantine.
   (A)   (1)   Animal Services shall ensure that all animals falling into the
following categories shall be isolated or quarantined or destroyed and a rabies
specimen taken at Animal Services or at such other place and under such
conditions as are prescribed by the Health Officer or authorized according to
other applicable California state laws and regulations, including but not
limited to:
         (a)   Known rabid animals;
         (b)   Suspected rabid animals;
         (c)   Animals that have bitten or otherwise exposed a human to rabies;
and
         (d)   Animals of a species subject to rabies, which have been bitten
by a known rabid or suspected rabid animal or have been in intimate contact
with a known rabid or suspected rabid animal.
      (2)   In circumstances where the bite or exposure to rabies occurred
while the victim was on the property of the owner or custodian of the animal or
when the victim is a member of the family or household of the owner or
custodian, and when the animal is not currently vaccinated against rabies, and,
as applicable, licensed as required by the provisions of this chapter, the
animal may, at the discretion of Animal Service, be quarantined on the property
of the owner providing the following:
         (a)   The owner of said animal can and does agree to ensure its
confinement and isolation for the period of quarantine;
         (b)   The owner agrees, upon demand of the Health Officer or Animal
Services during the period of quarantine, to surrender the animal to Animal
Services;
         (c)   The owner agrees to immediately notify Animal Services if the
animal escapes, becomes ill, or dies.
         (d)   It is unlawful for the owner or custodian of an animal to
violate any of the conditions of isolation or quarantine prescribed by the
Health Officer or Animal Services. Any violation of this section is a
misdemeanor.
   (B)   Non-vaccinated biting animals fee. Notwithstanding any other provision
of this chapter, the owner of any animal which is required by law to be
vaccinated for rabies and which has not been so vaccinated and which bites or
wounds any person or other animal shall be subject to a penalty fee.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.360 Potentially dangerous and vicious animals.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The purpose of this section is to regulate the keeping of animals
which are potentially dangerous or vicious or involve a threat to the safety of
people and other animals on streets, sidewalks, and private property where the
animals are not properly maintained as such animals constitute a serious hazard
within the City of Tulare. The increasing tendency to maintain animals which,
by virtue of breeding or training, have a propensity to attack others,
compounds the hazard.
      (2)   Every owner or custodian of an animal is held strictly accountable
for the exercise of such control over the animal as necessary to ensure that
the animal does not injure innocent human beings or other animals that are not
on the premises where the animal is maintained. Such strict accountability is
imposed whether or not the injury results from the negligence or fault of the
owner or custodian, and regardless of the degree of precaution or control
exercised by the owner or custodian.
   (B)   Owner responsible.
      (1)   Any owner or custodian of any animal is deemed responsible for the
acts committed by that animal when the owner or custodian has failed to comply
with the legal requirements for the keeping of that animal as defined in this
chapter. No person shall permit an animal to act in such a manner as
constitutes potentially dangerous or vicious behavior as defined in §
6.12.050 of this chapter.
      (2)   A violation of any of the provisions of this section is punishable
as follows:
         (a)   On a first offence, any animal owner who maintains an animal in
such a manner as to permit it to exhibit potentially dangerous behavior shall
be guilty of an infraction.
         (b)   On the second and subsequent offence, any animal owner who
maintains any animal in such a manner as to permit it to exhibit vicious
behavior shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall prevent prosecution for violations of
other statutes or codes which may deal with other or more specific offenses,
including but not limited to, penal and civil statutes.
   (C)   Quarantine or impound. No animal which has been declared potentially
dangerous or vicious or against which a potentially dangerous or vicious animal
report has been filed may be impounded or quarantined at any place other than
Animal Services, unless authorized by the Animal Services Manager.
   (D)   Notice of escape. Any person keeping, harboring, maintaining, or
owning a potentially dangerous animal, vicious animal, or wild animal that
escapes from its confinement shall immediately notify Animal Services.
Notification shall first be by phone and shall be followed with written
notification within one business day, via email to Animal Services, which
includes the following information, as known:
      (1)   The date, place, and time of the animal's escape;
      (2)   A description of the animal, including a photo, and its condition
at the time of escape; and
      (3)   The name, address, and residential and occupational telephone
numbers of the owner of the animal.
   (E)   Filling of a complaint. Any person, including employees of Animal
Services, possessing personal knowledge of facts that there exists a
potentially dangerous or vicious animal within the incorporated area of the
city or those contracted areas served by Animal Services may file with Animal
Services a written report, signed under the penalty of perjury, which contains
the following facts:
      (1)   A description of the offending animal including, to the extent
known, the color, size, sex, breed and name of the animal, and the name and
address of the animal owner or custodian;
      (2)   An assertion that the animal described is a potentially dangerous
or vicious within the meaning of §
6.12.050, together with a statement of the facts upon which the assertion was
based, including the name and address of any person who has been victimized or
injured, including a description of the extent of the injuries, the names and
addresses of the witnesses thereto, the time, date, and location of the
incident related to the assertion, and an explanation of how the personal
knowledge of the affiant was acquired; and
      (3)   The name, residential and occupational addresses and telephone
numbers of the affiant.
   (F)   Timely filing. Unless otherwise provided, the filing of a potentially
dangerous or vicious animal report must be made within five business days, of
the most recent event or circumstances occasioning the report. Upon evidence
that good cause exists that a report could not be filed within the five
business days, the Animal Services Manager may extend the deadline for filing
the report.
   (G)   Impoundment of animal. Upon receipt by Animal Services of a
potentially dangerous or vicious animal report, Animal Services shall initiate
an investigation of the incident or incidents described in the report for the
purpose of verifying the facts stated and obtaining other information. If,
after an investigation, the identified facts show the existence of a
potentially dangerous or vicious animal, Animal Services shall immediately
locate and impound the animal which is the subject of the charges and the owner
or custodian shall have to request a hearing within five business days, from
date of impoundment.
      (1)   All sheltering fees to date, including the hearing request fees,
shall be paid in full by the owner or custodian prior to acceptance of the
hearing request.
      (2)   Failure to pay all associated fees after five business days will
result in a forfeit of the appeal.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.370 Potentially dangerous and vicious animal hearings and appeals.
   (A)   Notice of hearing.
      (1)   When a hearing is requested by the animal owner or custodian,
Animal Services shall set a date and time for the hearing and send a notice
thereof by first class mail at least five business days before the scheduled
hearing date to the owner or custodian at the address set forth on his or her
request for a hearing and shall notify the victim and the Chief of Police of
such hearing.
         (a)   The hearing shall be set no more than ten business days from
date of notice of hearing.
      (2)   Conversely, if, or after an investigation, the identified facts
show that cause to conduct a potentially dangerous or vicious animal hearing
has not been shown, Animal Services shall notify the animal owner or custodian
to reclaim their animal from Animal Services.
   (B)   Conduct of hearing.
      (1)   The hearing shall be conducted before a person appointed as a
Hearing Officer.
      (2)   The hearing shall be open to the public.
      (3)   The owner or custodian may be represented by counsel at their own
discretion and cost. If Animal Services plans to be represented by counsel,
such fact will be made clear to the owner or custodian upon writing regarding
the time and place of the hearing. Animal Services representation by counsel
does not in any way entitle the owner or custodian to be represented by
counsel.
      (4)   The burden is on the animal owner or custodian to present evidence
that the animal is not potentially dangerous or vicious.
      (5)   The technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, except that the Hearing Officer's decision may not be based wholly on
hearsay evidence.
      (6)   The Hearing Officer may find, based upon the preponderance of the
evidence, that:
         (a)   The animal is not potentially dangerous or vicious and should be
returned to its owner or custodian;
         (b)   The animal is not potentially dangerous or vicious but that the
attack, bite, or injury was the result of improper or negligent training,
handling, or maintenance and that the license should be revoked and the animal
relinquished to Animal Services;
         (c)   The animal is potentially dangerous or vicious but may be
returned to the owner or custodian with stipulations and/or restrictions; or
         (d)   The animal is potentially dangerous or vicious and that it
should be humanely euthanized no sooner than the fifth business day following
the mailing of notice of determination.
      (7)   The Hearing Officer shall make other orders required or authorized
by this chapter.
      (8)   The Hearing Officer may decide all issues for or against the owner
or custodian of the animal even if the owner or custodian fails to appear at
the hearing. Failure to appear at the hearing will be deemed a forfeiture of
the animal.
   (C)   Consideration of evidence. In considering whether an animal is
potentially dangerous and/or vicious, the Hearing Officer shall consider
evidence including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Any previous history of the animal attacking, biting or causing
injury to a human being or other animal.
      (2)   The nature and extent of injuries inflicted and the number of
victims involved.
      (3)   The location where the bite, attack or injury occurred.
      (4)   The presence or absence of any provocation for the bite, attack, or
injury.
      (5)   The extent to which property has been damaged or destroyed.
      (6)   Whether the animal exhibits any characteristics of being trained
for fighting or attacking, or other evidence to show such training or fighting.
      (7)   Whether the animal exhibits characteristics of aggressive or
unpredictable temperament or behavior in the presence of persons or other
animals.
      (8)   Whether the animal can be effectively trained or re-trained to
change its temperament or behavior,
      (9)   The manner in which the animal had been maintained by its owner or
custodian.
      (10)   Any other relevant evidence concerning the maintenance of the
animal.
      (11)   Any other relevant evidence regarding the ability of the owner or
custodian to protect the public safety in the future if the animal is permitted
to remain in the city.
   (D)   Mitigating circumstances. In considering whether an animal is
potentially dangerous and/or vicious, the Hearing Officer may hear and consider
evidence of any of the following mitigating circumstances:
      (1)   That the injury or damage complained of was sustained by a person
who was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied
by the owner or custodian of the animal, or was teasing, tormenting, abusing,
or assaulting the animal, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime.
      (2)   That the animal was protecting or defending a person within the
immediate vicinity of the animal from an unjustified attack or assault.
      (3)   That the injury or damage complained of was sustained by a domestic
animal which at the time of the injury or damage was teasing, tormenting,
abusing, or assaulting the animal which is the subject of the hearing.
      (4)   The injury or damage complained of was to a domestic animal and was
sustained while the animal in question was working as a hunting animal, herding
animal, or predator control animal on the property of, or under the control of,
its owner or custodian and the damage or injury complained of was to a species
or type of domestic animal appropriate to the work of the animal.
   (E)   Determinations and orders—Notice—Compliance—Appeal—Finality of appeal.
      (1)   Within ten calendar days after the hearing is conducted, the
Hearing Officer shall notify in writing Animal Services and the owner or
custodian of the determination and orders issued, by first class mail or
personal service at the address appearing on the request for hearing.
      (2)   If a determination is made by the Hearing Officer that the animal
is potentially dangerous or vicious, and is returning the animal to the owner
or custodian, the owner or custodian shall comply with divisions (F) and (G) of
this section within 15 calendar days after the date of determination or 20
calendar days if notice of the determination is mailed to the owner or
custodian by first class mail.
      (3)   If a determination is made by the Hearing Officer that the animal
is not potentially dangerous or vicious, but that the bite, attack or injury
was the result of improper or negligent training, handling or maintenance, the
following may apply:
         (a)   The license may be revoked and reissued with reasonable terms,
conditions or restrictions imposed for the training, handling or maintenance of
the animal to protect the public health safety and welfare, only if it is
determined that the owner or custodian is able and willing to properly train,
handle or maintain the animal and a similar incident is not likely to occur in
the future with proper training, handling or maintenance; or
         (b)   The owner or custodian is unable or unwilling to properly train,
handle or maintain the animal and that a similar incident is not likely to
occur in the future with proper training, handling or maintenance, the animal
shall be relinquished to Animal Services.
      (4)   If Animal Services or the owner or custodian of the animal contests
the determination, he or she may, within five business days of the receipt of
the notice of determination, appeal the decision of the Hearing Officer to the
Chief of Police.
         (a)   All sheltering fees, including the hearing request fees, shall
be paid in full by the owner or custodian prior to acceptance of the appeal
hearing request.
         (b)   Failure to pay all associated fees within five business days
will result in a forfeit of the appeal and the original hearing decision shall
stand.
      (5)   The appeal shall be heard by an Appeals Hearing Officer, appointed
by the Chief of Police, other than the Hearing Officer who originally heard the
petition.
      (6)   The Chief of Police shall give notice by first class mail to Animal
Services, to the appellant or animal owner or custodian if Animal Services is
the appellant, and to the victim(s), of the date, time and location of when the
appeal will be heard.
         (a)   The notice of the appeals hearing shall be mailed within five
business days with the appeals hearing set no more than ten days business days
from date of mailing.
      (7)   The Hearing Officer hearing the appeal shall conduct a hearing de
novo, but upon submission of all relevant evidence, including but not limited
to Animal Control reports, transcripts, and other testimony, from the first
hearing, and make its own determination as to potential danger and viciousness
of the animal and make other orders authorized by this chapter, based upon
evidence presented.
      (8)   The hearing shall be conducted in the same manner set forth in
division (B) above.
      (9)   Judicial review of a decision made after an appeal hearing pursuant
to this section shall be made pursuant to § 1094.6 of the Cal. Code of Civil
Procedure where and to the extent said section may be applicable.
         (a)   Failure to pay sheltering fees upon receipt of such fees after
ten business days will result in animal abandonment by the animal owner or
custodian at which time the animal can be humanely euthanized, transferred to a
rescue or other sheltering facility as set forth in Cal. Civil Code § 1834.5
and Cal. Food and Agricultural Code § 31254.
   (F)   Registration. Any animal which has been declared by the Hearing
Officer to be potentially dangerous or vicious within the meaning of §
6.12.050, and is being returned to the owner or custodian, shall be subject to
special registration requirements as follows:
      (1)   An owner or custodian of a potentially dangerous or vicious animal
is required to pay, in addition to any licensing or license fee, an annual
special registration fee (as applicable) which shall be valid and renewable
concurrent with the effective dates of the licensing of the animal. Late
registration is subject to a penalty fee equal to two times the annual
registration fee.
   (G)   Keeping of a potentially dangerous or vicious animal. In addition to
any other provisions provided in the except as otherwise provided decision
rendered by the Hearing Officer, the keeping of an animal which has been
declared potentially dangerous or vicious and returned to the animal owner or
custodian by the Hearing Officer shall, at the minimum, be subject to the
following provisions:
      (1)   The animal must at all times, when not under restraint by leash on
public property, be securely confined in an enclosure under lock within a
lawful fence.
      (2)   The animal must, at all times when kept in any part of a house or
structure, be confined in such a manner that the animal cannot exit such
building on its own volition.
      (3)   The animal must, at all times, be licensed and registered as
required by this chapter and must be kept in compliance with all the regulatory
provisions of this chapter in its entirety.
      (4)   The animal owner or custodian must notify Animal Services in
writing within three calendar days if the location of the animal is to be
permanently changed. An administration fee will be charged to modify the issued
license.
      (5)   The owner or custodian must allow Animal Services to inspect the
property at such time as reasonable to insure the provisions ordered by the
Hearing Officer are being complied with. All costs associated with these
provisions or any other or additional provisions ordered by the Hearing Officer
shall be borne by the owner or custodian of the animal which has been declared
to be potentially dangerous or vicious.
   (H)   Right to destroy. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
prevent Animal Services from destroying an animal which is in the act of
dangerous or vicious behavior towards any person or other animal as set forth
in §
6.12.050, if such immediate destruction is reasonably necessary to protect
public safety.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.380 Spay and neuter of Tulare City dogs and cats - Findings.
   The City Council finds and declares that a program for the encouragement of
spaying/neutering of cats and dogs combined with a certification system for
unaltered cats and dogs owned, harbored or kept within the City of Tulare is a
reasonable and effective means of reducing the population of homeless or stray
cats and dogs, reducing the need to euthanize healthy cats and dogs, and
providing for the health, safety and welfare of the public.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.390 Care of feral cats.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person within the incorporated area of the city
to intentionally provide food, water or other forms of sustenance to a feral
cat colony unless the person furnishes the Manager of Animal Services with a
signed statement agreeing to the following conditions:
      (1)   Register with the Manager of Animal Services as caring for feral
cats;
      (2)   Regularly feed the cat colony, including weekends and holidays;
      (3)   Regularly and frequently trap the cats over the age of eight weeks
and have them spayed or neutered at the private individual's own cost;
      (4)   Arrange to have all trapped cats tested for feline leukemia and
feline immune deficiency virus, and to have those who test positive humanely
euthanized or isolated indoors;
      (5)   Identify all trapped cats by tipping their ears, to be done by a
veterinarian at the time of sterilization; and
      (6)   Arrange to have all trapped cats vaccinated for rabies in addition
to any other vaccination or immunization requirement imposed by the state.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person within the incorporated area of the city
to intentionally provide food, water or other forms of sustenance to a group of
two or more domesticated cats not belonging to that person, causing the cats to
congregate in a particular area or neighborhood.
   (C)   In lieu of acting under divisions (A) and (B) above, the Manager of
Animal Services may authorize the humane seizure of any cat at large by an
animal control officer or private citizen for determination of whether it has
been spayed or neutered and may authorize the submittal of the cat at large to
Tulare Animal Services Facility to be neutered or spayed and vaccinated. After
being altered, the cat may then be released in the area where it was found at
the discretion of the animal services division operating such spay/neuter and
release program as a means to help control the community cat population. Acting
under the authority of this section shall be at the discretion of the Manager
of Animal Services.
(Ord. 2022-11, passed 8-16-2022; Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.400 Spaying and neutering.
   (A)   No person shall own, harbor or keep within the incorporated area of
the City of Tulare, a dog or cat over the age of six months, which has not been
spayed or neutered, unless such person holds an unaltered animal certification
for the animal issued pursuant to §
6.12.410.
   (B)   Any person intentionally providing care or sustenance for a dog or cat
for a period longer than two weeks shall be deemed the owner of such dog or cat
and shall comply with this section.
   (C)   The following animals are exempt from the provisions of this section:
      (1)   Dogs documented as having been appropriately trained and actually
being used by public law enforcement agencies for law enforcement activities,
or dogs designated as breeding stock by an appropriate agency or organization
approved by the Manager of Animal Services after consultation with
knowledgeable professionals;
      (2)   Dogs documented as having been appropriately trained and actually
being legally used as a service dog such as a guide dog, hearing dog,
assistance dog, seizure alert dog or social/therapy dog, or a dog designated as
breeding stock by an appropriate agency or organization approved by the Manager
of Animal Services, after consultation with knowledgeable professionals;
      (3)   Dogs documented as having been appropriately trained and actually
being used by search and rescue agencies for search and rescue activities, or
dogs designated as breeding stock by an appropriate agency or organization
approved by the Manager of Animal Services after consultation with
knowledgeable professionals;
      (4)   A dog with a high likelihood of suffering serious bodily harm or
death if spayed or neutered, due to age or infirmity. The owner or custodian
must obtain written confirmation of this fact from a California licensed
veterinarian. If the dog is able to be safely spayed or neutered at a later
date, that date must be stated in the written confirmation; should this date be
later than 30 calendar days, the owner or custodian must apply for an unaltered
dog license;
      (5)   A cat with a high likelihood of suffering serious bodily harm or
death if spayed or neutered, due to age or infirmity. The owner or custodian
must obtain written confirmation of this fact from a California licensed
veterinarian. If the cat is able to be safely spayed or neutered at a later
date, which date must be stated in the written confirmation.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.410 Unaltered Animal Certification—Administration.
   (A)   The Manager of Animal Services shall administer a certification
program to allow for unaltered animals over the age of six months, if and when
the Manager of Animal Services determines that all of the following conditions
have been met:
      (1)   The owner has not been convicted of one or more violations of the
following within the preceding 24 months:
         (a)   Sections
6.12.320 and
6.12.360 (biting or attacking animal) of this chapter,
         (b)   Cal. Food and Agricultural Code § 31102 (killing dog, worrying
livestock),
         (c)   Cal. Civil Code § 3341 (dog threatening, killing, or injuring
livestock),
         (d)   Section
6.12.060 (interference with animal services officer) of this chapter,
         (e)   Cal. Health and Safety Code § 121705 (concealing bite
information),
         (f)   Cal. Penal Code §§ 487e, 487f, or 487g (theft of animal);
      (2)   The owner has not been convicted of two or more violations of the
following, involving the dog for whom the unaltered animal certification is
sought, within the preceding 12 months:
         (a)   Section
6.12.310 (dogs running at large) of this chapter;
         (b)   Section
6.12.100 (dog license required) of this chapter;
         (c)   Cal. Food and Agricultural Code § 30955 (dog running at large on
a farm).
      (3)   Within the preceding 24 months, the owner has not received a
Manager of Animal Services order involving the dog or cat for whom the
unaltered animal certification is sought, pursuant to:
         (a)   Cal. Code of Regulations Title 17 § 2606.2 (quarantine a dog or
cat for biting a person).
      (4)   The dog or cat for whom the unaltered animal certification is
sought has not been determined by the Manager of Animal Services to be a
vicious animal pursuant to §
6.12.360 of this chapter, unless such determination has been expressly
overturned through the appeal process;
      (5)   The animal owner otherwise shall comply with any applicable local
or state law concerning the care and housing of animals;
      (6)   No unaltered animal certification shall be granted to anyone who
has ever been convicted of the following offenses:
         (a)   Cal. Penal Code § 286.5 (sexual assault on animal),
         (b)   Cal. Penal Code § 596 (poisoning of animal),
         (c)   Cal. Penal Code § 597 (animal cruelty),
         (d)   Cal. Penal Code § 597.5 (fighting dogs),
         (e)   Cal. Penal Code § 599aa (seizure of fighting dogs).
   (B)   Any owner of an unaltered dog or cat who has been cited for failing to
obtain an unaltered animal certification shall have his or her citation
dismissed if they are subsequently issued an unaltered animal certification, or
if there is proof that the animal has been spayed or neutered within 30
calendar days of the issuance of the citation.
   (C)   Any owner who wishes to request to apply for an unaltered animal
certification may do so voluntarily or after enforcement action. Once a request
has been made by any owner, the Manager of Animal Services shall provide a
written response within five business days.
   (D)   All applications for unaltered animal certifications are reviewed and
decided by the Manager of Animal Services. The decision made to grant or deny
an application is based solely on factual data obtained as it relates to the
list of violations listed under this chapter. The decision by the Manager of
Animal Services is final. The animal owner can reapply for an unaltered animal
certification one year from the date of the previous request.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.420 Impoundment of unaltered dog or cat.
   When an unaltered dog or cat is impounded pursuant to state and/or local
law, in addition to satisfying applicable requirements for the release of the
animal, the owner or custodian shall also do one of the following:
   (A)   Provide written proof from a California licensed veterinarian of the
dog or cat's prior sterilization, if conditions cannot or do not make this
assessment obvious to Department personnel;
   (B)   Accept dog or cat after micro chipping fees and any other applicable
fees.
      (1)   Owner or custodian has 30 calendar days to have dog or cat
sterilized and show proof to Tulare Animal Services at which time the license
will be changed to an altered animal license and the difference will be
reimbursed (for dogs only) or apply for an unaltered animal certification. An
extension past the 30 calendar days shall be granted only if the owner or
custodian provides written proof of a later set appointment for spay and
neutering.
      (2)   If the animal is not sterilized within the allotted 30 calendar day
period or has applied for an unaltered animal certification, the owner or
custodian shall be charged for an unaltered animal license (for dogs only) and
an administrative citation shall be issued for having an unaltered dog or cat.
However, this citation may be waived if the owner is granted an unaltered
animal certification. All billing practices shall be utilized to collect any
delinquent fees and penalties associated.
      (3)   If in fact the dog or cat is incapable of breeding as outlined in §
6.12.400(C)(4) and (5), the owner will only be charged for an altered animal
license with a notation that the animal is unaltered.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.430 Unaltered animal penalty for violation.
   Except as otherwise provided, any person violating or causing or permitting
the violation of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction, and
shall be punished by a fine in accordance with §
1.61.040.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 6.12.440 Severability.
   The provisions of this chapter are severable. If any section, paragraph,
sentence, phrase or word of this chapter is declared invalid for any reason by
a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity thereof shall not affect the
validity of any other portion of this chapter, which shall remain in full force
and effect.
(Ord. 17-13, passed 12-19-2017)
CHAPTER 6.14: [REPEALED BY ORD. 17-13]
CHAPTER 6.16: [REPEALED BY ORD. 17-13]
CHAPTER 6.20: WEAPONS; FIREARMS
Section
   
6.20.010   Sale prohibited.
   
6.20.020   Possession prohibited.
   
6.20.030   Firearms—Use of prohibited.
   
6.20.040   Supervised shooting.
§ 6.20.010   Sale prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or give, offer for sale,
exchange or loan, or cause or permit to be sold, offered for sale, exchanged,
given or loaned, to any other person, any knife, without regard to the length
of the blade, design or intended to be opened by a spring, the release of a
clasp or the pushing of a button.
(1995 Code, § 6.20.010)
§ 6.20.020   Possession prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession, or to
carry, either concealed or unconcealed, any knife the sale of which is
prohibited by §
6.20.010, or any knife so designed, altered or maintained as to permit the same
to be opened without the use of both hands.
(1995 Code, § 6.20.020)
§ 6.20.030   Firearms—Use of prohibited.
   No person, except a peace officer in the performance of his or her duty,
shall fire, discharge, shoot, operate or assist or participate in the firing or
operating of any gun, revolver, pistol, firearm, spring gun, air gun, sling or
slingshot.
(1995 Code, § 6.20.030)
§ 6.20.040   Supervised shooting.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit the holding of
supervised shooting in the city, when a valid permit has been obtained from the
Council to so shoot.
(1995 Code, § 6.20.040)
CHAPTER 6.24: GAMBLING
Section
   
6.24.010   Slot machines prohibited.
   
6.24.020   Permitting children to participate.
   
6.24.030   Gambling prohibited.
   
6.24.040   Conducting gambling on premises.
   
6.24.050   Gambling implements in barred room.
   
6.24.060   Resorting to gambling place.
Statutory reference:
   Statute authority, see Cal. Penal Code § 230
§ 6.24.010   Slot machines prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, either as owner, lessee, agent,
employee, mortgagee or otherwise, to operate, keep, maintain, rent, use or
conduct, within the city, any clock, tape, slot machine or any other machine,
contrivance or device upon which money is staked or hazarded upon chance, or
upon the result of the action of which money, or other article of value is
staked, bet, hazarded, won or lost upon chance.
(1995 Code, § 6.24.010)
§ 6.24.020   Permitting children to participate.
   It is unlawful for any proprietor, keeper, clerk or any other person having
charge of any store or other public place within the city, to permit any person
under the age of 18 years to play or engage in or be present at any game of
cards played in any store or other public place within the city.
(1995 Code, § 6.24.020)
§ 6.24.030   Gambling prohibited.
   It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person within the city to deal,
play, carry on or bet at or against any game played with cards, dice or other
instrument, thing, device or machine, for money, either directly or indirectly,
or for checks, chips or credit or any other article exchangeable for or
redeemable in money, which game is not prohibited by any law of the state.
(1995 Code, § 6.24.030)
§ 6.24.040   Conducting gambling on premises.
   It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to rent, open up, carry
on, conduct or have charge of or control of any room, apartment or place in the
city whether as an owner, employee or otherwise, whether for hire or not,
wherein any game played with cards, dice or any other instrument, thing, device
or machine, which game is prohibited by any law of the state, is played, dealt,
conducted, carried on, permitted to be played or conducted, for money, either
directly or indirectly, or for checks, credit, chips or any other article
exchangeable for or redeemable in money.
(1995 Code, § 6.24.040)
§ 6.24.050   Gambling implements in barred room.
   It is unlawful for any person to exhibit or expose to view in any barred or
barricaded house or room in any place built or protected in a manner to make it
difficult of access or ingress to police officers, when three or more persons
are present, any cards, dice, dominoes, fantan table or layout or any gambling
implements whatsoever.
(1995 Code, § 6.24.050)
§ 6.24.060   Resorting to gambling place.
   It is unlawful for any person to visit or resort to any such barred or
barricaded house or room or other place built or protected in a manner to make
it difficult of access or ingress to police officers, where any cards, dice,
dominoes, fantan tables or layout, or any part of such layout, or any gambling
implements whatsoever are exhibited or exposed to view when three or more
persons are present.
(1995 Code, § 6.24.060)
CHAPTER 6.28: MINORS
Section
   
6.28.010   Loitering prohibited.
   
6.28.020   Responsibility of parents.
   
6.28.030   Notice to parents—Appearance.
   
6.28.040   Minors drinking in public.
   
6.28.050   Giving tobacco to children.
Statutory reference:
   Statute authority, see Cal. Penal Code § 308
   Statute authority, see Cal. Welfare and Institutions Code § 702
§ 6.28.010   Loitering prohibited.
   Except when and where a minor is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian
having the care and custody of the minor, or where the presence of the minor in
the place or places is connected with and required by, some legitimate
business, trade, profession or occupation in which the minor is engaged, it
shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to be in or on any
public street, park, square or any public place between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
of any day and 5:00 a.m. on the following day. It shall be unlawful for any
minor under the age of 18 years to loiter, gather in groups or congregate in
any manner in the city parks, or any public places, without lawful business and
accompanied by parent, or legal guardian. It shall be unlawful for any minor
under the age of 18 years to play, loiter or be in or about any railroad depot,
or the cares of any railroad within the city, or to ride upon any railroad car,
engine, truck or other vehicle, without consent of the owner thereof.
(1995 Code, § 6.28.010)
§ 6.28.020   Responsibility of parents.
   Any person assisting, aiding, abetting or encouraging any minor under the
age of 18 years to violate the provisions of §
6.28.010 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; and when any minor
is found violating the provisions of §
6.28.010 a presumption shall arise that the parent or legal guardian having the
care and custody of the minor assisted, aided, abetted and encouraged the minor
in so violating §
6.28.010.
(1995 Code, § 6.28.020)
§ 6.28.030   Notice to parents—Appearance.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Police Department to cause to be
issued and served upon the parent or guardian of any minor arrested pursuant to
the foregoing provisions of this chapter, a written notice requiring the parent
or guardian to appear before the Justice Court of Tulare Judicial District at a
time and place to be specified in the notice, but not less than five days after
the service of the notice, to show cause, if any, why the parent or guardian
should not be charged with assisting, abetting or encouraging the minor with a
violation of this chapter, or the provisions of Cal. Welfare and Institutions §
702. Any person failing to appear before the court in response to this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of the charge
on which he or she may have been cited to appear, and shall be punished
accordingly. Any notice to be served upon the parent or guardian pursuant to
this chapter may be served personally on the person, or the same may be
deposited in the United States Post Office at Tulare, California, addressed to
the parent or guardian at the place of residence and with the proper amount of
postage prepaid thereon, or the same may be left at the place of residence of
the parent or guardian. If the notice is delivered personally to the parent or
guardian, the same shall be deemed complete upon the delivery thereof, but if
the same is served by mail or left at the residence of the parent or guardian,
the service shall be complete after five days after the date of mailing the
same or leaving the same at the place of residence of the parent or guardian.
(1995 Code, § 6.28.030)
§ 6.28.040   Minors drinking in public.
   No person under the age of 21 years shall have in his or her possession or
consume any alcoholic beverage, as the same is defined under § 2(b) of the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of the state and amendments thereto, while in or
upon any street, alley, dance hall or other public place in the city.
(1995 Code, § 6.28.040)
§ 6.28.050   Giving tobacco to children.
   Any person selling, giving or in any manner furnishing or supplying any
cigarettes, cigars or tobacco in any shape or form to any minor under 18 years
of age, within the city, or causing the same to be done by another, and any
person who aids, assists or is in any manner instrumental to any minor
procuring cigarettes, cigars or tobacco in any form shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(1995 Code, § 6.28.050)
CHAPTER 6.32: STREET RACES AND RECKLESS DRIVING EXHIBITIONS PROHIBITED
Section
   
6.32.010   Purpose.
   
6.32.020   Definitions.
   
6.32.030   Street races and reckless driving exhibitions prohibited.
   
6.32.040   Spectators at street races and reckless driving exhibitions
prohibited.
   
6.32.050   Proving a violation—Spectators at street races or reckless driving
exhibitions.
§ 6.32.010    Purpose.
   (A)   The Tulare City Council finds and declares that pursuant to Cal.
Vehicle Code §§ 23103 et seq., and 23109 et seq., motor vehicle speed contests,
reckless driving, exhibitions of speed conducted on public streets and
highways, and reckless driving conducted on public streets, highways, and off-
street parking facilities, are illegal under California law. Motor vehicle
speed contests and exhibitions of speed are more commonly referred to as street
races. Common acts of reckless driving often occur during, or when preparations
are being made for, such illegal street races. This includes pre-race events
referred to as “sideshows” or motorcycle “stunting” in which groups of people
block streets and sidewalks to form sideshow or stunt areas in conjunction with
street races. Streets and off-street parking facilities within the City of
Tulare have been the site(s) of continued and escalating illegal street races,
sideshows, and motorcycle stunting over the past several years.
   (B)   Street races, sideshows, and motorcycle stunting pose an immediate
threat to the health and safety of the public, interfere with pedestrian and
vehicular traffic, create a public nuisance, and inhibit private business
owners from enjoying the use of their property within the City of Tulare.
Groups of racers, sideshow participants, stunters, and spectators gather on the
streets and in off-street parking facilities late at night and in the early
morning hours. Among other things, these groups block traffic on the streets
and sidewalks in order to form a racetrack, “sideshow,” or stunt area, place
bets and wagers, and otherwise encourage, aid and abet the street racing
process.
   (C)   Illegal street racers accelerate to high speeds without regard to
oncoming traffic, pedestrians, or other vehicles. The racers drive quickly from
street to street, race for several hours, and then move to different locations
upon the arrival of police. Participants in these illegal activities use cell
phones, police scanners, and other electronic devices to communicate with each
other in order to avoid arrest. Social media and other websites are used to
provide information on where to race and how to avoid detection and
prosecution. These activities have resulted in an increase in traffic
accidents, property crimes, and calls for police service. Illegal street
racing, sideshows, and motorcycle stunting attract many spectators, and the
presence of spectators at these events encourages street racing to continue and
creates an environment in which illegal activities can flourish.
   (D)   This chapter makes it a violation of the City of Tulare Municipal Code
to participate in a street race or reckless driving exhibition on or in a
public highway or off-street parking facility. This chapter also makes it a
violation of the City of Tulare Municipal Code to be a spectator at, otherwise
encourage, aid and abet the street racing process, or be present when
preparations are being made for, a street race or reckless driving exhibition.
This chapter further provides that evidence of specified prior acts are
admissible as evidence to show the propensity of a criminal defendant to be
present at or attend illegal street races or reckless driving exhibitions, if
the prior act(s) occurred within three years of the presently charged offense.
This chapter is adopted to prohibit spectators at illegal street races and
reckless driving exhibitions in order to significantly decrease this criminal
activity. It targets a clear, limited population and gives proper notice to
citizens as to which activities are unlawful.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 8-15-2023)
§ 6.32.020    Definitions.
   For purposes of this chapter:
   STREET RACE or STREET RACING means any speed contest or exhibition of speed
referred to in Cal. Vehicle Code § 23109, as it may be amended from time to
time.
   RECKLESS DRIVING EXHIBITION means any exhibition of reckless driving
referred to in Cal. Vehicle Code § 23103, as it may be amended from time to
time.
   OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITY has the same meaning as set forth in Cal.
Vehicle Code § 12500(c), as it may be amended from time to time, and includes
any public or private parking facility open and accessible to members of the
public.
   SPECTATOR means any person who is present at a street race or reckless
driving exhibition, or the site of the preparations for either of these
activities, for the purpose of viewing, observing, watching, or witnessing the
event as it progresses. A SPECTATOR includes any person at the location of the
event without regard to the means by which the person arrived.
   PRESENT. A person is PRESENT at a street race or reckless driving exhibition
if that person is within 200 feet of the location of the street race or
reckless driving exhibition, or within 200 feet of the site of the preparations
for either of these activities.
   PREPARATIONS for any street race or reckless driving exhibition include, but
are not limited to, any of the following acts done for the purpose of a street
race or reckless driving exhibition:
      (1)   One or more motor vehicles and persons have arrived at a
predetermined location on a public street or highway or in an off-street
parking facility;
      (2)   One or more persons have gathered on, or adjacent to, a public
street or highway;
      (3)   One or more persons have gathered in an off-street parking
facility;
      (4)   One or more persons have gathered for a sideshow, motorcycle
stunting or other exhibition in conjunction with a street race or reckless
driving exhibition;
      (5)   One or more persons have impeded the public use of a public street,
highway, or off-street parking facility by acts, words or physical barriers;
      (6)   One or more motor vehicles have lined up on a public street,
highway, or off-street parking facility with motors running;
      (7)   One or more drivers is revving a motor vehicle’s engine or causing
the motor vehicle’s tires to spin; or
      (8)   A person is standing or sitting in a location for the purpose of
acting as a race starter.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 8-15-2023)
§ 6.32.030    Street races and reckless driving exhibitions prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, or to aid and abet, any
street race or reckless driving exhibition conducted on a public street or
highway or in an off-street parking facility. A violation of this section may
be punishable as a misdemeanor or an infraction in the discretion of the City
of Tulare Attorney.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 8-15-2023)
§ 6.32.040    Spectators at street races and reckless driving exhibitions
prohibited.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be knowingly present as a
spectator at a street race or reckless driving exhibition conducted on a public
street or highway or in an off-street parking facility.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be knowingly present as a
spectator where preparations are being made for a street race or reckless
driving exhibition conducted on a public street or highway or in an off-street
parking facility.
   (C)   A violation of this section may be punishable as a misdemeanor or an
infraction at the discretion of the City Attorney.
   (D)   Nothing in this section prohibits peace officers or their agents who
are acting in the course of their official duties from being spectators at a
street race or reckless driving exhibition and/or spectators at the location of
preparations for either of these activities.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 8-15-2023)
§ 6.32.050    Proving a violation—Spectators at street races or reckless
driving exhibitions.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, to prove a violation of
this chapter, the following may be considered to show motive, opportunity,
intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, absence of mistake or accident:
      (1)   That the person charged has previously participated in or been a
spectator at a street race or reckless driving exhibition;
      (2)   That the person charged has previously aided and abetted street
racing or a reckless driving exhibition;
      (3)   That the person charged has previously attended a street race or
reckless driving exhibition;
      (4)   That the person charged was previously present at a location where
preparations were being made for a street race or reckless driving exhibition,
or where a street race or reckless driving exhibition was in progress; or
      (5)   To the fullest extent permissible by law, evidence of prior act(s)
may be admissible to show the plan, opportunity, intent, knowledge, identity
and/or propensity of the person charged to be present at a street race or a
reckless driving exhibition if the prior act(s) occurred within three years of
the presently charged offense. The prior act(s) may also be admissible to show
that, in the absence of a mistake or accident, the person charged had knowledge
that a street race or reckless driving exhibition was taking place.
   (B)   In addition to the circumstances set out herein, and notwithstanding
any other provision of law, to prove a violation of this chapter, admissible
evidence may also include, but is not limited to, any of the following:
      (1)   The time of day;
      (2)   The nature and description of the scene, including the number and
configuration of traffic lanes;
      (3)   The number of people at the scene;
      (4)   The location of the person charged in relation to any person or
group of persons present at the scene;
      (5)   The number and types of motor vehicles at the scene;
      (6)   That the motor vehicles at the scene have been modified or altered
to increase power, handling, or visual appeal;
      (7)   That the person charged drove or was transported to the scene; or
      (8)   That the person charged admitted to being a spectator at a street
race or reckless driving exhibition.
   (C)   As used herein, SCENE means the location of a street race or reckless
driving exhibition or the location of the preparations for a street race or
reckless driving exhibition.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 8-15-2023)
CHAPTER 6.36: BINGO
Section
   
6.36.010   Intent and purpose.
   
6.36.020   Definitions.
   
6.36.030   Bingo permitted.
   
6.36.040   Permit application.
   
6.36.050   Content of application.
   
6.36.060   Consent to investigation.
   
6.36.070   Reference of application.
   
6.36.080   Investigation by Chief of Police.
   
6.36.090   Investigation by the Planning Director.
   
6.36.100   Investigation by Fire Chief.
   
6.36.110   Denial of permit.
   
6.36.120   Appeal.
   
6.36.130   Issuance of permit.
   
6.36.140   Posting of permit.
   
6.36.150   Permit nontransferable.
   
6.36.160   Conditions of operation.
   
6.36.170   Operators.
   
6.36.180   Ownership of equipment.
   
6.36.190   Financial interest.
   
6.36.200   Special fund required.
   
6.36.210   Records.
   
6.36.220   Quarterly report.
   
6.36.230   Changes in conditions during permit period.
   
6.36.240   Restrictions on time for conducting bingo games.
   
6.36.250   Suspension or revocation.
   
6.36.260   Renewal.
§ 6.36.010   Intent and purpose.
   It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to authorize the playing of the
game of chance generally known as “bingo” subject to and pursuant to the
restrictions contained in Article IV, § 19c of the Constitution of the State of
California and Cal. Penal Code § 326.5. Definitions, conditions and
restrictions set forth in this chapter are intended to comply with and
implement the Constitutional and Penal Code provisions. To the extent that any
provision of this chapter is substantially the same as that contained in Cal.
Penal Code § 326.5 and violation thereof be deemed a violation of the Penal
Code and punishable thereunder, the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
explanatory only.
(1995 Code, § 6.36.010)
§ 6.36.020   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BINGO. A game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of
designated numbers of symbols on a card which conform to numbers or symbols
selected at random.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Tulare.
   FINANCE OFFICER, CHIEF OF POLICE, PLANNING DIRECTOR or FIRE CHIEF. The
Finance Officer, Chief of Police, Planning Director or Fire Chief of the City
of Tulare or their respective authorized agents.
   NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION. Any tax-exempt organization or senior citizens
organization, as such terms are defined in this section.
   SENIOR CITIZEN. Any person of age 60 or older or any person age 50 or older
who no longer engages in full-time employment.
   SENIOR CITIZENS ORGANIZATION. Any organization meeting the following
criteria:
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the organization is to improve the social,
recreational, economic, medical and/or housing conditions of senior citizens.
   (B)   Membership. The membership in the organization shall be limited to
senior citizens and their spouses.
   (C)   Formal organization. The organization shall have a duly adopted
constitution or by-laws stating the purpose of the organization and the
qualifications of membership and providing for the election of officers.
   TAX-EXEMPT ORGANIZATION. Any organization exempted from the payment of bank
or corporation taxes by Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 23701b (fraternal
beneficiary societies, orders or organizations) or 23701d (religious,
charitable, scientific, literary, educational and humanitarian corporations).
(1995 Code, § 6.36.020)
§ 6.36.030   Bingo permitted.
   A nonprofit organization having in effect a permit therefor from the Finance
Officer pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may conduct a bingo game for
charitable purposes subject to all conditions and restrictions contained in
Cal. Penal Code § 326.5 and this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 6.36.030)
§ 6.36.040   Permit application.
   A nonprofit organization may apply to the Finance Officer for a permit to
conduct a bingo game. The application shall be upon a form provided therefor by
the Finance Officer and shall be accompanied by a fee equal to the actual cost
of issuing such permit as may be determined from time to time by the Finance
Officer. Notwithstanding the actual cost of issuing the permit, the fee shall
not exceed $50, unless a higher maximum fee is authorized by law. If the
applicant is a tax-exempt organization, it shall accompany the application with
a certificate or letter from the state’s Franchise Tax Board stating that the
application is exempt from the payment of the bank or corporation taxes. If the
applicant is a senior citizens organization, it shall provide proof to the
satisfaction of the Finance Officer that it satisfies the criteria for the
“senior citizens organization” as set forth in §
6.36.020. Such proof may include but is not limited to a copy of the
organization’s constitution and/or by laws.
(1995 Code, § 6.36.040)
Editor’s note:
   For the most recent fee, please see the Rates and Fees Resolution passed by
the city and on file in the city offices
§ 6.36.050   Content of application.
   (A)   The application for a permit for conducting bingo games shall contain
the following:
      (1)   The name of the organization proposing to conduct such games
together with the names, signatures and addresses of all the officers of the
organization;
      (2)   The address of the premises where the bingo games are proposed to
be conducted;
      (3)   The names of the owner(s) and, if any, lessee(s) of the premises
where the bingo games are proposed to be conducted;
      (4)   The principal purpose for which the premises are used by the
organization together with the length of time for which the premises have been
so used;
      (5)   The name and address and photograph of the person responsible for
the operation of the bingo game and name and address of those persons assisting
therein;
      (6)   The day and hours of proposed operation of bingo games; and
      (7)   Such further information as may be required by the Finance Officer.
   (B)   The application shall be signed by a principal officer of the
applicant under penalty of perjury.
(1995 Code, § 6.36.050)
§ 6.36.060   Consent to investigation.
   The filing of an application for a permit shall be deemed a consent by the
applicant for the Chief of Police to make an investigation to determine if all
the statements on the application are true, to investigate the officers of the
applicant and the person who will be responsible for the operation of the bingo
games and those persons who will assist therein as to any criminal record which
they may have, and to disclose such information to the Finance Officer and,
upon appeal, to the City Council. The application shall also be deemed consent
for the Fire Chief and the Planning Director to inspect the premises and report
thereon.
(1995 Code, § 6.36.060)
§ 6.36.070   Reference of application.
   Immediately upon receipt of a proper application, the Finance Officer shall
furnish copies thereof to the Chief of Police, Planning Director and the Fire
Chief, each of whom shall make an investigation as specified in this chapter
and report back to the Finance Officer within 45 calendar days after the
receipt by the Finance Officer of the application with a recommendation
thereon. Failure of the Chief of Police, Planning Director or Fire Chief to
report back to the Finance Officer within the 45-day period shall be treated by
the Finance Officer as a recommendation to issue the permit.
(1995 Code, § 6.36.070)
§ 6.36.080   Investigation by Chief of Police.
   The Chief of Police shall determine if all the statements on the application
are true and shall obtain the criminal record, if any, of the principal
officers of the organization, each person who will be responsible for the
operation of the bingo game and those persons who will assist therein. He or
she shall recommend the issuance of the permit, except:
   (A)   In the event that he or she finds any of the statements on the
application to be false, he or she may recommend against its issuance; and/or
   (B)   In the event that he or she finds any officer of the organization or
any person who will be responsible for the operation of the bingo game or any
person who will assist therein to have been convicted within the last ten years
of crimes involving lotteries, gambling, larceny, perjury, bribery, extortion
or fraud, he or she shall recommend against is issuance.
(1995 Code, § 6.36.080)
§ 6.36.090 Investigation by the Planning Director.
   The Planning Director shall investigate the premises and surroundings for
the safety of the structure, adequacy of parking facilities and any other
condition which, in the opinion of the Director, might endanger the public
health, safety or well-being or constitute a nuisance. Should he or she find
that such a potential danger or nuisance exists, the Director may, at his or
her discretion, recommend denial of the permit or the attachment thereto of
such conditions as will, in his or her opinion, adequately protect the public
health, safety and well-being and preclude the existence of a nuisance;
otherwise, he or she shall recommend its issuance.
(1995 Code, § 6.36.090)
§ 6.36.100   Investigation by Fire Chief.
   The Fire Chief shall investigate the premises as to the safety of the
structure and for fire hazards and shall determine the maximum number of
persons who may be present in the premises during the conducting of bingo
games. In the event he or she finds any condition to exist which might endanger
the public health, safety or well-being from the standpoint of structural
safety or fire danger, he or she may recommend against the issuance of the
permit or recommend the attachment thereto of such conditions as will, in his
or her opinion, adequately safeguard the public health, safety and well-being;
otherwise, he or she shall recommend its issuance.
(1995 Code, § 6.36.100)
§ 6.36.110   Denial of permit.
   In the event the Chief of Police, Planning Director or Fire Chief recommends
against the issuance of the permit, the Finance Officer shall refuse to issue
the permit and one-half of the permit fee paid shall be refunded to the
organization that filed the application.
(1995 Code, § 6.36.110)
§ 6.36.120   Appeal.
   Any applicant or permittee may appeal to the City Council from any order or
action of the Finance Officer respecting the issuance, denial, modification,
suspension or revocation of any permit.
(1995 Code, § 6.36.120)
§ 6.36.130   Issuance of permit.
   In the event the Finance Officer does not receive a recommendation against
the issuance of the permit, he or she shall issue the same for a period of one
year, which permit shall contain the following information:
   (A)   The name and nature of the organization to whom the permit is issued;
   (B)   The address where the bingo games are authorized to be conducted;
   (C)   The maximum occupancy of the room in which the bingo games are to be
conducted;
   (D)   The date of the commencement of the permit;
   (E)   The date of the expiration of the permit;
   (F)   The days and hours during which bingo may be conducted; and
   (G)   Such conditions as may have been recommended by the Finance Officer,
Chief of Police, Planning Director or Fire Chief.
(1995 Code, § 6.36.130)
§ 6.36.140   Posting of permit.
   A permittee shall keep the permit posted in a conspicuous place within the
room in which bingo is being played during the conduct of any such game. The
permittee shall produce and exhibit the same whenever requested to do so by the
Finance Officer, Chief of Police, Planning Director or Fire Chief.
(1995 Code, § 6.36.140)
§ 6.36.150   Permit nontransferable.
   Any permit granted under this chapter shall not be transferable either as to
the permittee or the location. Any use of the permit other than by the named
permittee or other than at the address where the bingo games are authorized to
be conducted shall render the permit invalid.
(1995 Code, § 6.36.150)
§ 6.36.160   Conditions of operation.
   It is unlawful for any bingo game to be operated in violation of any of the
following conditions.
   (A)   No minors shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game.
   (B)   All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members
of the nonprofit organization.
   (C)   No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game, unless the
person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is
being conducted.
   (D)   The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo
games shall not exceed $250 in cash in kind, or both, for each separate game
which is held.
   (E)   Attendance at any bingo game shall be limited to the occupancy
capacity of the room as set forth in the permit.
   (F)   No permittee shall issue chips or money to a patron on credit or a
loan, including but not limited to IOUs and checks to be held, nor shall
patrons be allowed to play on credit.
   (G)   No person who is obviously intoxicated shall be allowed to participate
in a bingo game.
   (H)   No permittee shall conduct any bingo game except between the hours of
12:00 noon and 12:00 midnight, nor shall any permittee conduct bingo games for
more than 12 hours during any 24-hour period, nor shall any permittee conduct
bingo games more than six days in any seven-day period, but in no event more
than 13 days in any one quarter.
   (I)   No person shall violate any condition attached to the permit.
   (J)   The permittee shall post and keep posted in a conspicuous place within
the room in which bingo is being played the rules and regulations of the game.
   (K)   No person shall conduct any bingo game after the permit therefor has
expired or during any period which it is suspended.
   (L)   The permittee shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or
leased by it, and which property is used by such organization for an office or
for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized.
Nothing in this division shall be construed to require that the property owned
or leased by the organization be used or leased exclusively by such
organization.
   (M)   The permittee shall keep a written record of the name, address, phone
number and date of birth of each person receiving a prize for three years,
which records shall be made available to the Chief of Police upon request.
(1995 Code, § 6.36.160)
§ 6.36.170   Operators.
   Any bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the
permittee. The members shall not receive a profit, wage or salary from any
bingo game. Only the permittee shall operate the game or participate in the
promotion, advertising, supervision or other phase of the game, and no wage,
salary or other payment may be made on account thereof from funds received from
the games.
(1995 Code, § 6.36.170)
§ 6.36.180   Ownership of equipment.
   All equipment used by the permittee in conducting the bingo game shall be
owned by the permittee.
(1995 Code, § 6.36.180)
§ 6.36.190   Financial interest.
   No individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity except the
permittee authorized to conduct the bingo game shall have or hold a financial
interest in the conduct of the bingo game or the proceeds therefrom.
(1995 Code, § 6.36.190)
§ 6.36.200   Special fund required.
   With respect to organizations exempt from payment of bank or corporation
taxes by Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code § 23701d, all profits derived from a
bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be
commingled with any other fund or account. The profits shall be used only for
charitable purposes. With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct
bingo games pursuant to this chapter, all proceeds derived from a bingo game
shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any
other fund or account. The proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes,
except as follows:
   (A)   The proceeds may be used for prizes; and
   (B)   A portion of the proceeds, not to exceed 10% of the proceeds after the
deduction for prizes, or $500 per month, whichever is less, may be used for
rental of property, overhead and administrative expenses.
(1995 Code, § 6.36.200)
§ 6.36.210   Records.
   Each permittee conducting a bingo game shall maintain detailed records of
all proceeds, profits, expenditures, prizes and other expenses relating to the
operation of the bingo game. The records shall be retained for a period of
three years and as long thereafter as may be required by any state or federal
law. The records, including related bank accounts, shall be open for inspection
at any time by the Chief of Police, Finance Officer or any state or federal
official in the performance of his or her duties.
(1995 Code, § 6.36.210)
§ 6.36.220   Quarterly report.
   Within 15 days after March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31 during
the permit period, the permittee shall file a report under the penalty of
perjury with the Finance Officer containing the following information:
   (A)   Any changes in or additions to the information required in the
application;
   (B)   The total amount of money received from the operation of bingo games
during the previous three-month period;
   (C)   The total amount paid out in prizes;
   (D)   Detailed costs to the permittee of the operation of the bingo games;
and
   (E)   All disbursements from the fund.
(1995 Code, § 6.36.220)
§ 6.36.230   Changes in conditions during permit period.
   Any change during the permit period in the organization of the permittee,
its principal officers, the staff operating or assisting in the operation of
the bingo game, or the condition of the premises shall be immediately reported
to the Finance Office who shall refer such changes to the appropriate official
who shall make an investigation thereof and, if he or she deems appropriate,
recommend the suspension and revocation of the permit or the imposition of
additional conditions thereto, which suspension, revocation or additional
conditions shall be appealable to the City Council.
(1995 Code, § 6.36.230)
§ 6.36.240   Restrictions on time for conducting bingo games.
   Any permit issued under this chapter may be modified to further restrict the
time for conducting bingo games as set forth in §
6.36.160(H) by the Finance Officer upon his or her own recommendation or upon
the recommendation of the Chief of Police, the Planning Director or the Fire
Chief, which recommendation must be based upon good cause. The modified permit
shall have the same force and effect as a new permit. The modification shall
take effect and shall result in the automatic revocation of the prior permit 15
days after the notice thereof unless the permittee appeals the modification to
the City Council. The original permit shall remain in effect pending decision
by the City Council.
(1995 Code, § 6.36.240)
§ 6.36.250   Suspension or revocation.
   Any permit issued under this chapter shall be immediately suspended by the
Finance Officer upon his or her own recommendation or upon the recommendation
of the Chief of Police, the Planning Director or the Fire Chief, based upon
either a violation of this chapter by the permittee or its agent or the
discovery of some condition which would have been grounds for denial of the
permit application. The suspension shall result in the automatic revocation of
the permit 15 days after the notice thereof unless the permittee appeals the
suspension and revocation to the City Council. The suspension shall remain in
effect pending decision by the City Council.
(1995 Code, § 6.36.250)
§ 6.36.260   Renewal.
   A permittee desiring to continue conducting a bingo game shall at least 45
calendar days before the expiration of the permit make application to the
Finance Officer for a renewal. The application for renewal shall be accompanied
by the same fee and proofs and shall be processed in all respects as an
original application.
(1995 Code, § 6.36.260)
CHAPTER 6.40: NOISE
Section
   
6.40.010   Declaration of policy.
   
6.40.020   Definitions.
   
6.40.030   Special restrictions.
   
6.40.040   Schools, hospitals and churches.
   
6.40.050   Amplified sound permits.
   
6.40.060   Hawkers and peddlers.
   
6.40.070   Standards of enforcement.
   
6.40.071   Amplified sound noise standards.
   
6.40.072   Monitoring procedures.
   
6.40.073   Noise source exemptions.
   
6.40.080   Emergency equipment.
   
6.40.090   Penalties.
   
6.40.100   Severability.
§ 6.40.010   Declaration of policy.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that the peace, health,
safety and welfare of its citizens require protection from excessive,
unnecessary and unreasonable noises from any and all sources in the community.
It is the intention of the City Council to control the adverse effect of such
noise sources on the citizens under any condition of use, especially those
conditions of use, which have the most severe impact on any person.
(1995 Code, § 6.40.010) (Ord. 11-08, passed 8-16-2011)
§ 6.40.020   Definitions.
   The following words, phrases and terms as used in this chapter shall have
the following meanings:
   DECIBEL. A unit used to measure the intensity of a sound or the power level
of an electrical signal by comparing it with a given level on a logarithmic
scale.
   HOSPITAL. Any building or portion thereof used for the accommodation and
medical care of sick, injured or infirm persons including rest homes and
nursing homes.
   NOISE DISTURBANCE. Any sound which violates the standards set forth in this
chapter.
   SCHOOL. Public or private institutions conducting regular academic
instruction at preschool, kindergarten, elementary, secondary or collegiate
levels.
   SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT. Any machine or device for the amplification of
the human voice, music, or any other sound. SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT shall
not include standard automobile radios or tape players when heard only by the
occupants of the vehicle in which the automobile radio is installed. SOUND
AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT as used in this chapter shall not include warning devices
in authorized emergency vehicles, or horns or other warning devices in any
vehicle, which are used only for traffic safety purposes.
   SOUND LEVEL METER. An instrument including a microphone, an amplifier, an
output meter, and frequency weighted networks for the measurement of sound
levels which satisfy the pertinent specifications published by the American
National Standards Institute, New York, New York, in “American Standard Sound
Level Meters for the measurement of noise and Other Sounds,” S1.41971, or the
most recent revision thereof.
   WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL. The sound level in decibels as measured with a sound
level meter using the A:P weighted network (scale) at slow meter response. This
scale provides an average of sound levels over the whole audible spectrum and
reports an overall sound pressure level. The unit of measurement is referred to
as A-weighted decibels or dBA.
(Ord. 11-08, passed 8-16-2011)
§ 6.40.030   Special restrictions.
   Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. of one day and 6:00 a.m. of the following
day, it shall be unlawful for any person to create, cause to be created or
maintained sources of noise which shall cause annoyance or discomfort to a
reasonable person of normal sensitivity in the neighborhood. The sources shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
   (A)   Excessively loud noises caused by the use or operation of radios,
musical instruments and drums, phonographs, television sets or other machines
or devices for the production, reproduction or amplification of sound;
   (B)   Operation of equipment or performance of any outside construction or
repair work on buildings, structures or projects, or operation of construction
type devices, except that contractors may apply for a permit from the Planning
and Building Department to allow construction where extreme heat requires work
to occur between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.;
   (C)   Excessively loud sounds, cries or behavioral noise caused by the
keeping or maintenance of animals or fowls;
   (D)   Excessively loud noise caused by the operation of any machinery,
equipment, device, pump, fan, compressor, air conditioning apparatus or similar
mechanical device;
   (E)   Operation of chimes, bells or other devices for the purpose of
advertising or inviting the patronage of any person or persons to any business
enterprise;
   (F)   Repairing, rebuilding or testing of motor vehicles or operating of any
motor driven vehicle off public streets or highways; and
   (G)   Excessively loud noise caused by calling, shouting, laughing or
crying.
(1995 Code, § 6.40.030) (Ord. 11-08, passed 8-16-2011)
§ 6.40.040   Schools, hospitals and churches.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to create any noise on any street,
sidewalk or public place adjacent to any school, institution of learning or
church while the same is in the use or adjacent to any hospital, which noise
unreasonably interferes with the workings of the institutions or which disturbs
or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, providing conspicuous signs are
displayed in such streets, sidewalk or any public
place indicating the presence of a school, church or hospital.
(1995 Code, § 6.40.040) (Ord. 11-08, passed 8-16-2011)
§ 6.40.050   Amplified sound permits.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person other than personnel of law
enforcement or governmental agencies, to install, use or operate within the
city, and outside a building, a loud speaker or amplifying device in a fixed or
movable position or mounted upon any vehicle for the purpose of giving
instructions, directions, talks, addresses, lectures, transmitting music to any
persons or assembly of persons in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public
property without first obtaining an Amplified Sound Permit approved by the City
Manager with concurrence of the Police Department.
   (B)   The City Manager, with concurrence of the Police Department, when
considering an application for an Amplified Sound Permit, shall recognize and
consider the constitutional rights of free speech of all persons including the
applicant, but shall also consider the correlative constitutional rights of the
citizens of the city to privacy and freedom from public nuisance of loud and
unnecessary noise. The City Manager, with concurrence of the Police Department,
if granting permission, shall reserve the right to enforce whatever rules,
conditions or restrictions it deems necessary to ensure that the sound shall be
so controlled that it will not be unreasonably loud, raucous, varying,
disturbing or a nuisance to persons of normal sensitivity within the area of
audibility, subject to any other provisions within this chapter.
   (C)   An administrative fee of $10 will apply for processing an Amplified
Sound Permit request, said fee subject to change, pursuant to the Consumer
Price Index (CPI).
   (D)   In addition to the processing fee the applicant shall submit in
writing, at least ten days prior to the event, a statement outlining:
      (1)   The name and address of both the user and owner of the sound
amplifying equipment;
      (2)   The maximum sound producing power of the equipment including
wattage, use, volume decibels and approximate distance from which sound will be
audible; and
      (3)   Whether the sound equipment will be used for commercial or
noncommercial purposes.
   (E)   Permits for amplified sound for use in a public park or city facility
shall be processed by the Parks, Library and Recreation Department. Condition
of use is to be determined by the policies of the Parks, Library and Recreation
Department.
(1995 Code, § 6.40.050) (Ord. 14-05, passed 10-21-2014; Ord. 11-08, passed 8-
16-2011; Ord. 08-06, passed 6-3-2008)
§ 6.40.060   Hawkers and peddlers.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to sell, advertise
or invite patronage for anything by public outcry or by use of any type of
noise making or sound amplifying device.
   (B)   The City Council may grant an exception to this section, if, after
application and review, it finds that circumstances are such that an exception
is warranted. The circumstances must be such that the same exception would be
appropriate for any other hawker or peddler in the same situation.
   (C)   In granting an exception, the City Council may specify any special
requirements, routes, time schedules or other standards which they may deem
necessary to carry out the intent of this chapter and protect the public
welfare.
   (D)   Noise levels for mobile vendors are restricted by other chapters of
the Municipal Code and the California Vehicle Code.
(1995 Code, § 6.40.060) (Ord. 11-08, passed 8-16-2011)
§ 6.40.070   Standards of enforcement.
   In enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the enforcing officer shall
utilize, but shall not be limited to the following general standards:
   (A)   The volume, intensity and duration of the noise;
   (B)   Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;
   (C)   The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates;
   (D)   The time of the day or night the noise occurs; and
   (E)   Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant.
(1995 Code, § 6.40.070) (Ord. 11-08, passed 8-16-2011)
§ 6.40.071 Amplified sound noise standards.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person at any location within the city to
create any amplified sound on property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise
controlled by such person which causes the noise level, when measured at the
property line of any affected area, to exceed the decibel level of 70 during
the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
   (B)   Parades/community events. Activities pursuant to Municipal Code
Chapter 8.70 shall not exceed 85 decibels.
   (C)   Public park/city facilities.
      (1)   Sound or noise produced by sound amplification equipment used at
all city parks and other city facilities shall be measured at points not
greater than 100 feet from the sound source within city parks or facilities and
shall not exceed 85 decibels.
      (2)   Failure of the event sponsor to enforce the sound limits may result
in any or all of the following:
         (a)   The forced curtailment of activities as ordered by the Police
Department.
         (b)   Citation issued by the Police Department pursuant to §
6.40.090.
         (c)   Forfeiture of deposits placed with the city by the sponsor for
use of the facility.
(Ord. 11-08, passed 8-16-2011)
§ 6.40.072 Monitoring procedures.
   The following procedures shall be employed for monitoring and evaluating
noise in the community unless otherwise specified in this section:
   (A)   The evaluation shall be conducted any time of the day or night when
the offending noise is being operated.
   (B)   The sound level meter shall be equipped with an omnidirectional
microphone.
   (C)   No individual other than the operator shall be within ten feet when
possible of the sound level meter during the sample period.
(Ord. 11-08, passed 8-16-2011)
§ 6.40.073 Noise source exemptions.
   The following activities shall be exempted from the decibel limits of this
chapter:
   (A)   Activities conducted on public or private athletic fields;
   (B)   Events held at the Tulare County Fairgrounds;
   (C)   Events held at the International Agri-Center;
   (D)   Noise sources associated with the collection of waste or garbage from
commercially zoned, industrially zoned, or residentially zoned property by the
city or its authorized franchisee;
   (E)   Any activity to the extent regulation thereof has been preempted by
state or federal law.
(Ord. 11-08, passed 8-16-2011)
§ 6.40.080   Emergency equipment.
   The provisions of this chapter shall have no application to the sounding of
a siren or the making of other usual signals by any police or other peace
officers in the performance of their duties, nor to the sounding of any siren
upon any ambulance or firefighting equipment in the usual and customary manner.
(1995 Code, § 6.40.080) (Ord. 11-08, passed 8-16-2011)
§ 6.40.090   Penalties.
   Every person, firm or corporation who shall make or continue or cause to be
made or continued, any loud, unnecessary, unusually penetrating or boisterous
noise, disturbance or commotion, which disturbs the peace or quiet of any
neighborhood, or which causes a discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable
person of normal sensitivity residing in the area, shall be deemed guilty of an
infraction. Any person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this
chapter shall be punishable as set forth in §
1.12.010 of this code.
(1995 Code, § 6.40.090) (Ord. 11-08, passed 8-16-2011)
§ 6.40.100   Severability.
   If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the
invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of the
provisions of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid
provisions or application and, to this end, the provisions of this chapter are
declared to be severable.
(1995 Code, § 6.40.100) (Ord. 11-08, passed 8-16-2011)
CHAPTER 6.44: OPEN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTAINERS
Section
   
6.44.010   Possession in specified areas— Prohibited.
   
6.44.020   Possession in specified areas— Parking lots.
   
6.44.030   Possession in specified areas— Vehicles.
   
6.44.040   Alcoholic beverage—Defined.
   
6.44.050   Exception—State law.
   
6.44.060   Penalties.
   
6.44.070   Severability.
§ 6.44.010   Possession in specified areas— Prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the City of Tulare to possess any
alcoholic beverage in any public place, or to transport any alcoholic beverage
upon any public street, sidewalk, pedestrian mall, alleyway or thoroughfare
where the alcoholic beverage is in a receptacle which has been opened, the seal
of which has been broken or the contents of which has been partially removed.
(1995 Code, § 6.44.010)
§ 6.44.020   Possession in specified areas— Parking lots.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any alcoholic beverage where
the alcoholic beverage is in a receptacle which has been opened, the seal of
which has been broken or the contents of which have been partially removed, on
any parking lot within the City of Tulare associated with or under the control
of any business or other premises open to the public where the parking lot has
immediate access to a public street.
(1995 Code, § 6.44.020)
§ 6.44.030   Possession in specified areas— Vehicles.
   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner of any vehicle or the driver,
if the registered owner is not then present in the vehicle, to keep in a motor
vehicle when the motor vehicle is located in any area enumerated in §§
6.44.010 and
6.44.020 of this chapter, any bottle, can or other receptacle containing any
alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or a seal broken, or the contents of
which have been partially removed, unless the container is kept in the trunk of
the vehicle, or kept in some other area of the vehicle not normally occupied by
the driver or passengers, if the vehicle is not equipped with a trunk. A
utility compartment or glove compartment shall be deemed to be within the area
occupied by the driver and passengers. This section shall, however, not apply
to living quarters of a house, car, camper or motor home.
(1995 Code, § 6.44.030)
§ 6.44.040   Alcoholic beverage—Defined.
   The definition of ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE, as used herein, shall include alcohol,
spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every liquid or solid containing alcoholic,
spirits, wine or beer and which contains 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume and
which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or
combined with other substances.
(1995 Code, § 6.44.040)
§ 6.44.050   Exception—State law.
   Sections
6.44.010,
6.44.020 and
6.44.030 shall not be deemed to make punishable an act or acts which are
prohibited by any statute of the State of California.
(1995 Code, § 6.44.060)
§ 6.44.060   Penalties.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter which are
declared to be unlawful, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to a penalty
of imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of time not to exceed six
months, or by a fine not to exceed $500 or both, for each such violation.
Notwithstanding the classification of a violation of this chapter as a
misdemeanor, at the time an action is commenced to enforce the provisions of
this chapter, the trial court, upon recommendation of the prosecuting attorney,
may reduce the charged offense from a misdemeanor to an infraction.
   (B)   Any person convicted of an infraction under this chapter shall be
punished by:
      (1)   A fine not exceeding $50 for a first violation;
      (2)   A fine not exceeding $100 for the second violation of this chapter
within one year; and
      (3)   A fine not exceeding $250 for each additional violation of this
chapter within one year.
(1995 Code, § 6.44.070)
§ 6.44.070   Severability.
   The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter by
sentence, paragraph by paragraph and section by section, and does hereby
declare that the provisions of this chapter are severable and, if for any
reason any sentence, paragraph or section of this chapter shall be held
invalid, the decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining parts of
this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 6.44.080)
CHAPTER 6.48: CURFEW FOR MINORS
Section
   
6.48.010   Curfew hours and restrictions for minors.
§ 6.48.010   Curfew hours and restrictions for minors.
   No person under the age of 18 years shall loiter, idle, wander stroll or
play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds
and public buildings places of amusement and eating establishments, vacant lots
or any other unsupervised places between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.
of the day immediately following; provided, however, that the provisions of
this section shall not apply when:
   (A)   The person is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or other
adult person having the care and custody of the person, or by the his or her
spouse 18 years of age or older;
   (B)   The person is attending an official school, religious, or other
recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city or other
public entity, a civic organization, or other similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor, or the person is traveling directly to or home
from such activity;
   (C)   The person is going to or returning directly from work;
   (D)   The person is obtaining food in an eating establishment after an
exempt activity, after the hours of 10:00 p.m.; but shall vacate the premises
immediately after consuming the food served and proceed directly home;
   (E)   The person is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the
United States Constitution or the person is traveling directly to or from this
activity.
   (F)   The person is on an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent
guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of the person,
without any detour or stop;
   (G)   The person is involved in an emergency;
   (H)   The person is traveling directly to or directly home from any exempt
location without detour or stop;
   (I)   The person is emancipated pursuant to law.
(1995 Code, § 6.48.010) (Ord. 10-13, passed 4-6-2010)
CHAPTER 6.52: GRAFFITI
Section
   
6.52.010   Purpose.
   
6.52.020   Terms defined.
   
6.52.030   Sale of graffiti implements to minors.
   
6.52.040   Possession by minors– Prohibited.
   
6.52.050   Signs, display requirements.
   
6.52.060   Removal.
   
6.52.070   Appeal of cost of removal.
   
6.52.080   Responsibility.
   
6.52.090   Penalties.
   
6.52.100   Alternative.
   
6.52.110   Reward.
   
6.52.120   Severability.
§ 6.52.010   Purpose.
   (A)   Graffiti abatement. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the
prompt abatement of graffiti from public and private properties in the city; to
provide for methods of controlling the unauthorized use of aerosol paint
containers, wide-tipped marker pens, and paint sticks by minors; and to
encourage citizens to report occurrences of graffiti vandalism within the city.
   (B)   Nuisance declared. Due to the increase of graffiti vandalism on both
public and private property, a condition has arisen within the city which has
resulted in a deterioration of property values and concern for the quality of
life of the city’s citizens. The City Council finds and determines that
graffiti constitutes a public nuisance which, left unabated, adversely affects
the city’s image, business development, retail sales, and residential housing
costs. Allowing graffiti to remain on public or private property encourages
additional unacceptable occurrences of graffiti, fuels fear among the community
and is a factor which not only depreciates the value of the property which has
been the target of such vandalism, but also depreciates the value of adjacent
and surrounding properties.
   (C)   Minimize impact. The purpose of this chapter is, therefore, to
minimize the impact which graffiti has on the city’s quality of life, economic
stability, environmental image, aesthetic standard, and the overall sense of
feeling of safety and security of its citizens. Because the existence of
graffiti tends to breed community discontent and criminal and gang-related
activities, the chapter will serve to mitigate these problems through quick
removal and control of graffiti vandalism.
(1995 Code, § 6.52.010) (Ord. 05-1975, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 6.52.020   Terms defined.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.
   AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINER. Any aerosol container, regardless of the material
from which it is made, used for the purpose of spraying paint or other
substance capable of defacing property.
   FELT TIP MARKER. Any indelible marker or similar implement with a tip which,
at its broadest width, is greater than one-eighth inch containing an ink that
is not water-soluble.
   GRAFFITI. Defined as, but not limited to, any unauthorized inscription,
work, figure or design that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn or painted on
any surface.
   GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT. Defined as, but not limited to, aerosol containers of
paint, any felt-tip marker, any paint stick, or any other item used to mark,
etch, scratch, draw, or paint any unauthorized inscription, work, figure or
design.
   MINOR. A person under 18 years of age.
   PAINT STICK. A device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, epoxy, or
other similar substance, capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and
upon application, leaving a mark at least one-eighth of an inch in width,
visible from a distance of 20 feet, and not water-soluble.
(1995 Code, § 6.52.020) (Ord. 05-1975, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 6.52.030   Sale of graffiti implements to minors.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell or cause to be
sold, any graffiti implements, including, but not limited to, aerosol
containers of paint, any felt tip marker pen, or any paint stick, to any person
under the age of 18 years who is not accompanied by a responsible adult.
(1995 Code, § 6.52.030) (Ord. 05-1975, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 6.52.040   Possession by minors–Prohibited.
   (A)   (1)   It is unlawful for any minor to possess any graffiti implement:
         (a)   While upon public property; or
         (b)   While upon private property, without the consent of the owner,
or operator thereof. Such consent must be given in advance and must authorize
the minor’s presence while in the possession of a graffiti implement.
      (2)   This division shall not apply while the minor is attending, or
traveling to or from a school, who has a dated permission slip from a parent or
a teacher.
   (B)   This section is not intended to conflict with Cal. Penal Code § 594.1.
(1995 Code, § 6.52.040) (Ord. 05-1975, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 6.52.050   Signs, display requirements.
   (A)   Signs. Any person engaged in the retail sale of graffiti implements,
including, but not limited to, any aerosol containers of paint, any felt tip
marker pens, or paint sticks, shall display at the location of retail sales, a
sign clearly visible and legible to employees and customers which states as
follows:
   It is unlawful for any person to sell, lend, or give to any individual under
the age of 18 years, who is not accompanied by a responsible adult, any aerosol
container of paint or any felt tip marker pen or paint stick with a tip greater
than one-eighth inch.
   (B)   Display requirement.
      (1)   Every person or business engaged in a commercial enterprise shall
display for sale, trade or exchange, any aerosol paint container or felt tip
marker either:
         (a)   In an area continuously observable, through direct visual
observation or surveillance equipment, by employees of the retail establishment
during the regular course of business; or
         (b)   In an area not accessible to the public in the regular course of
business without employee assistance.
      (2)   Nothing herein shall relieve such person or business entity from,
at all times, complying with the requirements of Cal. Penal Code § 594.1(c) by
posting signs as described therein.
(Ord. 05-1975, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 6.52.060   Removal.
   (A)   General. Any person applying graffiti within the city shall have the
duty to remove same in a manner approved by the city and the property owner
within 24 hours after notice by the city or public or private owner of the
property involved. Failure of any person to so remove graffiti shall constitute
an additional violation of this chapter. Consistent with Cal. Civil Code §
1714.1 where graffiti is applied by minors, the parent or guardian shall be
responsible for such removal or payment of costs thereof.
   (B)   Public property. Whenever the City Manager, or his or her designated
representative, determines that graffiti exists upon property owned by the
city, it shall be removed as soon as possible. When the property is owned by a
public entity other than the city, the removal of the graffiti may be
authorized by the City Manager, or his or her designated representative, and
removal undertaken by city only after securing written consent of the public
entity having jurisdiction over the property. The public entity shall execute a
release and waiver as approved by the city’s Risk Manager.
   (C)   Notice of affected area; requirement to remove graffiti.
      (1)   Where graffiti is located upon private property and the graffiti is
capable of being viewed by persons utilizing any public right-of-way or
sidewalk within the city, it is the property owner’s duty to remove the
graffiti promptly from the property and to restore the property at least to the
condition it was in prior to such act of vandalism. If the property owner fails
to promptly remove the graffiti, the city shall cause a written notice to be
served upon the owner of the affected property notifying the owner of the
location and description of the graffiti and of the property owner’s obligation
to remove the graffiti. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to
commence removal of the graffiti described in the notice within five days of
service or personal delivery of the notice, and to diligently and promptly
pursue total removal of the graffiti; provided that, an exception may exist in
cases of undue hardship as established pursuant to division (C)(2) of this
section. The service is complete at the time of deposit of the notice in the
U.S. mail or by personal delivery of the notice to the owner of the property
subject to removal of graffiti. The failure of any person to receive such
notice shall not affect the validity of any proceeding.
      (2)   Undue hardship; optional procedure for removal.
         (a)   In the event the property owner cannot comply with the
requirement of division (C)(1) above, due to hardship, the property owner shall
file a written request for waiver of the removal requirement with the city. The
property owner shall explain his or her reason(s) for making such request. The
written request shall be filed within the five-day removal period stated in
division (C)(1) above. In determining whether the request for waiver will be
granted, and subsequent assistance provided to the property owner in removal of
the graffiti, the city shall consider the following circumstances:
            1.   The cost of restoration of the property to its original state
prior to the imposition of the graffiti in proportion to the relative value of
the property;
            2.   The ability of the owner to pay for such removal;
            3.   Whether or not the property has been the target of previous
incidents of graffiti or whether a pattern of vandalism to such property
exists.
         (b)   The decision of the city in the form of a written decision by
the City Manager, as to whether or not to grant the waiver shall be final.
      (3)   City’s release from liability. A written request to waive the
requirements of division (C)(1) above shall be accompanied by a “release from
liability” form signed by the property owner which shall release the city and
its authorized agents from any and all liability that may be caused or
attributed to removal of graffiti from the owner’s premises by persons acting
under the authorization of the city.
      (4)   Approval for city to remove graffiti. A written request to waive
the requirements of division (C)(1) above accompanied by a signed “release from
liability” form shall constitute an express approval by the property owner that
the city or its authorized representatives may provide for the removal of the
graffiti on owner’s property by persons acting under the authorization of the
city.
      (5)   Failure to remove graffiti or seek waiver of removal. In the event
the owner fails to remove graffiti from his or her property and fails to
request a waiver of such removal, the city may declare the property a public
nuisance and the city may take any of the following courses of action.
         (a)   Administrative procedure to abate nuisance. The city may direct
the removal of graffiti from the property with the cost of work performed
billed to the property owner who may select the option of direct payment of
such costs. Failure to make direct payment for the abatement of graffiti shall
constitute a special assessment against the respective lot or parcel plat to
which it relates. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the
same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to
the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as
provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy,
collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the
special assessment. Upon completion of the graffiti abatement work, the City
Manager shall cause to be recorded in the office of the Recorder of Tulare
County, a “notice of completion of graffiti abatement proceedings” against a
particular parcel involved. The notice of completion of graffiti abatement
proceedings shall have the effect, when recorded, of conclusively establishing
that graffiti abatement proceedings have been completed and that all
proceedings have been completed and that all necessary charges incurred on
account thereof by the city are due and owing and constitute a special
assessment against the subject real property. This notice shall specify the
name of the current owner of the parcel as shown on the last equalized
assessment rolls of the County of Tulare, and the Tulare County Assessor’s
parcel number for the parcel involved.
         (b)   The city may commence criminal proceedings to abate a public
nuisance under applicable Penal Code provisions.
(1995 Code, § 6.52.060) (Ord. 05-1975, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 6.52.070   Appeal of cost of removal.
   A property owner shall have 15 days from the date of mailing by the city of
the bill for the cost of removal of graffiti from the owner’s property to file
a written appeal of the costs. The appeal must be submitted in writing to the
City Clerk. Upon receipt of the written appeal, the City Clerk shall schedule a
hearing before the City Council. The City Manager shall be so notified and
shall submit a written report to the City Council, with a copy to the appealing
party, setting forth justifications for the description of the work done and
the cost thereof. The City Clerk shall notify the party appealing of the date
and time of the hearing before the City Council, at least ten days in advance
of such hearing. At the time and place of such hearing, the City Manager shall
present his or her report and the appealing party shall present any and all
information in opposition to the calculation of the cost of removal. At the
conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall determine what cost, if any,
is to be imposed upon the appealing party.
(1995 Code, § 6.52.070) (Ord. 05-1975, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 6.52.080   Responsibility.
   Any individual who is found guilty of violating §
6.52.060(A) of this chapter shall pay restitution to the property owner, in
addition to authorized penalties. If the violator is a minor, the parent or
guardian shall be responsible for payment of restitution. If unable to pay, the
juvenile may be permitted to work off his or her payment under the direction of
at least one parent by painting out graffiti.
(1995 Code, § 6.52.080) (Ord. 05-1975, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 6.52.090   Penalties.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor to apply graffiti on any
premises as described herein. Notwithstanding the classification of a violation
of this chapter as a misdemeanor, at the time an action is commenced to enforce
the provisions of this chapter, the trial court, upon recommendation of the
prosecuting attorney, may reduce the charged offense from a misdemeanor to an
infraction.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for a minor to possess any
“graffiti implement” as described herein in violation of §
6.52.040. Notwithstanding the classification of a violation of this chapter as
a misdemeanor, at the time an action is commenced to enforce the provisions of
this chapter, the trial court, upon recommendation of the prosecuting attorney,
may reduce the charged offense from a misdemeanor to an infraction.
   (C)   Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under this chapter shall be
punished by:
      (1)   A fine not to exceed $500 and/or 30 days in the county jail for a
first violation;
      (2)   A fine not exceeding $1,000 and/or 90 days in the county jail for a
second violation of this chapter within one year; and
      (3)   A fine not exceeding $2,500 and/or six months in the county jail
for each additional violation of this chapter within one year.
   (D)   (1)   Any person convicted of an infraction under this chapter shall
be punished by:
         (a)   A fine not exceeding $50 for a first violation;
         (b)   A fine not exceeding $100 for the second violation of this
chapter within one year; and
         (c)   A fine not exceeding $250 for each additional violation of this
chapter within one year.
      (2)   Each day that a violation continues shall be regarded as a new and
separate offense.
   (E)   Community based probation officer probation program, (Thunderbolt):
community service with minimum hours and parental involvement. If the person
violating this chapter is a minor, the matter may be referred to the community
based probation officer. The community based probation officer may request that
a petition be filed to declare the minor to be a ward of the court pursuant to
Cal. Welfare and Institutions Code § 602, or elect to refer the matter to the
traffic hearing officer. In lieu of filing a petition, the probation officer
may impose a program of informal supervision, not to exceed six months,
pursuant to Cal. Welfare and Institutions Code § 654. The probation officer
shall be authorized to order the minor to perform such community service the
probation officer deems appropriate. The community service shall contain the
following minimum elements:
      (1)   The minor shall perform not less than 20 hours, nor more than 100
hours of community service.
      (2)   The entire period of community service shall be performed under the
supervision of a community service provider approved by the community based
probation officer.
      (3)   The probation officer may require at least one of the custodial
parents or guardians to be in attendance for up to 50% of the period of the
assigned community service.
(1995 Code, § 6.52.090) (Ord. 05-1975, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 6.52.100   Alternative.
   Nothing in the foregoing sections shall be deemed to prevent the city from
commencing a civil or criminal proceeding to abate a public nuisance under
applicable Civil or Penal Code provisions as an alternative to the proceedings
set forth herein.
(1995 Code, § 6.52.100) (Ord. 05-1975, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 6.52.110   Reward.
   (A)   Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code, § 53069.5, the city reserves the right to
offer a reward in an amount and as to such locations as may be set by
resolution of the City Council, for information leading to the arrest and
conviction of any person for violation, within the city, of Cal. Penal Code §§
594 or 594.3 by the use of graffiti, Cal. Penal Code §§ 640, 640.5, 640.6. In
the event of multiple contributions of information, the reward amount shall be
divided by the city in the manner it shall deem appropriate. For the purposes
of this section, diversion of the violator to a community service program, a
plea bargain to a lesser offense, or the sustaining of any juvenile petition
filed pursuant to Cal. Welfare and Institutions Code §§ 602 et seq., shall
constitute a conviction.
   (B)   Claims for rewards under this section shall be filed with the city and
shall:
      (1)   Specifically identify the date, location and kind of property
damaged or destroyed;
      (2)   Identify by name the person who was convicted;
      (3)   Identify the court and the date upon which the conviction occurred;
and
      (4)   Be in writing and filed within 180 days of such conviction.
   (C)   No claim for a reward shall be allowed by the City Council unless the
city investigates and verifies the accuracy of the claim and determines that
the requirements of this section have been satisfied. Once the claim is
verified and the determination is made, the reward shall be paid within the
city’s ordinary course of business.
   (D)   The person committing the graffiti vandalism, and if an un-emancipated
minor, then the parent or lawful guardian of said minor shall be civilly liable
for any reward paid pursuant to this section in accordance with the provisions
of Cal. Gov’t Code § 53069.5.
(Ord. 05-1975, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 6.52.120   Severability.
   If any section, division, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
chapter, is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the
decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The City Council
declares that it would have adopted each section, division, sentence, clause,
phrase, or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more
sections, divisions, clauses, phrases or portions be declared invalid or
unconstitutional.
(1995 Code, § 6.52.020) (Ord. 05-1975, passed 8-16-2005)
CHAPTER 6.56: DESIGNATING CITY PARKS AND LIBRARIES AS DRUG FREE ZONES
Section
   
6.56.010   Designation of city parks as drug free zones.
   
6.56.020   Designation of city libraries as drug free zones.
   
6.56.030   Posting of notices of drug free zones.
§ 6.56.010   Designation of city parks as drug free zones.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Health and Safety Code § 11380.5(a), the
grounds of all public parks within the City of Tulare, including adjacent
public parking lots and sidewalks, as well as public swimming pools and public
youth centers, are herewith designated as drug free zones.
(1995 Code, § 6.56.010) (Ord. 99-1845, passed - -1999)
§ 6.56.020   Designation of city libraries as drug free zones.
   Pursuant to Cal. Health and Safety Code § 11380.5, all public libraries
within the City of Tulare are herewith designated as drug free zones.
(1995 Code, § 6.56.020) (Ord. 99-1845, passed - -1999)
§ 6.56.030   Posting of notices of drug free zones.
   All public parks and public libraries within the City of Tulare which have
been designated as drug free zones pursuant to this chapter shall have notices
posted in appropriate and reasonable locations at the facilities, advising and
directing the public that the facilities have been designated as drug free
zones pursuant to this chapter and Cal. Health and Safety Code § 11380.5.
(1995 Code, § 6.56.030) (Ord. 99-1845, passed - -1999)
CHAPTER 6.60: ADMINISTRATIVE FINES
Section
   
6.60.010   Administrative Fine Schedule.
§ 6.60.010 Administrative Fine Schedule.
   The City Council of the City of Tulare in an effort to more efficiently
administer all fines, as referenced within each chapter of the Tulare Municipal
Code and associated with its administrative citation process hereby sets forth
an Administrative Fine Schedule to be established and adopted by resolution.
(Ord. 10-15, passed 4-20-2010)
CHAPTER 6.70: SOCIAL HOST LIABILITY
Section
   
6.70.010   Findings.
   
6.70.020   Authority and purpose.
   
6.70.030   Definitions.
   
6.70.040   Public nuisance.
   
6.70.050   Civil penalties.
   
6.70.060   Emergency response cost liability.
   
6.70.070   Protected activities.
   
6.70.080   Severability.
§ 6.70.010 Findings.
   (A)   Underage persons consuming alcoholic beverages at gatherings held at
private residences or at rented residential and commercial premises is harmful
to the underage persons themselves and a threat to the peace, health, safety,
quiet enjoyment of residential property and the general welfare of the public.
Underage persons, who have been consuming alcoholic beverages, are at greater
risk to be in automobile accidents and otherwise harm themselves and/or others,
to commit suicide, to be assaulted or assault others, and girls are at greater
risk of sexual assaults.
   (B)   Persons responsible for the occurrence of these types of gatherings on
private property over which they have possession or control have failed to
ensure that alcoholic beverages are neither served to nor consumed by underage
persons at these parties.
   (C)   Problems associated with gatherings involving underage persons
drinking alcohol are difficult to prevent and deter. Police need an arsenal of
tools to deal with the issue of underage drinking and its attendant problems.
If persons are held civilly responsible by having to pay a significant fine for
hosting a party where there is underage drinking, they will be more likely to
properly supervise or stop such conduct at events held on property under their
possession or control.
   (D)   In the past and present, law enforcement, fire and other emergency
response services personnel have and are required to respond, sometimes on
multiple occasions, to these types of gatherings. The repeated return of police
officers to the location of an event constitutes a drain of emergency personnel
and resources, often leaving other areas of the city without police protection
or with unreasonably limited protection. Responses to such gatherings also
result in a disproportionate expenditure of public safety resources of the
city, which are underwritten by general municipal taxes paid to the city by its
taxpayers and residents.
   (E)   The service of alcohol to underage persons at loud and unruly
gatherings and the consumption of alcohol by underage persons at loud or unruly
gatherings has in the past and continues to pose a threat to the health and
safety of all persons who reside in the city, is a drain on the city’s public
safety resources and also causes significant disruption of city residents’
quiet enjoyment of their households, especially in the city’s residential
neighborhoods. It is therefore the policy of the City Council that in
responding to loud or unruly gatherings, the city Police Department shall
strictly enforce any and all applicable local and state laws pertaining to the
service of alcohol to underage persons, and the consumption of alcohol by
underage persons, and with respect to underage persons in possession of
alcohol, the Police Department shall establish a “no tolerance” protocol by
which the Police Department contacts, or causes the underage person’s school to
contact, the underage person’s parents or legal guardians whenever the underage
person is found to be in possession of alcohol or narcotics or found to be
intoxicated at a loud or unruly gathering. Where the underage person’s school
has an internal student disciplinary office any such incident shall likewise be
reported to that office.
(Ord. 12-06, passed 5-15-2012)
§ 6.70.020 Authority and purpose.
   This chapter is adopted under the municipal affairs provisions of the City
Charter for the purpose of establishing standards and controls to enforce laws
prohibiting the service to and consumption of alcoholic beverages by underage
persons; to protect public health, safety, general welfare and quiet enjoyment
of residential property and properties neighboring one of these gatherings; to
discourage and deter persons from hosting or improperly supervising a party
where there is underage drinking; and to establish standards and controls of
parties, gatherings or assemblages involving underage persons consuming
alcoholic beverages on private property when such gatherings are determined to
be a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, or require
initial police response and return calls to the location to disperse
uncooperative participants.
(Ord. 12-06, passed 5-15-2012)
§ 6.70.030 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid
or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-
half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage
purposes or other consumption either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined
with other substances.
   EMERGENCY RESPONSE COSTS. The cost to the city to provide law enforcement,
fire, or other emergency response provider personnel to respond to an unruly
gathering and any equipment used or damaged in connection with the response.
   JUVENILE. Any person under 18 years of age.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Shall mean, but is not limited to, a home, yard,
apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall
or meeting room, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether
occupied as a dwelling, during party or other social function, and whether
owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON. A person or persons with a right of possession of the
residence or other private property at which an unruly gathering is conducted.
A RESPONSIBLE PERSON need not be present at such gathering and prior knowledge
of the unruly gathering is not a prerequisite to a finding that any specific
individual is a RESPONSIBLE PERSON as defined by this section. This chapter
therefore imposes vicarious as well as direct liability upon RESPONSIBLE
PERSONS. A RESPONSIBLE PERSON includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   Owner(s) and/or lessee(s) of the property where an unruly gathering
is taking place, including the record owner of the title to property, wherever
that person or entity may currently reside;
      (2)   Person(s) hosting an unruly gathering;
      (3)   Person(s) receiving money or other consideration for granting
access to an unruly gathering;
      (4)   Parent(s) or legal guardian(s) of a juvenile who is also a
RESPONSIBLE PERSON;
      (5)   Tenant of the residence or other private property; and
      (6)   Person(s) in charge of the private property.
   UNDERAGE PERSON. Any person under 21 years of age.
   UNRULY GATHERING. A party, event or gathering where four or more underage
persons are present at a private property in which alcoholic beverages are
being consumed or possessed by any underage person and upon which unruly
conduct occurs. Illustrative of such unruly conduct is excessive noise,
excessive traffic, obstruction of public streets by crowds or vehicles, public
drunkenness or unlawful public consumption of alcohol or alcoholic beverages,
assaults, batteries, fights, or other disturbances of  peace, vandalism,
litter, and any other conduct which constitute a threat to peace, public
health, safety, quiet enjoyment of residential property or general welfare.
(Ord. 12-06, passed 5-15-2012)
§ 6.70.040 Public nuisance.
   (A)   Any unruly gathering shall constitute a public nuisance and an
immediate threat to public health and safety.
   (B)   As a public nuisance, the unruly gathering may be summarily abated by
police by all reasonable means, singularly or in combination, including, but
not limited to:
      (1)   An order requiring the gathering to be disbanded;
      (2)   An assessment of a civil penalty under this chapter; and
      (3)   The issuance of a criminal citation or the arrest of any law
violators under any applicable ordinances or statutes.
(Ord. 12-06, passed 5-15-2012)
§ 6.70.050 Civil penalties.
   (A)   Any and all responsible persons of an unruly gathering shall be
subject to civil penalty under the provisions of
Chapter 6.60 of this code.
   (B)   The City Council, by resolution, shall establish civil penalties for:
      (1)   A first violation;
      (2)   A second violation occurring at the same private property within
one year of the first cited violation; and
      (3)   A third and any further violation occurring at the same private
property within one year of the first cited violation.
   (C)   If the owner of the private property where an unruly gathering has
occurred has leased the property to another person, such owner shall not be
considered a responsible person until that owner receives notice of at least
one previous unruly gathering on his or her property in the prior 12 months.
Notice shall be by a copy of the administrative citation transmitted via
certified mail to the owner of the private property as recorded by the last
equalized assessment roll of the Tulare County Assessor.
   (D)   In the event that an unruly gathering is hosted by a juvenile, then
the parents or guardians of that juvenile will be jointly and severally liable
for any civil penalty assessed on the juvenile under this section.
   (E)   The fine schedule prescribed at division (B) of this section is a
“rolling schedule” meaning that in calculating the fine payable the Police
Department or City Attorney shall count backward starting from the date of the
most recent loud or unruly gathering to determine how many prior loud or unruly
gatherings have taken place at the premises in question during the statutory
12-month period. A warning given pursuant to §
6.80.040 shall remain in effect for the premises at a given address until a
full 12-month period has elapsed during which there have been no loud or unruly
gatherings at those premises.
(Ord. 12-06, passed 5-15-2012)
§ 6.70.060 Emergency response cost liability.
   (A)   When a law enforcement, fire, or other emergency response provider
makes an initial response to an unruly gathering at a private property, the
official shall, in writing, warn any responsible person(s) for the gathering at
the scene that:
      (1)   The official has determined that an unruly gathering exists; and
      (2)   If emergency response providers make any further emergency
responses to the same location for an unruly gathering within one year of the
initial response, the responsible person(s) will be charged for the costs of
providing those emergency responses.
   (B)   When a law enforcement, fire, or other emergency response provider
responds to any unruly gathering at a private property within one year after
the warning in division (A) of this section has been given, any and all
responsible persons shall be jointly and severally liable for the city’s costs
of providing those emergency responses. If the responsible person is a
juvenile, then the juvenile’s parents or guardians shall be liable for the
emergency response cost. This liability is in addition to any civil penalty
authorized under this chapter.
   (C)   The emergency response costs incurred under this section shall be
deemed a debt owed to the city and are due 30 days after receipt of the bill. A
bill will be deemed received five days after the date posted on the bill which
is mailed by placing first class postage on the envelope and mailing it to the
address provided by the responsible party to the law enforcement, fire or other
emergency response provider or to the address where the unruly gathering took
place. Any responsible person owing such debt shall be liable in a civil action
brought in the name of the city for recovery of such debt, including reasonable
attorney’s fees and costs. The bill shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name(s) of the person(s) being held liable for the payment of
such costs;
      (2)   The address of the private property where the unruly gathering
occurred;
      (3)   The date and time of the emergency response;
      (4)   The names of law enforcement, fire or emergency service providers
who responded;
      (5)   The date(s) and time(s) of any previous warning given pursuant to
division (A) of this section and/or previous responses to unruly gatherings at
the private property in question within the previous one year; and
      (6)   An itemized list of the emergency response costs for which the
person(s) is being held liable.
(Ord. 12-06, passed 5-15-2012)
§ 6.70.070 Protected activities.
   This chapter shall not apply to activities protected by Article I, § 4 of
the California Constitution or the 1st or 14th Amendments of the United States
Constitution.
(Ord. 12-06, passed 5-15-2012)
§ 6.70.080 Severability.
   If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the
invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of the
provisions of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid
provisions or application and, to this end, the provisions of this chapter are
declared to be severable.
(Ord. 12-06, passed 5-15-2012)
CHAPTER 6.80: CHARGES FOR SPECIAL SECURITY SERVICES AT LOUD AND UNRULY
GATHERINGS
Section
   
6.80.010   Findings.
   
6.80.020   Authority and purpose.
   
6.80.030   Definitions.
   
6.80.040   Response to loud or unruly gatherings.
   
6.80.050   Cost recovery for special security services.
   
6.80.060   Violations; fines.
   
6.80.070   Billing and collection.
   
6.80.080   Severability.
§ 6.80.010 Findings.
   (A)   Loud and unruly gatherings held at private residences or at rented
residential and commercial premises or on public property are harmful to the
persons themselves and a threat to the peace, health, safety, quiet enjoyment
of residential property and the general welfare of the public. Persons at these
gatherings are at greater risk to harm themselves and/or others, to be
assaulted or assault others, and girls are at greater risk of sexual assaults.
   (B)   Problems associated with loud and unruly gatherings are difficult to
prevent and deter. Police need an arsenal of tools to deal with the issue of
these gatherings and their attendant problems. If persons are held civilly
responsible by having to pay a significant fine for gathering where there is
loud and unruly behavior, they will be more likely to properly supervise or
stop such conduct at events held on property under their possession or control.
   (C)   In the past and present, law enforcement, fire and other emergency
response services personnel have and are required to respond, sometimes on
multiple occasions, to these types of gatherings. The repeated return of police
officers to the location of an event constitutes a drain of emergency personnel
and resources, often leaving other areas of the city without police protection
or with unreasonably limited protection. Responses to such gatherings also
result in a disproportionate expenditure of public safety resources of the
city, which are underwritten by general municipal taxes paid to the city by its
taxpayers and residents.
(Ord. 12-06, passed 5-15-2012)
§ 6.80.020 Authority and purpose.
   This chapter is adopted under the municipal affairs provisions of the City
Charter to protect public health, safety, general welfare and quiet enjoyment
of residential property and public property and properties neighboring one of
these gatherings; to discourage and deter persons from hosting or improperly
supervising a party where there is loud and unruly behavior; and to establish
standards and controls of parties, gatherings or assemblages on private and
public property when such gatherings are determined to be a threat to the
public peace, health, safety or general welfare, or require initial police
response and return calls to the location to disperse uncooperative
participants.
(Ord. 12-06, passed 5-15-2012)
§ 6.80.030 Definitions.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply.
   LOUD OR UNRULY GATHERING. A gathering of four or more persons on private
property or a permitted gathering of two or more persons on public property
whose loud or unruly conduct constitutes a threat to public peace, health,
safety, quiet enjoyment of residential property or the quiet enjoyment of other
persons at a public property or general welfare, including violations of
Chapter 6.70. This term excludes incidents of domestic violence. A LOUD OR
UNRULY GATHERING shall constitute a public nuisance.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Shall mean, but is not limited to, a home, yard,
apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall
or meeting room, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether
occupied as a dwelling, during party or other social function, and whether
owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Shall mean, but is not limited to, a property owned by the
city, a district or other public entity, state or federal government.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON. A person or persons with a right of possession of the
residence or other private or public property at which an unruly gathering is
conducted.
   (A)   A RESPONSIBLE PERSON includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   Owner(s) and/or lessee(s) of the property where an unruly gathering
is taking place, including the record owner of the title to property, wherever
that person or entity may currently reside;
      (2)   Permittee(s) if the gathering is a permitted gathering on public
property;
      (3)   Person(s) hosting or accepting responsibility for an unruly
gathering;
      (4)   Person(s) receiving money or other consideration for granting
access to an unruly gathering;
      (5)   Parent(s) or legal guardian(s) of a juvenile person who is also a
RESPONSIBLE PERSON;
      (6)   Tenant of the residence or other private property; and
      (7)   Person(s) in charge of the private property.
   (B)   To incur liability for special security service charges imposed by
this chapter the RESPONSIBLE PERSON need not be present at the loud or unruly
gathering resulting in the emergency response giving rise to the imposition of
special security service charges and prior knowledge of the unruly gathering is
not a prerequisite to a finding that any specific individual is a RESPONSIBLE
PERSON as defined by this section. This chapter therefore imposes vicarious as
well as direct liability upon RESPONSIBLE PERSONS.
   SPECIAL SECURITY SERVICES. The provision of any police, fire or other
emergency response service to a loud or unruly gathering within 12 months of a
first response as provided in this chapter.
   UNDERAGE PERSON. Any person under 21 years of age.
(Ord. 12-06, passed 5-15-2012)
§ 6.80.040 Response to loud or unruly gatherings.
   (A)   When a police officer responds to a first loud or unruly gathering at
premises in the city with a given address, the officer shall issue a written
warning to any responsible person at the scene that:
      (1)   The officer has determined that a loud or unruly gathering exists;
and
      (2)   Responsible persons will be charged for the cost of any special
security services required for subsequent responses to the scene within the
next 12 months.
   (B)   Only one warning will be given pursuant to this section before the
city assesses special security service costs pursuant to §
6.80.050. If a responsible person cannot be identified at the scene, the Police
Department may issue a warning to one of the other responsible persons defined
in §
6.80.030 or subsequently return to the scene and issue the warning to a then-
present responsible person. Warnings given to responsible persons who do not
reside at the premises in question shall be delivered by certified mail.
(Ord. 12-06, passed 5-15-2012)
§ 6.80.050 Cost recovery for special security services.
   When the Police Department or Fire Department or other city emergency
responder responds to a loud or unruly gathering at premises with a given
address in the city within 12 months of a warning given to a responsible person
for those premises pursuant to §
6.80.040, or while any such warning remains in effect pursuant to §
6.80.040, all responsible persons shall be jointly and severally liable for the
city’s costs of providing special security service for that response and all
subsequent responses during that warning period.
(Ord. 12-06, passed 5-15-2012)
§ 6.80.060 Violations; fines.
   (A)   Violations. It shall be an infraction for a responsible person to
conduct or allow a loud or unruly gathering on premises owned by the
responsible person or on premises rented by or to the responsible person or on
public property where the responsible party is the permittee. A third or
subsequent violation within a 12-month period shall constitute a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Fines. The City Council, by resolution, shall establish civil
penalties for:
      (1)   A first violation;
      (2)   A second violation occurring at the same private property within
one year of the first cited violation; and
      (3)   A third and any further violation occurring at the same private
property within one year of the first cited violation.
   (C)   Other charges. The fines prescribed at division (B) are in addition to
any other special security service charges that may be assessed pursuant to
this Chapter 6.80.
   (D)   Application of subsequent fines. The second, third or subsequent
violation fines prescribed at division (B) above are payable whether or not the
responsible person at the time of the current loud or unruly gathering is the
same person who was the responsible person for any prior loud or unruly
gathering at those premises.
   (E)   Warning period. The fine schedule prescribed at division (B) above is
a “rolling schedule” meaning that in calculating the fine payable the Police
Department or City Attorney shall count backward starting from the date of the
most recent loud or unruly gathering to determine how many prior loud or unruly
gatherings have taken place at the premises in question during the statutory
12-month period. A warning given pursuant to §
6.80.040 shall remain in effect for the premises at a given address until a
full 12-month period has elapsed during which there have been no loud or unruly
gatherings at those premises.
(Ord. 12-06, passed 5-15-2012)
§ 6.80.070 Billing and collection.
   (A)   Charges for special security service shall include a reasonable charge
for the emergency responder’s time and actual costs of any equipment used or
damaged in connection with the response, together with an additional 33% of the
special security charge for administrative overhead. These charges shall be
computed and a bill submitted to the responsible person(s). The Chief of Police
shall promulgate notice and billing procedures for this purpose.
   (B)   The emergency response costs incurred under this section shall be
deemed a debt owed to the city and are due 30 days after receipt of the bill. A
bill will be deemed received five days after the date posted on the bill which
is mailed by placing first class postage on the envelope and mailing it to the
address provided by the responsible party to the law enforcement, fire or other
emergency response provider or to the address where the unruly gathering took
place. Any responsible person owing such debt shall be liable in a civil action
brought in the name of the city for recovery of such debt, including reasonable
attorney’s fees and costs and costs of collection. The bill shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   The name(s) of the person(s) being held liable for the payment of
such costs;
      (2)   The address where the loud and unruly gathering occurred;
      (3)   The date and time of the emergency response;
      (4)   The names of law enforcement, fire or emergency service providers
who responded;
      (5)   The date(s) and time(s) of any previous warning given pursuant to §
6.80.040 and/or previous responses to unruly gatherings at the address in the
city in question within the previous one year; and
      (6)   An itemized list of the emergency response costs for which the
person(s) is being held liable.
(Ord. 12-06, passed 5-15-2012)
§ 6.80.080 Severability.
   If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the
invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of the
provisions of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid
provisions or application and, to this end, the provisions of this chapter are
declared to be severable.
(Ord. 12-06, passed 5-15-2012)
TITLE 7: HEALTH AND SANITATION
Chapter
   
7.04.   HEALTH ENFORCEMENT
   
7.05.   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
   
7.08.   WATER SERVICE
   
7.09   WELLS
   
7.10.   GROUNDWATER OVERDRAFT MITIGATION
   
7.12.   FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
   
7.16.   GARBAGE COLLECTION AND STREET SWEEPING SERVICES
   
7.17.   MANDATORY RECYCLING AND ORGANIC WASTE DISPOSAL REDUCTION
   
7.18.   RECYCLING AND DIVERSION OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS
   
7.19.   SHARPS WASTE MANAGEMENT
   
7.20.   SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
   
7.21.   RECYCLED WATER ORDINANCE
   
7.24.   CAMPGROUNDS
   
7.28.   NUISANCES GENERALLY
   7.29.   ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLES ON PRIVATE
PROPERTY
   
7.32.   WATER CONSERVATION
   
7.36.   WASTE TIRE HAULERS
   
7.40.   EMERGENCY AMBULANCE OPERATOR FRANCHISE
   
7.44.   REGULATION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS
   
7.48.   PUBLIC USE/CONSUMPTION OF MEDICAL/RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA
   
7.49.   REGULATION OF PSYCHOACTIVE BATH SALTS, PSYCHOACTIVE HERBAL INCENSE, AND
OTHER SYNTHETIC DRUGS
   
7.52.   REGULATION OF SQUATTER CAMPS
   
7.56.   REGULATION OF ROADSIDE AND MEDIAN SOLICITATION
   
7.60.   REGULATION OF SHOPPING CARTS
   
7.64.   SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT
   
7.68.   ADMINISTRATIVE FINES
CHAPTER 7.04: HEALTH ENFORCEMENT
Section
   
7.04.010   Consent to enforcement by county.
§ 7.04.010   Consent to enforcement by county.
   Consent is hereby given that the county’s Health Officer of the County of
Tulare shall enforce and observe in this city all orders, quarantine
regulations and rules prescribed by the state’s Department of Public Health,
all statutes of the state and all ordinances of the county relating to the
public health, all of which orders, regulations, rules, statutes and ordinances
are hereby declared to be effective within the city.
(1995 Code, § 7.04.010)
CHAPTER 7.05: CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
Section
   
7.05.010   Code Enforcement Officer.
   
7.05.020   Duties.
   
7.05.030   Enforcement.
   
7.05.040   Compliance.
§ 7.05.010 Code enforcement officer.
   Any duly appointed employee of the Office of Safety, Compliance and
Facilities as a Code Enforcement Officer shall be authorized to perform the
enforcement duties identified in this code. The Code Enforcement Officer will
work closely with members of other departments and the Code Enforcement Officer
shall be under the supervision of the Safety, Compliance and Facilities Officer
or his or her designee.
(Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022)
§ 7.05.020 Duties.
   The duties of the Code Enforcement Officer shall include, but are not
limited to, issues involving property maintenance by abating hazardous
conditions which threaten the life, health and safety of the public, and any
other provisions allowed by law.
(Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022)
§ 7.05.030 Enforcement.
   The Code Enforcement Officer shall enforce the provisions of all applicable
state and city codes including, but not limited to, the City Municipal Code,
the California Health and Safety Code, Uniform Code for the Abatement of
Dangerous Buildings, as the codes may, from time to time, be amended.
(Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022)
§ 7.05.040 Compliance.
   The Code Enforcement Officer shall work with property owners/residents to
obtain voluntary compliance; however, the Code Enforcement Officer shall also
have authority to issue citations and pursue other legal remedies as necessary.
(Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022)
CHAPTER 7.08: WATER SERVICE
Section
   
7.08.010   Turning on water—Permit required.
   
7.08.020   Issuance of permit—Applications.
   
7.08.030   Front foot and service lateral fees—Water main extensions.
   
7.08.040   Benefit district refunding.
   
7.08.050   In-lieu water fees.
   
7.08.060   Surplus.
§ 7.08.010   Turning on water—Permit required.
   No person shall turn on any curb cock or connection admitting water from the
water mains to any property in the city without first obtaining a permit
therefor from the Water Collector.
(1995 Code, § 7.08.010)
§ 7.08.020 Issuance of permit—Applications.
   The permit shall be issued without payment of any fee therefor and, upon the
application blanks, as the Water Collector shall from time to time decide.
(1995 Code, § 7.08.020)
§ 7.08.030   Front foot and service lateral fees—Water main extensions.
   (A)   Whenever an applicant applies for a permit to connect property
fronting an existing water main, the installation cost of which main was paid
by the city or by a previous applicant and approved by the city, such
subsequent applicant shall pay to the city, prior to the granting of such
permit, the water front foot charge. Said front foot charge shall be based on
60% of the estimated cost of an eight-inch water main and appurtenances in an
existing paved local city street. Said fee shall be computed by the City
Engineer, and adopted by resolution of the Board of Public Utilities annually.
   (B)   Whenever an applicant applies for a permit to connect property where a
water service has already been installed by the city or a previous applicant
and approved by the city, such subsequent applicant shall pay to the city a
water service charge. The fee shall be computed by the City Engineer, and
adopted by resolution of the Board of Public Utilities annually.
(1995 Code, § 7.08.030) (Ord. 06-2026, passed - -2006)
§ 7.08.040   Benefit district refunding.
   (A)   Any applicant desiring to make an extension to the water system of the
city to serve applicant’s property shall make a request in writing to the City
Engineer for a preliminary investigation into the feasibility of such
extension. If the extension is found to be feasible, such extension may be made
to the water system of the city in accordance with the provisions of this
section. The city shall inspect and may permit the final connection to the city
system only if it is found that such extension conforms in all respects with
city standards and specifications for waters within the city and with the sizes
and grades designated by the City Engineer.
   (B)   Any applicant paying for the installing of a public water main shall,
prior to the construction of the water main, file with the City Engineer a
legal description of the applicant’s property, which is served by said water
main. Within 90 days following the notice of completion of the main, the
applicant shall file with the City Engineer a financial statement, in the form
specified by the City Engineer, stating the cost (excluding any anticipated
city reimbursement) of the construction of the main. Actual costs shall be
limited to engineering, applicable fees paid to the city, county, state,
contractor, surety bonding company, and for staking, compaction tests and
interest as defined in division (F) below. If the financial statement is not
filed within this time period, the applicant shall not be eligible for any
reimbursements under this chapter.
   (C)   For a period of not to exceed 20 years after the notice of completion
of a water main referred to in division (B) of this section, all of the front
foot fees collected by the city pursuant to this chapter for a connection to
such water main shall be paid by the city to applicant, not to exceed 100% of
the approved cost of constructing water mains which do not front on any of the
applicant’s property and 50% of the cost of constructing water mains for those
portions where the applicant’s property fronts on only one side of the street.
Payments shall be made annually in July, or as soon thereafter as practical.
   (D)   Whenever a water main is extended to serve property, the water shall
be extended across the full street frontage of the property to be served unless
the City Engineer determines that such water shall not be extended in the
future.
   (E)   Existing benefit districts. After the effective date of this
ordinance, the Engineer shall determine which benefit districts which existed
prior to this ordinance are still active. The City Engineer shall then
determine what unpaid balance exists in each active benefit district, together
with any accrued interest as provided for at the time of adoption of said
district and apply the same procedures for repayment as outlined in division
(C) to said unpaid balance except that the 20-year time limit mentioned in that
section shall be from the original date of the adoption of said district.
   (F)   Interest. The unpaid balance due the applicant for water main shall be
adjusted by annual compounding with a variable interest rate. The interest rate
used for each calendar year shall be based on the average annual Local Agency
Investment Fund (LAIF) rate of return on City of Tulare investments from the
previous calendar year.
(1995 Code, § 7.08.040) (Ord. 06-2026, passed - -2006)
§ 7.08.050   In-lieu water fees.
   Whenever the City Engineer determines it is impractical or unreasonable for
an applicant to install a water main on a street frontage for which such
installation would be otherwise be required, the applicant shall pay to the
city an in-lieu fee for their fair share of the future installation of the
main. The fee shall be the same front foot fee as established in §
7.08.030 above.
(1995 Code, § 7.08.050) (Ord. 06-2026, passed - -2006)
§ 7.08.060   Surplus.
   Any surplus of monies remaining after the applicant has been reimbursed in
accordance with the applicable provisions of this code may be expended for
construction or reconstruction of the facilities including raising of
facilities to grade or, work for which the funds were collected.
(1995 Code, § 7.08.060) (Ord. 06-2026, passed - -2006)
CHAPTER 7.09: WELLS
Section
   
7.09.010   Title.
   
7.09.020   Legislative intent.
   
7.09.030   Definitions.
   
7.09.040   Acts prohibited; permit required.
   
7.09.050   Meter required.
   
7.09.055   Reporting water use.
   
7.09.060   Permits.
   
7.09.070   Rules and regulations.
   
7.09.080   Cash deposit or security bond.
   
7.09.090   Suspension or revocation of permit.
   
7.09.100   Appeal.
   
7.09.110   Public nuisance.
   
7.09.120   Inspection.
   
7.09.130   Backflow prevention of existing auxiliary water supply wells.
   
7.09.140   Violation—Penalty.
   
7.09.150   Notification of violation.
§ 7.09.010 Title.
   This chapter shall be known and referred to as the Well Ordinance of the
City of Tulare.
(Ord. 2024-06, passed 12-17-2024; Ord. 18-11, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 7.09.020 Legislative intent.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate the construction, modification
or repair, abandonment or destruction of wells in such a manner that the
groundwater of this city will not be contaminated, polluted, or used in an
unstainable manner, that water obtained from wells will be suitable for
beneficial use and will not jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the
people of this city, and to monitor the amount of water pumped from wells.
(Ord. 2024-06, passed 12-17-2024; Ord. 18-11, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 7.09.030 Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them.
   ABANDON or ABANDONMENT. When applied to a well, shall mean to cease
maintenance or use of the well for a period of one year.
   CONTAMINATION. The impairment of the quality of water to a degree which
creates, or may create a hazard, to the public health through poisoning or
through spread of disease.
   DESTROY or DESTRUCTION. When applied to a well, shall mean any action which
causes the well to no longer produce or act as a conduit for the interchange of
water.
   EMERGENCY. A circumstance which (1) causes an imminent threat of or actual
contamination or pollution of the city’s groundwater; or (2) jeopardizes the
health or safety of the people of this city; or (3) is likely to cause a
substantial and immediate loss of property.
   OWNER. The owner of the property upon which any well subject to this chapter
is located and/or the permittee for such well.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, general corporation, association,
or governmental entity.
   POLLUTION. The alteration of the quality of water, in full or part, which
affects or may affect such water for beneficial uses. POLLUTION may include
contamination.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. When applied to a well, shall mean any action or omission
which threatens to or which in fact contaminates or pollutes the groundwater,
exacerbates overdraft conditions, adversely impacts the City of Tulare’s public
water supply system, or otherwise jeopardizes the health, safety, and welfare
of the public.
   PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR. The Public Works Director of the City of Tulare or
his/her duly authorized representatives.
   WELL. Any artificial excavation for the purpose of extracting water from, or
injecting water into, the ground, or for providing cathodic protection, or for
making tests or observations of underground conditions, or for any other
similar purpose. This definition shall not include: (1) oil, gas, or geothermal
wells; or (2) wells used for the purpose of (a) dewatering excavation during
construction or (b) stabilizing hillsides or earth embankments.
(Ord. 2024-06, passed 12-17-2024; Ord. 18-11, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 7.09.040 Acts prohibited, permit required.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, modify or repair,
abandon, or destroy any well within the city, except by the city, unless such
person has a valid permit issued by the Public Works Director for the specific
action to be taken.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, modify or repair,
abandon, or destroy any well, unless such construction, modification or repair,
abandonment or destruction is in conformance with the terms and conditions
contained in the permit issued by the Public Works Director.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct any well, whether for
domestic, industrial, or any other use. No permit shall be issued for
construction of a well, if the property to be served is connected to the city’s
water supply system, the property is within city limits, or within 500 feet of
a feasible connection point to the city’s water supply system.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to modify an existing well, and no
permit shall be issued for modifications other than abandonment and destruction
if the property is within city limits or within 500 feet of a feasible
connection point to the city’s water supply system.
   (E)   The Public Works Director may issue a permit for the construction,
modification, or repair of a supply well for domestic, commercial, or
industrial purposes, for temporary use only, under the following conditions:
      (1)   City water mains are not in place adjacent to the property
involved;
      (2)   The City Engineer has determined that it is not economically
feasible or desirable to extend the city’s water mains to serve the property at
the time the request for service is made by the owner or lessee; and
      (3)   The owner has executed an agreement for the discontinuance of the
use of the well and capping of the same upon notice by the City Engineer. Such
notice shall be given immediately following the installation of water mains
adjacent to the property on which the well has been drilled.
(Ord. 2024-06, passed 12-17-2024; Ord. 18-11, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 7.09.050 Meter required.
   All new wells constructed after the date of this chapter are required to
have a meter installed at the time of construction. In the event that a meter
is not installed on an existing constructed water well the Public Works
Director may cause a meter to be installed, at the cost of the city. Existing
water wells are defined as those constructed prior to the effective date of
this chapter. In the event any water well meter is not properly maintained by
the owner, the Public Works Director may perform the necessary maintenance on
the meter and recover the costs from the owner.
(Ord. 2024-06, passed 12-17-2024; Ord. 18-11, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 7.09.055 Reporting water use.
   The owner of each well within the City of Tulare on which a water meter has
been installed shall allow the city access to read said meter annually on or
about October 1 of each year and, not later than 30 days thereafter. This
information shall be reported to the Public Works Director as the amount of
water pumped since the last meter reading. In the event the meter is not read
and the amount pumped not reported to the Public Works Director in accordance
with this chapter, he/she may cause the meter to be read by any lawful means.
(Ord. 2024-06, passed 12-17-2024; Ord. 18-11, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 7.09.060 Permits.
   (A)   The application for the permit required by this chapter shall be:
      (1)   Made in writing to the Public Works Director on such forms as he/
she may prescribe, setting forth such information as he/she may require to
carry out the purposes of this chapter.
      (2)   Signed by the applicant.
   (B)   The application shall be accompanied by any filing fee established for
said applications by the City Council through Resolution. No part of the filing
fee is refundable.
   (C)   Permits issued pursuant to this chapter by the Public Works Director
may contain, and be subject to, such terms and conditions as the Public Works
Director determines are necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
The Public Works Director shall deny any application for a permit if, in his/
her determination, its issuance would tend to jeopardize the purposes of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2024-06, passed 12-17-2024; Ord. 18-11, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 7.09.070 Rules and regulations.
   The Public Works Director may adopt rules and regulations to implement and
administer this chapter. Said rules and regulations shall be approved by the
City Council.
(Ord. 2024-06, passed 12-17-2024; Ord. 18-11, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 7.09.080 Cash deposit or security bond.
   Prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall post with the Public
Works Director a cash deposit or security bond to guarantee compliance with any
terms and conditions of the permit and the proper performance of the work. Such
cash and security bond shall be in the amount determined necessary by the
Public Works Director to ensure compliance with this chapter, but in no event
will such cash deposit or security bond be for an amount in excess of the total
estimated cost of the work to be performed. The deposit or bond will be
returned to the permittee upon satisfactory completion of the work.
(Ord. 2024-06, passed 12-17-2024; Ord. 18-11, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 7.09.090 Suspension or revocation of permit.
   (A)   The Public Works Director may suspend or revoke a water well permit
issued under this chapter whenever the Public Works Director determines that
any work performed under such a permit constitutes a public nuisance or when
the applicant, his agents, employees, or the licensed well drilling contractor
performing the work (1) violates any provision of this chapter or any terms and
conditions of the permit; or (2) misrepresents any material fact(s) in the
permit application.
   (B)   Before the Public Works Director suspends or revokes a water well
permit, the Public Works Director shall make reasonable effort to notify the
landowner where the well is located or the licensed well drilling contractor
performing work on the well.
(Ord. 2024-06, passed 12-17-2024; Ord. 18-11, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 7.09.100 Appeal.
   Any person whose permit application has been denied, granted conditionally,
or any person whose permit has been suspended or revoked, may appeal to the
City Council:
   (A)   Said person shall file a notice of appeal with the City Clerk on or
before the fourteenth calendar day following the date of decision by the Public
Works Director.
   (B)   The matter shall be scheduled for hearing before the City Council, no
later than 30 days following receipt of the appeal, absent mutual agreement to
the contrary. The appellant shall be served with notice of the time and place
of the hearing, as well as any relevant materials, at least five calendar days
prior to the hearing. The hearing may be continued, upon mutual consent. At the
time of the hearing the appealing party, the Public Works Director, and any
other interested person may present such relevant evidence as he or she may
have, relating to the determination from which the appeal is taken.
   (C)   Based upon the submission of such evidence and any other relevant
material including city files, the City Council shall issue a decision
upholding, modifying, or reversing the determination from which the appeal is
taken. Notice of decision shall be given within 14 days following submission of
the matter to the Council and shall state the reasons for the Decision. Any
notices under this section may be sent by regular mail, postage prepaid, and
shall be deemed received on the fifth calendar day following the date of
mailing.
(Ord. 2024-06, passed 12-17-2024; Ord. 18-11, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 7.09.110 Public nuisance.
   Upon finding by the Public Works Director that a well may cause
contamination or pollution to the groundwater or is a threat to the public
health, safety, or welfare, such well shall constitute a public nuisance. The
Public Works Director may take any action necessary to abate such public
nuisance. The owner of the property upon which the well is located and/or the
permittee for such well shall be liable for any and all costs incurred by, or
at the request of, the Public Works Director in the abatement of said public
nuisance.
(Ord. 2024-06, passed 12-17-2024; Ord. 18-11, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 7.09.120 Inspection.
   The Public Works Director or his/her designee(s) may, at any and all
reasonable times (absent an emergency, reasonable times exclude any time of day
on weekends or holidays and prior to 8:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. on weekdays),
enter any and all places, property, enclosures, and structures for the purpose
of examining or investigating the construction, modification or repair,
abandonment, or destruction of wells.
(Ord. 2024-06, passed 12-17-2024; Ord. 18-11, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 7.09.130 Backflow prevention of existing auxiliary water supply wells.
   The water purveyor has the primary responsibility to prevent water from
unapproved sources entering the public water supply system. Each service
connection from a public water system supplying water to premises having an
auxiliary water supply (well) shall be protected against backflow of water from
the premises into the public water system by the installation of a city-
approved reduced pressure principal backflow prevention device installed at the
public water supply meter connection. It shall be the responsibility of the
water user to provide protective devices as required under this code. It shall
be the duty of the water user on any premise for which backflow protective
devices are installed to have a competent licensed inspection and test
performed at least once per year at the expense of the water user (see
California Administrative Code Title 17).
(Ord. 2024-06, passed 12-17-2024; Ord. 18-11, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 7.09.140 Violation—Penalty.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this
chapter. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, any violation of the
provisions herein shall constitute a misdemeanor. Notwithstanding the
classification of a violation of this chapter as a misdemeanor, at the time an
action is commenced to enforce the provisions of the chapter, the trial court,
upon recommendation of the City Attorney, may reduce the charged offense from a
misdemeanor to an infraction.
   (B)   Any person convicted on a misdemeanor under this chapter shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $2,500 or by imprisonment not exceeding six
months, or by both the fine and imprisonment.
   (C)   Any person convicted of an infraction under this chapter shall be
punished by:
      (1)   A fine not exceeding $50 for a first violation;
      (2)   A fine not exceeding $100 for a second violation of this chapter
within one year; and
      (3)   A fine not exceeding $250 for each and every additional violation
of this chapter within one year.
   (D)   Each day that a violation continues shall be regarded as a new and
separate offense.
   (E)   In addition to the penalty set forth hereinabove for the conviction of
a misdemeanor and/or infraction for violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter, any person so convicted shall further be required to pay restitution
to the city for all costs, including city staff time and reasonable attorney’s
fees, related to the enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-06, passed 12-17-2024)
§ 7.09.150 Notification of violation.
   Whenever the Public Works Director finds that any user has violated or is
violating this chapter, the Public Works Director may serve upon the owner of
the property upon which the well is located and/or the permittee for such well
a written notice of violation. Within ten days of the receipt of this notice,
an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and
prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by
the owner of the property upon which the well is located and/or the permittee
for such well to the Public Works Director. Submission of this plan in no way
relieves the owner of the property upon which the well is located and/or the
permittee for such well of liability for any violations occurring before or
after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit
the authority of the city to take any action, including emergency actions or
any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
(Ord. 2024-06, passed 12-17-2024)
CHAPTER 7.10: GROUNDWATER OVERDRAFT MITIGATION
Section
   
7.10.010   Legislative findings.
   
7.10.020   Purpose.
   
7.10.030   Short title, authority and applicability.
   
7.10.040   Rules of construction.
   
7.10.050   Imposition of groundwater mitigation fee on new development.
   
7.10.060   Imposition of groundwater impact mitigation fee on users of
municipal water supplies (residential-commercial- industrial).
   
7.10.070   Computation of amount of fee.
   
7.10.080   Use of funds.
   
7.10.090   Refund of fees paid.
   
7.10.100   Modification of fee.
   
7.10.110   Penalty.
   
7.10.120   Severability.
§ 7.10.010   Legislative findings.
   The City Council of the City of Tulare finds determines and declares that:
   (A)   Local water resources are among the most precious resources of the
city and surrounding area;
   (B)   Management of the water resources serving the residents of the city is
critical to the long-term health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the
city;
   (C)   The city’s primary water supply is from underground water resources,
which are being depleted by groundwater extraction in excess of groundwater
replenishment (“groundwater overdraft”);
   (D)   Conversion of land from agricultural to urban uses increases the local
groundwater overdraft and has the potential to seriously deplete available
groundwater resources over time;
   (E)   Provision of municipal water supplies by the city contributes
substantially to the continuing groundwater overdraft;
   (F)   The impact of existing and proposed development on groundwater
overdraft has been determined through a technical study prepared by the city,
which study has been reviewed and considered by the City Council of the city
prior to adoption of this ordinance. The technical analysis provides the basis
for the fees established by ordinance and resolution; and
   (G)   California Constitution, Article XI, § 7, Cal. Public Utilities Code
§§ 6203 and 6294, §§ 3 and 15 of the City Charter authorize the city to enact
this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 7.10.010) (Ord. 06-2008, passed - -2006)
§ 7.10.020   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to assess impact fees upon new development
and a volumetric fee upon existing urban water supplies to fund programs to
mitigate the impact of new development and existing water extractions upon
conditions of groundwater overdraft. Specifically, this chapter is intended to
fund activities and projects to mitigate impacts to conditions of groundwater
overdraft. The activities will include, but not be limited to, the following:
   (A)   Acquisition of surface water rights and surface water supplies;
   (B)   Development of groundwater recharge facilities;
   (C)   Reconfiguration of stormwater facilities designed to retain as much
stormwater as possible within and near the city;
   (D)   Enhancement of cooperative programs with local water management
agencies and companies; and
   (E)   Development of more efficient water delivery systems.
(1995 Code, § 7.10.020) (Ord. 06-2008, passed - -2006)
§ 7.10.030   Short title, authority and applicability.
   (A)   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “City of Tulare
Water Resource Management and Groundwater Overdraft Mitigation Fee Ordinance”.
   (B)   The City Council of the city has the authority to adopt this chapter
pursuant California Constitution, Article XI, § 7, Cal. Public Utilities Code
§§ 6203 and 6294, §§ 3 and 15 of the City Charter.
   (C)   This chapter shall apply in the incorporated area of the city to the
extent permitted by Article XI of § 7 of the Constitution of the State of
California.
(1995 Code, § 7.10.030) (Ord. 06-2008, passed - -2006)
§ 7.10.040   Rules of construction.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed so as to
effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public health, safety
and welfare.
   (B)   For the purpose of administration and enforcement of this chapter,
unless otherwise stated in this chapter, the following rules of construction
shall apply to the text of this chapter:
      (1)   In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the
text of this chapter and any caption, illustration, summary table or
illustrative table, the text shall control.
      (2)   The word “shall” is always mandatory and not discretionary; the
word “may” is permissive.
      (3)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words
used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the
single, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
      (4)   The word “person” includes an individual, a corporation, a
partnership, an incorporated association or any other similar entity.
      (5)   Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a
regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events
connected by the conjunction “and”, “or” or “either...or”, the conjunction
shall be interpreted as follows:
         (a)   “And” indicates that all the connected terms, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply.
         (b)   “Or” indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions
or events may apply singly or in any combination.
         (c)   “Either...or” indicates that the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination.
      (6)   The word “includes” shall not limit a term to the specific example,
but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances
of like kind or character.
(1995 Code, § 7.10.040) (Ord. 06-2008, passed - -2006)
§ 7.10.050   Imposition of groundwater mitigation fee on new development.
   (A)   Any person seeking a building permit within the city, shall be
required to pay the fee specified below.
      (1)   The fee shall be assessed per unit or per acre of land to be
developed, and will be established by the city’s annual fee ordinance.
      (2)   The obligation to pay the fee shall be made a condition of issuance
of the building permit.
      (3)   The fee paid shall be in addition to all other impact fees paid
prior to issuance of a building permit.
   (B)   In lieu of payment of the fee specified in division (A) above, and
with concurrence of the city, any person seeking to annex, subdivide or
otherwise procure entitlement to develop property within the city may dedicate
water rights to the city. The city, in its sole discretion, shall determine
whether the dedication equals in value the amount of the fee otherwise
applicable pursuant to division (A) above.
(1995 Code, § 7.10.050) (Ord. 07-18, passed 8-7-2007; Ord. 06-2008, passed - -
2006)
§ 7.10.060   Imposition of groundwater impact mitigation fee on users of
municipal water supplies (residential-commercial-industrial).
   As established by resolution of the Board of Public Utilities Commissioners,
all users of municipal water service in the city shall pay a groundwater impact
mitigation fee to be assessed on the monthly water bill.
(1995 Code, § 7.10.060) (Ord. 06-2008, passed - -2006)
§ 7.10.070   Computation of amount of fee.
   The fees established by §§
7.10.050 and
7.10.060 were determined by evaluating the impact of development on existing
conditions of groundwater overdraft, and calculating the cost of the water and
facilities necessary to mitigate the impact. A technical study was prepared to
make the determination.
(1995 Code, § 7.10.070) (Ord. 06-2008, passed - -2006)
§ 7.10.080   Use of funds.
   All funds collected shall be used exclusively for the purposes specified in
§
7.10.020.
(1995 Code, § 7.10.080) (Ord. 06-2008, passed - -2006)
§ 7.10.090   Refund of fees paid.
   If a building permit or permit for mobile home installation expires without
commencement of construction, then the fee payer shall be entitled to a refund,
without interest, of the fee paid plus a condition of its issuance; except,
that the city shall retain three percent of the fee to offset a portion of the
costs of collection and refund. The fee payer must submit an application for
the refund to the city within 30 days of the expiration of the permit. Within
20 working days of receipt of an application for refund the city shall issue a
refund issue written findings as to why the refund shall not be made.
(1995 Code, § 7.10.090) (Ord. 06-2008, passed - -2006)
§ 7.10.100   Modification of fee.
   The City Council of the city may modify the fee established in §
7.10.050 annually by ordinance if the assumptions utilized in calculating the
fee have changed. The Board of Public Utilities Commissioners may modify the
fee established in §
7.10.060 annually by resolution if the assumptions utilized in calculating the
fee have changed. The modifications adopted by ordinance and resolution will
not be based on a change in the method of calculating the fees. Absent action
by the City Council to modify the fees, each April of each year the chief
financial officer shall review the current Engineering News Record Construction
Cost Index (ENRCCI) for the cities of Los Angeles and San Francisco,
California. When the average of the indices differs from the average of the
indices for the preceding April 1, the factor of increase or decrease shall he
applied to the fee established in §
7.10.050.
(1995 Code, § 7.10.100) (Ord. 06-2008, passed - -2006)
§ 7.10.110   Penalty.
   Any violation of this chapter shall be prosecuted in the same manner as
misdemeanors are prosecuted and, upon conviction, the violator shall be
punishable according to law; however, in addition to or in lieu of any criminal
prosecution the city shall have the power to sue in civil court to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 7.10.110) (Ord. 06-2008, passed - -2006)
§ 7.10.120   Severability.
   If any section, phrase, sentence or portion of this chapter is for any
reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction,
the portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and
the holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.
(1995 Code, § 7.10.120) (Ord. 06-2008, passed - -2006)
CHAPTER 7.12: FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
7.12.010   Food defined.
   
7.12.020   Meat and Food Inspector—Duties.
   
7.12.030   Power to destroy food.
   
7.12.040   Sale of unwholesome food.
   
7.12.050   Sale of unwholesome meat.
   
7.12.060   Sale of unbranded meat.
   
7.12.070   Manufacture from unbranded meat.
   
7.12.080   Protection of food— Contamination.
   
7.12.090   Meat permit required.
   
7.12.100   Application for permit.
   
7.12.110   Issuance of permit.
   
7.12.120   Duration of permit.
   
7.12.130   Transfer of permit.
   
7.12.140   Posting of permit.
   
7.12.150   Revocation—Suspension of permit.
   
7.12.160   Slaughterhouses—Requirements.
   
7.12.170   Sanitation of premises.
   
7.12.180   Lavatories, closets.
   
7.12.190   Keeping of live poultry beneath store.
   
7.12.200   Live animals in food establishments.
   
7.12.210   Meat markets in basements.
   
7.12.220   Sanitation of meat establishments.
   
7.12.230   Sanitation of food vehicles.
   
7.12.240   Refrigerators.
   
7.12.250   Meat racks.
   
7.12.260   Refuse cans.
   
7.12.270   Unauthorized stamps—Brands.
   
7.12.280   Personal cleanliness.
   
7.12.290   Clothing fabrics.
   
7.12.300   Diseased employees.
§ 7.12.010   Food defined.
   In this chapter, unless it appears from the context hereof that some other
meaning is intended, the word FOOD shall mean any article or substance used as
food, either liquid or solid, by humans, whether simple, mixed or compound.
(1995 Code, § 7.12.010)
§ 7.12.020   Meat and Food Inspector—Duties.
   The Office of Municipal Meat and Food Inspector is hereby created. The Meat
and Food Inspector shall be appointed by, and hold office during, the pleasure
of the Manager. It is the duty of the Meat and Food Inspector to inspect all
kinds of foods handled by markets, establishments and places of business in the
city, intended for human consumption.
(1995 Code, § 7.12.020)
§ 7.12.030   Power to destroy food.
   The Meat and Food Inspector shall have the power, without liability, to
condemn and destroy such foods as shall be found tainted, decayed, spoiled,
unfit, unwholesome, deleterious or injurious.
(1995 Code, § 7.12.030)
§ 7.12.040   Sale of unwholesome food.
   No person shall sell, exchange or deliver or keep or expose for sale,
exchange or delivery as food for human consumption any spoiled, contaminated or
unwholesome vegetables, fruits, cereals, butter, cheese or other foods.
(1995 Code, § 7.12.040)
§ 7.12.050   Sale of unwholesome meat.
   No person shall sell, exchange or deliver or keep or expose for sale,
exchange or delivery as food for human consumption any tainted or diseased, any
decayed or partly decayed or unwholesome meat food products or flesh of any
cattle, hogs, sheep, swine, goats, fish, poultry or other animals.
(1995 Code, § 7.12.050)
§ 7.12.060   Sale of unbranded meat.
   No person shall sell, exchange or deliver or have in possession, keep or
expose for sale, exchange or delivery as food for human consumption, the flesh
of any cattle, hogs, sheep, swine, goats or other animals or meat food products
unless the same shall have been slaughtered and marked with the brand of
approval placed on each primal part of the animal or on the food product
containers under the supervision of the Meat Inspection Division of the United
States Bureau of Animal Industry in accordance with the regulations relating to
the inspection thereof, as provided by the Department of Agriculture of the
United States or under the supervision of the state’s Department of
Agriculture, in accordance with the regulations relating to the inspection
thereof as prescribed by the state’s Department of Agriculture or under the
supervision of any authorized inspection department whose brand or mark of
approval is approved by the Meat and Food Inspection Department of the city.
(1995 Code, § 7.12.060)
§ 7.12.070   Manufacture from unbranded meat.
   No person shall manufacture into sausage or other meat food products the
flesh or meat of any animal designated in this chapter unless the flesh or meat
shall bear the brand of approval, as provided in this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 7.12.070)
§ 7.12.080   Protection of food—Contamination.
   It shall be the duty of every occupant, owner or lessee of any meat shop,
slaughterhouse or food establishment where meat, meat products, fish, dressed
poultry or any other foods for human consumption are kept, stored, handled,
manufactured or offered for sale, to protect the same from dust, dirt, flies
and vermin and prevent, as far as possible, handling by prospective buyers.
(1995 Code, § 7.12.080)
§ 7.12.090   Meat permit required.
   No person shall slaughter, sell or deliver or have in possession for sale,
slaughter, delivery or manufacture in the city the flesh of any cattle, hogs,
sheep, swine or other animals or meat food products, fish or poultry without
having first applied for and obtained a permit to do so from the Meat and Food
Inspection Department of the city in the manner hereinafter provided.
(1995 Code, § 7.12.090)
§ 7.12.100   Application for permit.
   Every applicant for a permit shall file with the Department a written
application, which shall set forth the name and address of the applicant and
description of the premises intended for the conduct of the business.
(1995 Code, § 7.12.100)
§ 7.12.110   Issuance of permit.
   If it shall appear to the Meat and Food Inspection Department, upon
considering the application, that the statements therein are true and that the
premises designated in the application are in proper sanitary and ratproof
condition for the conduct of the business, and also that the provisions of all
laws and regulations pertaining thereto have been complied with, the Department
shall issue a signed permit.
(1995 Code, § 7.12.110)
§ 7.12.120   Duration of permit.
   The permit shall be valid until the same is suspended or revoked by the
Department or until the holder of the permit changes his or her place of
business.
(1995 Code, § 7.12.120)
§ 7.12.130   Transfer of permit.
   Any person, who shall purchase the business for which a permit shall have
been obtained and shall be in force at the time of the sale, may conduct and
operate such business under the permit for a period of not more than 30 days
from and after the date of the sale, unless the permit is suspended or revoked
as herein provided; and the purchaser shall, during the period of 30 days,
apply for and obtain a permit in the manner provided by this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 7.12.130)
§ 7.12.140   Posting of permit.
   The written permit herein provided for, when issued, shall be kept, at all
times, posted in a conspicuous place on the premises.
(1995 Code, § 7.12.140)
§ 7.12.150   Revocation—Suspension of permit.
   The holder of any permit must strictly conform to all the provisions and
requirements of this chapter; and in addition to the other penalties herein
provided for, the Meat and Food Inspection Department may revoke or suspend any
such permit whenever, in the discretion of the Department, it is deemed that a
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter has been committed by any
holder of any such permit.
(1995 Code, § 7.12.150)
§ 7.12.160   Slaughterhouses—Requirements.
   (A)   Walls, floors. The floors and walls of the slaughterhouse, factory or
processing room where meat, or meat products, fish or poultry are handled,
manufactured or processed shall be maintained in a sanitary manner to prevent
the surroundings under or about the same from becoming contaminated by filth or
offensive matter.
   (B)   Separation of killing room from feeding room. The slaughterhouse or
killing room shall be separated from any room where stock or poultry are fed.
   (C)   Cooling room; partition. A cooling room shall be provided apart from
the killing room and shall be separated from the killing room by a tight
partition in the side next or nearest the killing room.
   (D)   Ventilation; screening of cooling room. The cooling room shall be
thoroughly ventilated and well screened so as to exclude flies and other
insects therefrom.
   (E)   Covers for meat taken from slaughterhouse. All trucks and other
conveyances used to transport meats, meat products, fish or dressed poultry
from the slaughtering establishment must be provided with freshly cleaned
canvas or burlap covers sufficient in size to protect and cover the load at
every point in its entirety from dust, dirt, flies and vermin.
   (F)   Poultry slaughterhouses. No person shall conduct, maintain or carry on
any poultry slaughterhouse unless such place is maintained and operated so as
to conform to the following provisions:
      (1)   Sanitation of premises, equipment. Every such place and every
appurtenance, appliance and utensil maintained and used in connection therewith
shall be kept clean and maintained in a sanitary condition.
      (2)   Removal of waste. All refuse, offal and feathers shall be removed
from the premises daily.
      (3)   Meat containers. Separate metal containers shall be provided for
dead fowls and parts.
      (4)   Feather containers. Separate metal containers shall be provided for
feathers.
(1995 Code, § 7.12.160)
§ 7.12.170   Sanitation of premises.
   All parts of slaughtering establishments, including the slaughterhouses,
storage rooms for meats and dressed poultry, factories, trucks, carts, wagons
or other receptacles, stables or corrals used for livestock, shall be kept in a
clean, wholesome condition.
(1995 Code, § 7.12.170)
§ 7.12.180   Lavatories, closets.
   Sufficient lavatories, toilets and clothes closets with adequate light and
ventilation must be provided, together with an ample supply of soap, towels and
toilet paper, in all markets and food establishments.
(1995 Code, § 7.12.180)
§ 7.12.190   Keeping of live poultry beneath store.
   No person shall keep live chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys or other fowls in
any cellar or basement underneath any grocery store, market or other place
where foods for human consumption are kept for sale.
(1995 Code, § 7.12.190)
§ 7.12.200   Live animals in food establishments.
   No person shall keep any live chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese or live fowls
of any kind or any cats, dogs or any animal in any room where any kind of
foodstuffs such as are enumerated in this chapter are kept, prepared for sale
or sold.
(1995 Code, § 7.12.200)
§ 7.12.210   Meat markets in basements.
   No person shall conduct or maintain a fish or meat market in the basement of
any building or in any space below the level of the street.
(1995 Code, § 7.12.210)
§ 7.12.220   Sanitation of meat establishments.
   Those portions of premises where meat food products, fish, dressed poultry
or any meat are kept, stored, handled, manufactured or offered for sale shall
have a smooth interior finish with no open joints or cracks in floors, walls or
ceiling. The interior shall be painted with washable paint or other material
satisfactory to the Meat and Food Inspector and shall be so refinished when, in
his or her judgment, it becomes necessary. All working places and table tops
shall be constructed of materials satisfactory to the Meat and Food Inspector.
The premises must have adequate light and ventilation and be provided with a
porcelain sink of adequate size with hot and cold running water.
(1995 Code, § 7.12.220)
§ 7.12.230   Sanitation of food vehicles.
   All vehicles used for delivery by retail meat shops, markets, grocery stores
or other food establishments to customers of meats, meat products, fish,
dressed poultry or any other foods for human consumption must be kept in a
clean, wholesome condition.
(1995 Code, § 7.12.230)
§ 7.12.240   Refrigerators.
   All slaughterhouses, markets or factories where meat or meat food products,
fish or poultry are handled, manufactured or offered for sale shall have
provided therein, coolers, refrigerators and iceboxes adequate in size and of a
construction approved by the Meat and Food Inspection Department. All such
coolers, refrigerators or iceboxes must have a white gloss enamel finish and
maintain a temperature below 45°F and be maintained with a sufficient
circulation of air.
(1995 Code, § 7.12.240)
§ 7.12.250   Meat racks.
   All meat racks, rails, hooks or brackets must be metal.
(1995 Code, § 7.12.250)
§ 7.12.260   Refuse cans.
   Metal cans for scraps and trimmings and other refuse and garbage must be
provided with tight metal covers and sufficient in number and size to care for
all refuse.
(1995 Code, § 7.12.260)
§ 7.12.270   Unauthorized stamps—Brands.
   No person shall keep, make or use any mark, stamp, brand or other device
having thereon insignia or words similar in character or import to the marks,
stamps or brands provided or used for marking, stamping or branding any of the
foodstuffs described in §
7.12.060 or in any manner counterfeit such marks, stamps or brands.
(1995 Code, § 7.12.270)
§ 7.12.280   Personal cleanliness.
   All persons handling any of the foods mentioned in this chapter shall, at
all times, keep their persons and wearing apparel in a clean condition.
(1995 Code, § 7.12.280)
§ 7.12.290   Clothing fabrics.
   All aprons, gowns, smocks and other outer wearing apparel which are worn
must be of a material which can be easily washed and cleaned.
(1995 Code, § 7.12.290)
§ 7.12.300   Diseased employees.
   No employer shall require or permit any person to work, nor shall any person
work, in a building, room, basement, cellar place or vehicle occupied or used
for the production, preparation, manufacture, packing, storage, sale,
distribution or transportation of meat, fish, poultry or other foods of any
kind intended for human consumption who is afflicted or affected with any
venereal disease, smallpox, diphtheria, scarlet fever, yellow fever,
tuberculosis, consumption, bubonic plague, Asiatic cholera, leprosy, trachoma,
typhoid fever, epidemic dysentery, measles, mumps, German measles, whooping
cough, chicken pox or any other infectious or contagious disease, or who shows
the condition known as the “carrier state” of any such contagious disease.
(1995 Code, § 7.12.300)
CHAPTER 7.16: GARBAGE COLLECTION AND STREET SWEEPING SERVICES
Section
   
7.16.010   Definitions.
   
7.16.020   Unlawful acts.
   
7.16.030   Garbage collection and street sweeping services compulsory.
   
7.16.040   Authorized collectors.
   
7.16.050   Containerized service.
   
7.16.060   General provisions.
   
7.16.070   Special commercial container accessibility service.
   
7.16.080   When and where to place garbage for collection.
   
7.16.090   Garbage, recyclable materials, and organic materials collection.
   
7.16.100   Special haul service.
   
7.16.110   Carry-out residential service.
   
7.16.120   Garbage collection and disposal and street sweeping services.
   
7.16.130   Garbage collection and disposal and street sweeping services
delinquencies.
   
7.16.140   Establishment of garbage collection and street sweeping service
routes.
   
7.16.150   Fees for garbage collection and street sweeping services.
   
7.16.160   Residential vacancy credit for garbage services.
   
7.16.170   Special events.
§ 7.16.010   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and terms are defined as
follows.
   CUSTOMER. The person or business, or an agent or employee of the person or
business, who made arrangements with the city to use the services described in
this chapter.
   GARBAGE.
      (1)   Garbage, rubbish, rubble, organic materials or street sweepings.
      (2)   All organic or inorganic materials not defined herein as garbage or
rubble, which are rejected, abandoned or discarded by the owners or producers
thereof, as offensive or useless or no longer desired by the owners or
producers. These materials include, but are not limited to pasteboard boxes,
paper, rags and clothing; discarded or abandoned bedding; discarded or
abandoned mattresses; discarded or abandoned carpets; discarded or abandoned
oilcloth or linoleum; sweepings or cleanings from buildings; bottles, tin cans
or containers, broken crockery and glassware; old metals, wire packaging or
wrapping materials; ashes; rope, twine, jute, bagging or burlap.
   GARBAGE ACCUMULATIONS. Garbage accumulations of animal, fruit or vegetable
matter that attend the storage, sale, preparation and use of meat, fish, fowl,
fruits, vegetable; tin cans or other containers originally used for foodstuffs;
any other discarded or abandoned putrescible, organic materials.
    LOADED WEIGHT. Loaded weight of containers shall not exceed the
manufacturer’s recommendation. Containers shall not be over-filled past lid
level such that spillage may occur when dumping container.
   NONSTANDARD CONTAINERS. Nonstandard containers shall be tagged and marked
but will not be emptied. Marked containers shall be disposed of if reused.
   ORGANIC MATERIALS or ORGANICS. Food scraps and trimmings from food
preparation, including, but not limited to meat, fish and dairy waste, fruit
and vegetable waste, and biodegradable food packaging items such as pizza
boxes, paper towels, waxed cardboards, food contaminated paper products, plant
debris, such as leaves, grass, weeds and wood materials from trees and shrubs.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS or RECYCLABLES. Those materials separated from garbage
by the generator which are capable of being recycled and which would otherwise
be processed or disposed of as garbage.
   RUBBLE. Stones, concrete, plaster, bricks and similar solid material, sod,
dirt and similar abandoned or discarded inorganic, noncombustible,
nonputrescible materials; building construction or demolition waste materials.
   SOLID WASTE MANAGER. The Director of the Department of Public Utilities of
the city or such person designated by him or her to manage or oversee the
garbage collection and disposal and street sweeping services for the city.
   SPECIAL HAUL. Any garbage collection service beyond the standard service.
Special haul service will be provided to the customer at an extra cost.
   STANDARD CONTAINERS. Plastic 96- gallon containers owned by the city,
supplied to customers and serviced by the city’s solid waste automated
collection vehicles.
   STREET SWEEPINGS. Litter or other debris which has accumulated upon streets,
roadways and other public highways and necessitates the periodic collection
thereof by street sweepers.
(1995 Code, § 7.16.010) (Ord. 18-05, passed 9-18-2018)
§ 7.16.020   Unlawful acts.
   The following acts are unlawful and shall constitute infractions, as
provided in §
1.12.010 of this code.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit, or cause to
be thrown or deposited, any garbage, rubbish or rubble, as the terms are
defined by this chapter, on or upon any vacant lot, or on or upon any street,
alley, gutter, highway, park or other public place in the city, or to deposit
or place or keep any garbage, rubbish or rubble except in the manner prescribed
in this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit, or cause to
be thrown or deposited, any garbage, rubbish or rubble, as the terms are
defined by this chapter, into, upon or next to any private garbage container
not his or her own, or into, upon or next to any container furnished by the
city pursuant to §
7.16.050 of this chapter unless he or she is the person or business, or an
agent or employee of the person or business, who made arrangements with the
city to use the container.
   (C)   Contents of the standard containers, commercial bins or roll-off
containers of all sizes become the property of the city, subject to the
following exceptions and limitations:
      (1)   Once a standard container has been placed for collection, no
person, except the customer, shall retrieve the contents therein; and
   (D)   No person other than the city shall remove standard containers,
commercial bins or roll- off containers of all sizes which have been placed for
collection. Any and each violation hereof from one or more collection locations
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as provided in this
chapter.
   (E)   It is unlawful or any person to burn, break, destroy, scatter,
scavenge, collect, or take any materials from the standard containers without
the consent from the Public Works Director or designee.
   (F)   Pursuant to the provisions of Assembly Bill 1594 (AB 1594) a
contractor or permittee, and any owners, occupants or persons in possession,
charge or control of all dwellings, buildings, places and premises in the city
who self-haul organics, may not direct their organic waste for use as
alternative daily cover (ADC). If the Solid Waste Manager determines that a
contractor or permittee, or any other applicable person has directed any
organics waste for use as ADC, the Solid Waste Manager will notify the
contractor, permittee, or person of the requirements of this provision.
Repeated instances of directing organic materials for use as ADC may result in
enforcement action.
(1995 Code, § 7.16.020) (Ord. 18-05, passed 9-18-2018)
§ 7.16.030   Garbage collection and street sweeping services compulsory.
   All dwellings, apartment houses and place of business in which garbage
waste, recyclable materials, and organic materials accumulate within the city
or upon streets or public highways which abut such property shall be required
to utilize the collection and disposal and street sweeping services of the city
and to pay the charges set forth for the services by the Department of Public
Utilities of the city.
(1995 Code, § 7.16.030) (Ord. 18-05, passed 9-18-2018)
§ 7.16.040 Authorized collectors.
   It shall be unlawful within the city for any person other than duly
authorized collectors and street sweeping operators, employed by the Department
of Public Utilities, or private collectors and street sweeping operators
licensed by the Department of Public Utilities or other regulating entity, to
gather, collect, transport, burn or dispose of any garbage or to remove any
garbage receptacle from any place where the same was placed by any occupant.
Excepting that rubbish and rubble may be transported and lawfully disposed of
by the customer who owns or controls the premises service upon which it has
accumulated. The Solid Waste Manager may permit large construction or
demolition debris hauls by equipment other than by roll-off container vehicles.
In addition, collection of rubbish, rubble or other waste materials utilizing
roll-off containers, or commercial bins, on a temporary basis must be performed
by the authorized collector(s) licensed by the Department of Public Utilities
or other regulating entity.
(1995 Code, § 7.16.040) (Ord. 18-05, passed 9-18-2018)
§ 7.16.050   Containerized service.
   CONTAINERIZED SERVICE shall mean special services approved by the Solid
Waste Manager wherein the city provides a vehicle equipped for mechanical
handling of various size loose yardage and compactorized containers.
   (A)   Various size loose yardage (including roll-off) containers will be
furnished and maintained by the city.
   (B)   Enclosed roll-off containers equipped with attached, or detachable,
compactor units meeting city specifications for vehicle loading and safety
concerns may be furnished and maintained by the customer when permitted to do
so by the Solid Waste Manager.
      (1)   It shall be the obligation of the customer owning enclosed roll-off
containers with detachable compactor units, which permit garbage spillage when
detached, to clean the area in a timely manner so as to not cause a delay in
reattaching the equipment upon the collectors return from the landfill or
disposal site.
      (2)   The customer may request this spillage cleanup by city forces for a
fee.
   (C)   It shall be the customer’s responsibility not to overload roll-off
containers beyond net legal transporting weights. Legal gross transporting
weight shall include vehicle and container weights. Overloaded container
situations will be corrected at the customers expense.
(1995 Code, § 7.16.050) (Ord. 18-05, passed 9-18-2018)
§ 7.16.060   General provisions.
   The general requirements for providing residential and commercial
collections are as follows.
   (A)   Where commercial collections are made from private alleys and access
ways approaches shall be maintained in such a manner as not to be a hazard to
solid waste personnel and equipment, and provide a safe and convenient entrance
to and through the premises for the purpose of collecting garbage.
   (B)   The approach to privately-owned containers, or containers furnished by
the city, must be kept clear. An unaccessible container will not be dumped at
the scheduled time. There will be an extra charge to dump a container other
than at the scheduled time.
   (C)   Private alleys and access ways shall be structurally designed and
constructed at the customer’s expense to accommodate a loaded garbage vehicle
to enter for service without damage to entry way. The city will not be held
responsible for any damage to customer’s entry way resulting from normal
collection service by a loaded garbage vehicle.
   (D)   Over-filled containers and excess trash on top of containers shall
constitute a special haul.
   (E)   All persons or businesses utilizing privately-owned containers, or
containers furnished by the city, are responsible for the sanitary conditions
of each container or receptacle and the proximity thereof and must keep lids
and doors closed when not in use. All persons and businesses will be
responsible for city-owned containers which are burned or damaged due to other
than normal wear and tear and will be charged for necessary repairs or
replacement.
   (F)   Items that are likely to cause damage to standard city containers or
the collection vehicles will not be regularly picked up. Some examples are, but
are not limited to, timbers or tree trunks larger than four inches in diameter
or longer than five feet, engine blocks, head, transmissions axles, spring
assemblies or drive shafts, all of which shall constitute a special haul.
   (G)   Where container enclosures are required by the Planning Commission for
aesthetic and other considerations, the enclosure design shall conform to
minimum standard dimensions on file in the office of the Public Works Director.
   (H)   Garbage collection service to a development with private streets may
be considered in accordance with the provisions of Board of Public Utilities
Commission Res. 292.
   (I)   The customer shall be responsible for the contents of the container
conforming to acceptable federal, state and county Class 2 landfill or disposal
site. Recyclable materials and organic materials shall be separated from other
solid waste for collection and placed in appropriate containers.
(1995 Code, § 7.16.060) (Ord. 18-05, passed 9-18-2018)
§ 7.16.070   Special commercial container accessibility service.
   Special commercial service may be required of, or requested by, the customer
as follows.
   (A)   Direct truck access service shall be provided at a location where the
container can be directly serviced by the collector/driver remaining in vehicle
at all times without backing and shall constitute the standard or basic
service.
   (B)   Gated access service shall be provided at a location where the
collector/driver exits the vehicle before and/or after service to open and
close enclosure or property access gates.
   (C)   Roll-out access service shall be provided at a location where
collector/driver exits vehicle before service to roll out and align castored
container, which is situated at an angle or location other than with direct
truck access, with the collection vehicle. After service collector/driver must
exit the vehicle again to return container to its designated angle or location.
Due to physical restrictions and container weight, the maximum container size
permitted under this service is three cubic yards.
   (D)   Combined access service shall be provided where container service
requires both gated and roll-out service. Maximum container size is three cubic
yards.
   (E)   Although backup cameras and monitors are standard equipment on
commercial collection vehicles, it shall be the policy of the Solid Waste
Manager, for safety reasons, to prohibit container placement locations which
cause excessive vehicle backing situations.
   (F)   Where property dimensions and physical development orientation
permits, each customer will be required to have individual containers;
otherwise, shared service may be requested from Solid Waste Manager.
   (G)   Abandoned, dead domestic pets shall be separated from normal refuse
and disposed of by the customer.
   (H)   Syringes, needles and other possible infectious waste materials shall
be separated from normal garbage. Customer shall contact Solid Waste Manager
for proper handling and disposal.
(1995 Code, § 7.16.070) (Ord. 18-05, passed 9-18-2018)
§ 7.16.080   When and where to place garbage for collection.
   Garbage may not be placed in alleyways for service. Garbage must be placed
at the curb/gutter. Garbage must be placed at such designated place by 6:00
a.m. on days set for collection and empty containers removed from curb/gutter
the same day.
(1995 Code, § 7.16.080) (Ord. 18-05, passed 9-18-2018)
§ 7.16.090   Garbage, organic materials, and recyclable materials collections.
   The city shall service garbage, recyclable materials, and organic materials
collections containers once each week from all dwelling units in the city. The
city shall collect daily (except Sundays) if required from all business and
commercial establishments.
   (A)   Commercial customers are responsible for compliance. Each commercial
customer shall be responsible for ensuring and demonstrating its compliance
with the requirements of this chapter, including all multi-family dwellings of
four units or more, and also including multi-family dwellings under four units
that share solid waste collection containers and services under one account.
   (B)   Commercial recycling and organics collection required. Each commercial
customer shall subscribe to a level of service that is sufficient to handle the
volume of recyclable materials and organic materials generated or accumulated
on the premises, or complete and retain on-site a self-hauling form certifying
that all self-hauling activities will be completed in accordance with any other
applicable law or regulation. The commercial customer shall make a copy of such
form available to the Public Works Director or designee upon request.
Additionally, each commercial customer shall ensure the proper separation of
solid waste, as established by the city, by placing each type of material in
designated standard receptacles or containers, and ensure that employees,
contractors, volunteers, customers, visitors, and other persons on-site conduct
proper separation of solid waste.
   (C)   Commercial customer self-haul. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude
any commercial customer from self-hauling recyclable materials or organic
materials generated by that commercial customer to a recycling or organics
processing facility, provided that the responsible parties:
      (1)   Comply with the requirements in this chapter by delivering
recyclable materials or organics materials to permitted facilities that will
process those materials in accordance with the requirements and intent of this
chapter.
      (2)   Complete and retain on-site a self-hauling form certifying that all
self-hauling activities will be completed in accordance with this chapter or
any other applicable law or regulation. A copy of such form shall be completed
and remitted annually to the Public Works Director or designee.
      (3)   Provide proof of compliance with this chapter, upon request by the
city; proof includes, but is not limited to, a receipt from a recycling or
organics processing facility that clearly identifies the type and quantity of
material delivered.
   (D)   Exemptions to mandatory commercial recycling and organics. The
following shall be exempt from the requirements of this section. Commercial
customers seeking an exemption shall submit their request for exemption in a
form specified by the Public Works Director or designee, if such a form exists.
After reviewing the exemption request, and after an on-site review, if
applicable, the Public Works Director or designee may either approve or deny
the exemption request.
      (1)   The state, a special district or other local public agency other
than the city, as defined, or any employee thereof, when collecting or
transporting recyclable materials produced by operation or system of the
entities described above.
      (2)   Municipal corporations and governmental agencies other than city
using their own vehicles and employees engaged in the collection,
transportation or disposal of recyclable materials within the boundaries of the
city.
      (3)   Commercial customers that can provide documentation to the
satisfaction of the Public Works Director or designee that no organic materials
and recyclable materials are generated by that commercial customer generator,
its employees, customers, tenants, businesses practices, and other persons or
processes which occur on the premises of the commercial customer generator.
This exemption may be granted only if the commercial customer generator is not
subject to the requirements of AB 1826 or AB 341.
      (4)   Commercial customers that can provide documentation to the
satisfaction of the Public Works Director or designee that there is inadequate
space for the commercial customer to store sufficient containers for recyclable
materials and organic materials on site and that it is infeasible for the
commercial customer to share recyclable materials or organic materials
containers with adjacent commercial facilities or multi-family dwellings. This
exemption may be granted only if the commercial customer is not subject to the
requirements of AB 1826 or AB 341.
      (5)   Commercial customers that can provide documentation to the
satisfaction of the Public Works Director or designee that compliance with this
chapter will result in violating city zoning or other regulations. This
exemption may be granted only if the commercial customer generator is not
subject to the requirements of AB 1826 or AB 341.
   (E)   Additionally:
      (1)   The Public Works Director or designee shall review commercial
customer data to confirm whether all commercial customers are compliant with
the requirements of this chapter by reviewing subscription levels of garbage,
organics and recycling collection services. Those commercial customers who do
not subscribe to the required collection services with the city will be
notified of the requirement to subscribe or self-haul organics and recyclables.
Those commercial customers who do not subscribe to the required services with
the city, but who can produce evidence of legitimate self-haul of organics and
recyclables will be deemed compliant with this chapter, whereas those who
cannot will be deemed non-compliant.
      (2)   The Public Works Director or designee shall annually work with any
non-compliant commercial customers in order to bring them into compliance with
the requirements of this chapter by providing outreach, education, and
technical assistance to facilitate compliance.
      (3)   Commercial customers shall be responsible for ensuring and
demonstrating compliance with the requirements of this chapter within 30 days
of notification of non-compliance. Failure to demonstrate compliance with the
requirements of this chapter shall be cause for enforcement.
(1995 Code, § 7.16.090) (Ord. 18-05, passed 9-18-2018)
§ 7.16.100   Special haul service.
   Dirt, sod, tree stumps, stones, broken concrete, furniture, appliances,
construction debris, demolition debris and other building materials are not
considered to be normal household rubbish; however, they will be handled on a
special haul basis for which an extra charge is made. Tree and shrub trimmings
which cannot be placed in containers for organic materials, as provided in §
7.16.010 of this chapter, shall be handled on a special haul basis for which an
extra charge will be made.
(1995 Code, § 7.16.100) (Ord. 18-05, passed 9-18-2018)
§ 7.16.110   Carry-out residential service.
   Carry-out residential service shall be provided at a set fee per container
when containers are located other than curb side.
(1995 Code, § 7.16.110) (Ord. 18-05, passed 9-18-2018)
§ 7.16.120   Garbage collection and disposal and street sweeping services.
   Billing and collection charges for garbage and street sweeping services
shall be included on the regular city utility bill to customers who have city
water service. When the garbage collection and street sweeping customer does
not have city water service, a separate bill for garbage collection and street
sweeping services shall be mailed in accordance with standard billing
procedures to the person who owns or controls the premises serviced.
(1995 Code, § 7.16.120) (Ord. 18-05, passed 9-18-2018)
§ 7.16.130   Garbage collection and disposal and street sweeping services
delinquencies.
   (A)   All charges for garbage collection and street sweeping services
included on utility bills shall be due and payable at the same time as other
city utility charges. If a bill for garbage collection and street sweeping
services is not paid within the time provided, the city may discontinue water
and other services to the premises.
   (B)   All collection service bills, if not a part of the city utility bills,
shall become delinquent at 5:00 p.m. on the twentieth day following each
applicable billing month. If a bill for garbage collection and street sweeping
services is not paid within the time, a collection charge of 10% per month will
be added and collection shall be enforced by law.
(1995 Code, § 7.16.130) (Ord. 18-05, passed 9-18-2018)
§ 7.16.140   Establishment of garbage collection and street sweeping service
routes.
   The Solid Waste Manager shall, subject to approval of the Board of Public
Utilities of the city, supervise the collection, removal and disposal of all
refuse and establish routes, days and hours for collection and may change the
same from time to time. When such routes, days and hours are established or
changed, he or she shall give such notice thereof as he or she may deem
advisable.
(1995 Code, § 7.16.140) (Ord. 18-05, passed 9-18-2018)
§ 7.16.150   Fees for garbage collection and street sweeping services.
   Fees to be collected by the city for the collection and removal of garbage
and for street sweeping services shall be set by resolution by the Board of
Public Utilities Commissioners of the city.
(1995 Code, § 7.16.150) (Ord. 18-05, passed 9-18-2018)
§ 7.16.160 Residential vacancy credit for garbage services.
   The city will issue a residential vacancy credit for garbage services,
provided the period of the vacancy is three months or longer. The amount of the
credit shall be equal to the monthly refuse service charge. A written
application for a vacancy must be submitted by the property owner or tenant a
minimum of ten working days prior to the date of the actual vacancy. No vacancy
credit will be allowed if an application is requested or received after the
actual vacancy has occurred. The Director shall have the authority to establish
a fee for the actual cost of providing a vacancy credit and the resumption of
services. No vacancy credits are established for commercial or industrial
businesses.
(Ord. 09-02, passed - -2009) (Ord. 18-05, passed 9-18-2018)
§ 7.16.170 Special events.
   Special event recycling and organics collection required. For a special
event, in addition to any other conditions the city requires as part of the
special event permit, the responsible party shall either arrange for commingled
or source separated collection and processing of garbage, recycling and
organics or shall arrange for and provide recycling and organics containers
throughout the event location to make source separation of recyclable
materials, organic materials and garbage convenient for the employees,
volunteers, contractors, customers of the food vendors and attendees of the
event. This includes arranging for collection and appropriate processing of all
garbage, organics and recycling collected during the special event.
Requirements for special events not utilizing commingled or source separated
collection services provided by the franchised hauler include:
   (A)   The minimum number of recycling and organic containers shall equal or
exceed the number of garbage containers. Containers for garbage, organics and
recyclables shall be collocated throughout the event location in order to
provide equally convenient access to users.
   (B)   All of the containers must have appropriate signage and be color coded
to identify the type of materials to be deposited and meet any additional
design criteria established by the city by regulation.
   (C)   Food vendors must have at least one separate container each for
recyclable materials, organic materials and garbage for use by customers and
visitors. Multiple food vendors that provide disposable food service ware and
share a common eating area may share an appropriate number, size, and placement
of containers for recyclable materials, organic materials and garbage for
convenient use by customers or visitors or have common access to such a
container which shall be located within a reasonable proximity of the vendors.
   (D)   The types of recyclable materials suitable for deposit into each
container shall include, at a minimum; plastic bottles and jars, paper,
cardboard, glass, newspaper, metal containers, and cans. Each recycling
container shall be clearly identified as a recycling container and shall
display a list of types of recyclable materials which may be deposited into the
recycling container.
(Ord. 18-05, passed 9-18-2018)
CHAPTER 7.17: MANDATORY RECYCLING AND ORGANIC WASTE DISPOSAL REDUCTION
Section
   
7.17.010   Purpose and findings.
   
7.17.020   Title of chapter.
   
7.17.030   Definitions.
   
7.17.040   General provisions and prohibitions for the use of solid waste,
recyclables (non-organic) and organic containers by generators.
   
7.17.050   Requirements for single- family generators.
   
7.17.060   Requirements for commercial businesses.
   
7.17.070   Waivers for generators.
   
7.17.080   Requirements for commercial edible food generators.
   
7.17.090   Requirements for food recovery organizations and services.
   
7.17.100   Requirements for haulers and facility operators.
   
7.17.110   Self-hauler requirements.
   
7.17.120   Inspections and investigations by city.
   
7.17.130   Enforcement.
§ 7.17.010 Purpose and findings.
   The City of Tulare finds and declares:
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to implement state laws in order to
reduce the amount of recyclable, e.g., non-organic and organic, solid wastes
deposited in landfills from the city's commercial businesses, residents, and
self-haulers.
   (B)   State recycling law, Assembly Bill 939 of 1989, the Cal. Integrated
Waste Management Act of 1989 (Cal. Public Resources Code §§ 40000 et seq., as
amended, supplemented, superseded, and replaced from time to time), requires
cities and counties to reduce, reuse, and recycle (including composting) solid
waste generated in their jurisdictions to the maximum extent feasible before
any incineration or landfill disposal of waste, to conserve water, energy, and
other natural resources, and to protect the environment.
   (C)   State recycling law, Assembly Bill 341 of 2011 (approved by the
Governor of the state of California on October 5, 2011, which amended §§ 41730,
41731, 41734, 41735, 41736, 41800, 42926, 44004, and 50001 of, and added §§
40004, 41734.5, and 41780.01 and Chapter 12.8 (commencing with § 42649) to Part
3 of Division 30 of, and added and repealed § 41780.02 of, Cal. Public
Resources Code as amended, supplemented, superseded and replaced from time to
time), places requirements on businesses and multifamily property owners that
generate a specified threshold amount of solid waste to arrange for recycling
services and requires jurisdictions to implement a mandatory commercial
recycling program.
   (D)   State organics recycling law, Assembly Bill 1826 of 2014 (approved by
the Governor of the State of California on September 28, 2014, which added
Chapter 12.9 (commencing with § 42649.8) to Part 3 of Division 30 of the Cal.
Public Resources Code, relating to solid waste, as amended, supplemented,
superseded, and replaced from time to time), requires businesses and
multifamily property owners that generate a specified threshold amount of solid
waste, recycling, and organic waste per week to arrange for recycling services
for that waste, requires jurisdictions to implement a recycling program to
divert organic waste from businesses subject to the law, and requires
jurisdictions to implement a mandatory commercial organics recycling program.
   (E)   SB 1383, the Short-Lived Climate Pollutant Reduction Act of 2016,
requires CalRecycle to develop regulations to reduce organics in landfills as a
source of methane. The regulations place requirements on multiple entities
including jurisdictions, residential households, commercial businesses and
business owners, commercial edible food generators, haulers, self-haulers, food
recovery organizations, and food recovery services to support achievement of
statewide organic waste disposal reduction targets.
   (F)   SB 1383, the Short-Lived Climate Pollutant Reduction Act of 2016,
requires jurisdictions to adopt and enforce an ordinance or enforceable
mechanism to implement relevant provisions of SB 1383 regulations. This chapter
will also help reduce food insecurity by requiring commercial edible food
generators to arrange to have the maximum amount of their edible food, that
would otherwise be disposed, be recovered for human consumption.
   (G)   Requirements in this chapter are consistent with other adopted goals
and policies of the city to reduce waste and lower emissions of greenhouse
gases.
   (H)   This chapter is intended to supplement the city's general regulation
of solid waste set forth in other portions of the City's Municipal Code,
including, but not limited to,
Chapter 7.16.
(Ord. 2022-07, passed 6-7-2022)
§ 7.17.020 Title of chapter.
   This chapter shall be entitled "Mandatory Recycling and Organic Waste
Disposal Reduction."
(Ord. 2022-07, passed 6-7-2022)
§ 7.17.030 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and terms are defined as
follows.
   BLUE CONTAINER. Has the same meaning as in 14 CCR § 18982.2(a)(5) and shall
be used for the purpose of storage and collection of source-separated
recyclable materials or source-separated blue container organic waste.
   CALRECYCLE. California's Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery,
which is the department designated with responsibility for developing,
implementing, and enforcing SB 1383 regulations.
   CALIFORNIA CODE OF REGULATIONS or CCR. The state of California Code of
Regulations. CCR references in this chapter are preceded with a number that
refers to the relevant title of the CCR (e.g., "14 CCR" refers to Title 14 of
CCR).
   C&D. Abbreviation for construction or demolition debris.
   CITY. The City of Tulare, a California Municipal Corporation and charter
city, in Tulare, California.
   CITY ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. The City Manager or their authorized designee(s)
who is/are partially or wholly responsible for enforcing this chapter.
   COMMERCIAL BUSINESS or COMMERCIAL. A firm, partnership, proprietorship,
joint-stock company, corporation, or association, whether for-profit or
nonprofit, strip mall, industrial facility, or a multifamily residential
dwelling, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(6). A multifamily
residential dwelling that consists of fewer than five units is not a commercial
business for purposes of implementing this chapter.
   COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR. A tier one or a tier two commercial edible
food generator as defined in this section or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR §
18982(a)(73) and (a)(74). For the purposes of this definition, food recovery
organizations and food recovery services are not commercial edible food
generators pursuant to 14 CCR § 18982(a)(7).
   COMPLIANCE REVIEW. A review of records by the city to determine compliance
with this chapter.
   COMMUNITY COMPOSTING. Any activity that composts green material,
agricultural material, food material, and vegetative food material, alone or in
combination, and the total amount of feedstock and compost on site at any one
time does not exceed 100 cubic yards and 750 square feet, as specified in 14
CCR § 17855(a)(4); or, as otherwise defined by 14 CCR § 18982(a)(8).
   COMPOST. The same meaning as in 14 CCR § 17896.2(a)(4), which stated, as of
the effective date of this chapter, that COMPOST means the product resulting
from the controlled biological decomposition of organic solid wastes that are
source separated from the municipal solid waste stream, or which are separated
at a centralized facility.
   COMPOSTABLE PLASTICS or COMPOSTABLE PLASTIC. The plastic materials that meet
the ASTM D6400 standard for compostability, or as otherwise described in 14 CCR
§§ 18984.1(a)(1)(A) or 18984.2(a)(1)(C).
   CONTAINER CONTAMINATION or CONTAMINATED CONTAINER. A container, regardless
of color, that contains prohibited container contaminants, or as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(55).
   DESIGNATED SOURCE SEPARATED ORGANIC WASTE FACILITY. As defined in 14 CCR §
18982(14.5), a solid waste facility that accepts a source-separated organic
waste collection stream as defined in 14 CCR § 17402(a)(26.6) and complies with
one of the following:
      (1)   The facility is a TRANSFER/PROCESSOR, as defined in 14 CCR §
18815.2(a)(62), that is in compliance with the reporting requirements of 14 CCR
§ 18815.5(d), and meets or exceeds an annual average source separated organic
content recovery rate of 50% between January 1, 2022, and December 31, 2024,
and 75% on and after January 1, 2025, as calculated pursuant to 14 CCR §
18815.5(f) for organic waste received from the source separated organic waste
collection stream.
         (a)   If a transfer/processor has an annual average source separated
organic content recovery rate lower than the rate required in division (1) of
this definition for two consecutive reporting periods, or three reporting
periods within three years, the facility shall not qualify as a DESIGNATED
SOURCE SEPARATED ORGANIC WASTE FACILITY.
      (2)   The facility is a COMPOSTING OPERATION or COMPOSTING FACILITY as
defined in 14 CCR § 18815.2(a)(13), that pursuant to the reports submitted
under 14 CCR § 18815.7 demonstrates that the percent of the material removed
for landfill disposal that is organic waste is less than the percent specified
in 14 CCR §§ 17409.5.8(c)(2) or 17409.5.8(c)(3), whichever is applicable, and,
if applicable, complies with the digestate handling requirements specified in
14 CCR § 17896.5.
         (a)   If the percent of the material removed for landfill disposal
that is organic waste is more than the percent specified in 14 CCR §§ 17409.5.8
(c)(2) or 17409.5.8(c)(3), for two consecutive reporting periods, or three
reporting periods within three years, the facility shall not qualify as a
DESIGNATED SOURCE- SEPARATED ORGANIC WASTE FACILITY. For the purposes of this
chapter, the reporting periods shall be consistent with those defined in 14 CCR
§ 18815.2(a)(49).
   DESIGNEE. An entity that jurisdiction contracts with or otherwise arranges
to carry out any of the jurisdiction's responsibilities of this chapter as
authorized in 14 CCR § 18981.2. A designee may be a government entity, a
hauler, a private entity, or a combination of those entities.
   EDIBLE FOOD. Food intended for human consumption, or as otherwise defined in
14 CCR § 18982(a)(18). For the purposes of this chapter or as otherwise defined
in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(18), EDIBLE FOOD is not solid waste if it is recovered and
not discarded. Nothing in this chapter or in 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12
requires or authorizes the recovery of edible food that does not meet the food
safety requirements of the Cal. Retail Food Code.
   ENFORCEMENT ACTION. An action of the city to address noncompliance with this
chapter including, but not limited to, issuing administrative citations, fines,
penalties, or using other remedies.
   EXCLUDED WASTE. Hazardous substance, hazardous waste, infectious waste,
designated waste, volatile, corrosive, medical waste, infectious, regulated
radioactive waste, and toxic substances or material that facility operator(s),
which receive materials from the city and its generators, reasonably  believe
(s) would, as a result of or upon acceptance, transfer, processing, or
disposal, be a violation of local, state, or federal law, regulation, or
ordinance, including: land use restrictions or conditions, waste that cannot be
disposed of in Class III landfills or accepted at the facility by permit
conditions, waste that in city's reasonable opinion would present a significant
risk to human health or the environment, cause a nuisance or otherwise create
or expose city to potential liability; but not including de minimis volumes or
concentrations of waste of a type and amount normally found in single-family or
multifamily solid waste after implementation of programs for the safe
collection, processing, recycling, treatment, and disposal of batteries and
paint in compliance with Cal. Public Resources Code §§ 41500 and 41802.
   FOOD DISTRIBUTOR. A company that distributes food to entities including, but
not limited to, supermarkets and grocery stores, or as otherwise defined in 14
CCR § 18982(a)(22).
   FOOD FACILITY. The same meaning as in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 113789.
   FOOD RECOVERY. Actions to collect and distribute food for human consumption
that otherwise would be disposed, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)
(24).
   FOOD RECOVERY ORGANIZATION. An entity that engages in the collection or
receipt of edible food from commercial edible food generators and distributes
that edible food to the public for food recovery either directly or through
other entities or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(25), including, but
not limited to:
      (1)   A food bank as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 113783;
      (2)   A nonprofit charitable organization as defined in Cal. Health and
Safety Code § 113841; and
      (3)   A nonprofit charitable temporary food facility as defined in Cal.
Health and Safety Code § 113842.
   A food recovery organization is not a commercial edible food generator for
the purposes of this chapter and implementation of 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter
12 pursuant to 14 CCR § 18982(a)(7).
   If the definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(25) for FOOD RECOVERY ORGANIZATION
differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(25) shall
apply to this chapter.
   FOOD RECOVERY SERVICE. A person or entity that collects and transports
edible food from a commercial edible food generator to a food recovery
organization or other entities for food recovery, or as otherwise defined in 14
CCR § 18982(a)(26). A food recovery service is not a commercial edible food
generator for the purposes of this chapter and implementation of 14 CCR,
Division 7, Chapter 12 pursuant to 14 CCR § 18982(a)(7).
   FOOD SCRAPS. All food such as, but not limited to, fruits, vegetables, meat,
poultry, seafood, shellfish, bones, rice, beans, pasta, bread, cheese, and
eggshells. FOOD SCRAPS excludes fats, oils, and grease when such materials are
source separated from other food scraps.
   FOOD SERVICE PROVIDER. An entity primarily engaged in providing food
services to institutional, governmental, commercial, or industrial locations of
others based on contractual arrangements with these types of organizations, or
as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(27).
   FOOD-SOILED PAPER. Compostable paper material that has come in contact with
food or liquid, such as, but not limited to, compostable paper plates, paper
coffee cups, napkins, pizza boxes, and milk cartons.
   FOOD WASTE. Food scraps, food-soiled paper, and compostable plastics.
   GRAY CONTAINER or BROWN CONTAINER. The same meaning as in 14 CCR § 18982.2
(a)(28) and shall be used for the purpose of storage and collection of gray
container waste.
   GRAY CONTAINER WASTE. Solid waste that is collected in a gray container that
is part of a three-container collection service that prohibits the placement of
organic waste in the gray container as specified in 14 CCR § 18984.1 (a) and
(b), or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 17402(a)(6.5).
   GREEN CONTAINER. The same meaning as in 14 CCR § 18982.2(a)(29) and shall be
used for the purpose of storage and collection of source separated green
container organic waste.
   GROCERY STORE. A store primarily engaged in the retail sale of canned food;
dry goods; fresh fruits and vegetables; fresh meats, fish, and poultry; and any
area that is not separately owned within the store where the food is prepared
and served, including a bakery, deli, and meat and seafood departments, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(30).
   HAULER ROUTE. The designated itinerary or sequence of stops for each segment
of the city's collection service area, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR §
18982(a)(31.5).
   HIGH DIVERSION ORGANIC WASTE PROCESSING FACILITY. A facility that is in
compliance with the reporting requirements of 14 CCR § 18815.5(d) and meets or
exceeds an annual average mixed waste organic content recovery rate of 50%
between January 1, 2022, and December 31, 2024, and 75% after January 1, 2025,
as calculated pursuant to 14 CCR § 18815.5(e) for organic waste received from
the mixed waste organic collection stream as defined in 14 CCR § 17402(a)
(11.5); or, as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(33).
   INSPECTION. A site visit where a city reviews records, containers, and an
entity's collection, handling, recycling, or landfill disposal of organic waste
or edible food handling to determine if the entity is complying with
requirements set forth in this chapter, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR §
18982(a)(35).
   LARGE EVENT. An event, including, but not limited to, a sporting event or a
flea market, that charges an admission price, or is operated by a local agency,
and serves an average of more than 2,000 individuals per day of operation of
the event, at a location that includes, but is not limited to, a public,
nonprofit, or privately owned park, parking lot, golf course, street system, or
other open space when being used for an event. If the definition in 14 CCR §
18982(a)(38) differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)
(38) shall apply to this chapter.
   LARGE VENUE. A permanent venue facility that annually seats or serves an
average of more than 2,000 individuals within the grounds of the facility per
day of operation of the venue facility. For purposes of this chapter and
implementation of 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12, a VENUE FACILITY includes,
but is not limited to, a public, nonprofit, or privately owned or operated
stadium, amphitheater, arena, hall,  amusement park, conference or civic
center, zoo, aquarium, airport, racetrack, horse track, performing arts center,
fairground, museum, theater, or other public attraction facility. For purposes
of this chapter and implementation of 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12, a site
under common ownership or control that includes more than one large venue that
is contiguous with other large venues in the site, is a single large venue. If
the definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(39) differs from this definition, the
definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(39) shall apply to this chapter.
   LOCAL EDUCATION AGENCY. A school district, charter school, or county office
of education that is not subject to the control of city or county regulations
related to solid waste, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(40).
   MIXED WASTE ORGANIC COLLECTION STREAM or MIXED WASTE. Organic waste
collected in a container that is required by 14 CCR §§ 18984.1, 18984.2 or
18984.3 to be taken to a high diversion organic waste processing facility or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 17402(a)(11.5).
   MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DWELLING or MULTI-FAMILY. From, or pertaining to
residential premises with five or more dwelling units. Multi-family premises do
not include hotels, motels, or other transient occupancy facilities, which are
considered commercial businesses.
   NON-COMPOSTABLE PAPER. Includes but is not limited to paper that is coated
in a plastic material that will not break down in the composting process, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(41).
   NON-LOCAL ENTITY. The following entities that are not subject to the city's
enforcement authority, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(42):
      (1)   Federal facilities located within the boundaries of the city,
including but not limited to United States Postal Service, Immigration and
Customs Enforcement, and Federal Bureau of Investigations.
      (2)   County fairgrounds located within the boundaries of the city,
including Tulare County Fairgrounds owned by State of California.
      (3)   Reserved.
      (4)   Local school districts within the boundaries of the city, including
but not limited to Tulare City School District and Tulare Joint Union High
School District.
      (5)   Public universities located within the boundaries of the city,
including but not limited to the College of the Sequoias.
      (6)   State agencies located within the boundaries of the city, including
but not limited to Department of Vehicles, California Highway Patrol, and
California Department of Transportation.
   NON-ORGANIC RECYCLABLES. Non-putrescible and nonhazardous recyclable wastes
including but not limited to bottles, cans, metals, plastics and glass, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(43).
   NOTICE OF VIOLATION (NOV). A notice that a violation has occurred that
includes a compliance date to avoid an action to seek penalties, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(45) or further explained in 14 CCR §
18995.4.
   ORGANIC WASTE. Solid wastes containing material originated from living
organisms and their metabolic waste products, including but not limited to
food, green material, landscape and pruning waste, organic textiles and
carpets, lumber, wood, paper products, printing and writing paper, manure,
biosolids, digestate, and sludges or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)
(46). Biosolids and digestate are as defined by 14 CCR § 18982(a).
   ORGANIC WASTE GENERATOR. A person or entity that is responsible for the
initial creation of organic waste, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)
(48).
   PAPER PRODUCTS. Products that include, but are not limited to, paper
janitorial supplies, cartons, wrapping, packaging, file folders, hanging files,
corrugated boxes, tissue, and toweling, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR §
18982(a)(51).
   PRINTING AND WRITER PAPERS. Products that include, but are not limited to,
copy, xerographic, watermark, cotton fiber, offset, forms, computer printout
paper, white wove envelopes, manila envelopes, book paper, note pads, writing
tablets, newsprint, and other uncoated writing papers, posters, index cards,
calendars, brochures, reports, magazines, and publications, or as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(54).
   PROHIBITED CONTAINER CONTAMINANTS. Defined as the following:
      (1)   Discarded materials placed in the blue container that are not
identified as acceptable source separated recyclable materials for the city's
blue container;
      (2)   Discarded materials placed in the green container that are not
identified as acceptable source separated green container organic waste for the
city's green container;
      (3)   Discarded materials placed in the gray container that are
acceptable source separated recyclable materials and/or source separated green
container organic wastes to be placed in city's green container and/or blue
container; and
      (4)   Excluded waste placed in any container.
   RECOVERED ORGANIC WASTE PRODUCTS. Products made from California, landfill-
diverted recovered organic waste processed in a permitted or otherwise
authorized facility, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(60).
   RECYCLED-CONTENT PAPER. Paper products, and printing and writing paper that
consists of at least 30%, by fiber weight, postconsumer fiber, or as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(61).
   RECOVERY. Any activity or process described in 14 CCR § 18983.1(b), or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(49).
   REGIONAL AGENCY. Regional agency as defined in Cal. Public Resources Code §
40181.
   REMOTE MONITORING. The use of the internet of things (IoT) and/or wireless
electronic devices to visualize the contents of blue containers, green
containers, and gray containers for purposes of identifying the quantity of
materials in containers (level of fill) and/or presence of prohibited container
contaminants.
   RENEWABLE GAS. Gas derived from organic waste that has been diverted from a
California landfill and process at an in-vessel digestion facility that is
permitted or otherwise authorized by 14 CCR to recycle organic waste, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(62).
   RESTAURANT. An establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of food
and drinks for on-premises or immediate consumption, or as otherwise defined in
14 CCR § 18982(a)(64).
   ROUTE REVIEW. A visual inspection of containers along a hauler route for the
purpose of determining container contamination, and may include mechanical
inspection methods such as the use of cameras, or as otherwise defined in 14
CCR § 18982(a)(65).
   SB 1383. Senate Bill 1383 of 2016 approved by the Governor on September 19,
2016, which added §§ 39730.5, 39730.6, 39730.7, and 39730.8 to the Cal. Health
and Safety Code, and added Chapter 13.1 (commencing with § 42652) to Part 3 of
Division 30 of the Cal. Public Resources Code, establishing methane emissions
reduction targets in a statewide effort to reduce emissions of short-lived
climate pollutants as amended, supplemented, superseded, and replaced from time
to time.
   SB 1383 REGULATIONS or SB 1383 REGULATORY. Refers to, for the purposes of
this chapter, the Short-Lived Climate Pollutants: Organic Waste Reduction
regulations developed by CalRecycle and adopted in 2020 that created 14 CCR,
Division 7, Chapter 12 and amended portions of regulations of 14 CCR and 27
CCR.
   SELF-HAULER. A person who hauls solid waste, organic waste or recyclable
material he or she has generated to another person. Self-hauler also includes a
person who back-hauls waste, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(66).
BACK-HAUL means generating and transporting organic waste to a destination
owned and operated by the generator using the generator's own employees and
equipment, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(66)(A). Self-haulers
must also meet one of the exceptions from the requirements of §
8.12.020.
   SINGLE-FAMILY. From, or pertaining to any residential premises with fewer
than five units.
   SOLID WASTE. Has the same meaning as defined in Cal. Public Resources Code §
40191, which defines SOLID WASTE as all putrescible and non-putrescible solid,
semisolid, and liquid wastes, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish,
ashes, industrial wastes, demolition and construction wastes, abandoned
vehicles and parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances,
dewatered, treated, or chemically fixed sewage sludge which is not hazardous
waste, manure, vegetable or animal solid and semisolid wastes, and other
discarded solid and semisolid wastes, with the exception that SOLID WASTE does
not include any of the following wastes:
      (1)   Hazardous waste, as defined in the Cal. Public Resources Code §
40141.
      (2)   Radioactive waste regulated pursuant to the Cal. Radiation Control
Law (Chapter 8 (commencing with § 114960) of Part 9 of Division 104 of the Cal.
Health and Safety Code).
      (3)   Medical waste regulated pursuant to the Cal. Medical Waste
Management Act (Part 14 (commencing with § 117600) of Division 104 of the Cal.
Health and Safety Code). Untreated medical waste shall not be disposed of in a
solid waste landfill, as defined in Cal. Public Resources Code § 40195.1.
Medical waste that has been treated and deemed to be solid waste shall be
regulated pursuant to Division 30 of the Cal. Public Resources Code.
   SOURCE SEPARATED. Materials, including commingled recyclable materials, that
have been separated or kept separate from the solid waste stream, at the point
of generation, for the purpose of additional sorting or processing those
materials for recycling or reuse in order to return them to the economic
mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted
products, which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the
marketplace, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 17402.5(b)(4). For the
purposes of this chapter, SOURCE SEPARATED shall include separation of
materials by the generator, property owner, property owner's employee, property
manager, or property manager's employee into different containers for the
purpose of collection such that source separated materials are separated from
gray container waste/mixed waste or other solid waste for the purposes of
collection and processing.
   SOURCE SEPARATED BLUE CONTAINER ORGANIC WASTE. Source separated organic
waste that can be placed in a blue container that is limited to the collection
of those organic waste and non-organic recyclables as defined in 14 CCR § 18982
(a)(43), or as otherwise defined by 14 CCR § 17402(a)(18.7).
   SOURCE SEPARATED GREEN CONTAINER ORGANIC WASTE. Source separated organic
waste that can be placed in a green container that is specifically intended for
the separate collection of organic waste by the generator, excluding source
separated blue container organic waste, carpets, non-compostable paper, and
textiles.
   SOURCE SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Source separated non-organic
recyclables and source separated blue container organic waste.
   STATE. The State of California.
   SUPERMARKET. A full-line, self-service retail store with gross annual sales
of $2,000,000, or more, and which sells a line of dry grocery, canned goods, or
nonfood items and some perishable items, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR §
18982(a)(71).
   TIER ONE COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR. A commercial edible food
generator that is one of the following:
      (1)   Supermarket.
      (2)   Grocery store with a total facility size equal to or greater than
10,000 square feet.
      (3)   Food service provider.
      (4)   Food distributor.
      (5)   Wholesale food vendor.
   If the definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(73) of TIER ONE COMMERCIAL EDIBLE
FOOD GENERATOR differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR § 18982
(a)(73) shall apply to this chapter.
   TIER TWO COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR. A commercial edible food
generator that is one of the following:
      (1)   Restaurant with 250 or more seats, or a total facility size equal
to or greater than 5,000 square feet.
      (2)   Hotel with an on-site food facility and 200 or more rooms.
      (3)   Health facility with an on-site food facility and 100 or more beds.
      (4)   Large venue.
      (5)   Large event.
      (6)   A state agency with a cafeteria with 250 or more seats or total
cafeteria facility size equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet.
      (7)   A local education agency facility with an on-site food facility.
   If the definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(74) of TIER TWO COMMERCIAL EDIBLE
FOOD GENERATOR differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR § 18982
(a)(74) shall apply to this chapter.
   UNCONTAINERIZED GREEN WASTE AND YARD WASTE COLLECTION SERVICE or
UNCONTAINERIZED SERVICE. A collection service that collects green waste and
yard waste that is placed in a pile or bagged for collection on the street in
front of a generator's house or place of business for collection and transport
to a facility that recovers source separated organic waste, or as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR § 189852(a)(75).
   WHOLESALE FOOD VENDOR. A business or establishment engaged in the merchant
wholesale distribution of food, where food (including fruits and vegetables) is
received, shipped, stored, prepared for distribution to a retailer, warehouse,
distributor, or other destination, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 189852
(a)(76).
(Ord. 2022-07, passed 6-7-2022)
§ 7.17.040 General provisions and prohibitions for the use of solid waste,
recyclable (non-organic) and organic containers by generators.
   (A)   Generators shall have and maintain a three-container solid waste
collection system consisting of blue containers, gray/brown containers and
green containers, and shall comply with the general requirements specified in
other portions of the City's Municipal Code, including, but not limited to,
Chapter 7.16.
   (B)   Generators shall separate materials into their correct containers and
shall not place prohibited container contaminants in any container.
   (C)   Generators shall provide adequate onsite parcel space for three-
container solid materials systems, unless otherwise allowed by the city. The
container space or refuse enclosure shall be large enough to accommodate a
minimum of three containers, including additional space for accessibility by
persons and collection vehicles.
   (D)   Generators shall maintain and keep materials containers areas,
including refuse enclosures, clean, free of litter, debris, stored supplies,
equipment and other materials, and unsanitary conditions, and safely accessible
to users and city staff and vehicles.
(Ord. 2022-07, passed 6-7-2022)
§ 7.17.050 Requirements for single-family generators.
   Single-family organic waste generators shall comply with the following
requirements:
   (A)   Shall subscribe to city's organic waste collection services for all
organic waste generated as described in division (B) of this section. City
shall have the right to review the number and size of a generator's containers
to evaluate adequacy of capacity provided for each type of collection service
for proper separation of materials and containment of materials; and, single-
family generators shall adjust its service level for its collection services as
requested by the city. Generators may additionally manage their organic waste
by preventing or reducing their organic waste, managing organic waste on site,
and/or using a community composting site pursuant to 14 CCR § 18984.9(c).
   (B)   Shall participate in the city's organic waste collection service(s) by
placing designated materials in designated containers as described below, and
shall not place prohibited container contaminants in collection containers.
      (1)   A three and three plus container collection service (blue
container, green container, and gray container).
         (a)   Generator shall place source separated green container organic
waste, including food waste, in the green container; source separated
recyclable materials in the blue container; and gray container waste in the
gray container. Generators shall not place materials designated for the gray
container into the green container or blue container.
   (C)   Accommodate and cooperate with the city's remote monitoring program
for inspection of the contents of containers for prohibited container
contaminants, which may be implemented at a later date, to evaluate generator's
compliance with §
7.17.040(B). The remote monitoring program may involve installation of remote
monitoring equipment on or in the blue containers, green containers, and gray
containers.
(Ord. 2022-07, passed 6-7-2022)
§ 7.17.060 Requirements for commercial businesses.
   Generators that are commercial businesses, including multifamily residential
dwellings, shall:
   (A)   Subscribe to city's collection services and comply with requirements
of those services as described below in this section, except commercial
businesses that meet the self-hauler requirements in §
7.17.110. City shall have the right to review the number and size of a
generator's containers and frequency of collection to evaluate adequacy of
capacity provided for each type of collection service for proper separation of
materials and containment of materials; and, commercial businesses shall adjust
their service level for their collection services as requested by the city.
   (B)   Subscribe to nonorganic recyclables service if the customer generates
four cubic yards or more of solid waste weekly or if otherwise required by law.
   (C)   Except commercial businesses that meet the self-hauler requirements in
§
7.17.110, participate in the city's organic waste collection service(s) by
placing designated materials in designated containers as described below.
      (1)   A three and three plus container collection service (blue
container, green container, and gray container).
         (a)   Generator shall place source separated green container organic
waste, including food waste, in the green container; source separated
recyclable materials in the blue container; and gray container waste in the
gray container. Generator may place recyclable materials in gray container if
mixed waste material recovery service is utilized and approved by the city.
Generator shall not place materials designated for the gray container into the
green container or blue container.
   (D)   Supply and allow access to adequate number, size and location of
collection containers with sufficient labels or colors (conforming with
divisions (E)(1) and (E)(2) of this section) for employees, contractors,
tenants, and customers, consistent with city's collection service or, if self-
hauling, per the commercial business' instructions to support its compliance
with its self-haul program, in accordance with § 8.14.100.
   (E)   Excluding multifamily residential dwellings, provide containers for
the collection of source-separated green container organic waste and source
separated recyclable materials in all indoor and outdoor areas where disposal
containers are provided for customers, for materials generated by that
business. Such containers do not need to be provided in restrooms. If a
commercial business does not generate any of the materials that would be
collected in one type of container, then the business does not have to provide
that particular container in all areas where disposal containers are provided
for customers. Pursuant to 14 CCR § 18984.9(b), the containers provided by the
business shall have either:
      (1)   A body or lid that conforms with the container colors provided
through the collection service provided by city, with either lids conforming to
the color requirements or bodies conforming to the color requirements or both
lids and bodies conforming to color requirements. A commercial business is not
required to replace functional containers, including containers purchased prior
to January 1, 2022, that do not comply with the requirements of this section
prior to the end of the useful life of those containers, or prior to January 1,
2036, whichever comes first.
      (2)   Container labels that include language or graphic images, or both,
indicating the primary material accepted and the primary materials prohibited
in that container, or containers with imprinted text or graphic images that
indicate the primary materials accepted and primary materials prohibited in the
container. Pursuant to 14 CCR § 18984.8, the container labeling requirements
are required on new containers commencing January 1, 2022.
   (F)   Multifamily residential dwellings are not required to comply with
container placement requirements or labeling requirement in division (E) of
this section pursuant to 14 CCR § 18984.9(b).
   (G)   To the extent practical through education, training, inspection, and/
or other measures, excluding multifamily residential dwellings, prohibit
employees from placing materials in a container not designated for those
materials per the city's blue container, green container, and gray container
collection service or, if self-hauling, per the commercial business'
instructions to support its compliance with its self-haul program, in
accordance with §
7.17.110.
   (H)   Excluding multifamily residential dwellings, periodically inspect all
containers for contamination and inform employees if containers are
contaminated and of the requirements to keep contaminants out of those
containers pursuant to 14 CCR § 18984.9(b)(3).
   (I)   Annually provide information to employees, contractors, tenants, and
customers about organic waste recovery requirements and about proper sorting of
source separated green container organic waste and source separated recyclable
materials.
   (J)   Provide education information before or within 14 days of occupation
of the premises to new tenants that describes requirements to keep source
separated green container organic waste and source separated recyclable
materials separate from gray container waste (when applicable) and the location
of containers and the rules governing their use at each property.
   (K)   Provide or arrange access for city or its agent to their properties
during all inspections conducted in accordance with §
7.17.120 to confirm compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (L)   If a commercial business wants to self-haul, meet the self-hauler
requirements in §
7.17.110.
   (M)   Nothing in this section prohibits a generator from preventing or
reducing waste generation, managing organic waste on site, or using a community
composting site pursuant to 14 CCR § 18984.9(c).
   (N)   Commercial businesses that are tier one or tier two commercial edible
food generators shall comply with food recovery requirements, pursuant to §
7.17.080.
(Ord. 2022-07, passed 6-7-2022)
§ 7.17.070 Waivers for generators.
   (A)   De minimis waivers. The city may waive a commercial business'
obligation (including multifamily residential dwellings) to comply with some or
all of the organic waste requirements of this chapter if the commercial
business provides documentation that the business generates below a certain
amount of organic waste material as described in division (A)(2) of this
section. Commercial businesses requesting a de minimis waiver shall:
      (1)   Submit an application specifying the services that they are
requesting a waiver from and provide documentation as noted in division (A)(2)
of this section.
      (2)   Provide documentation that either:
         (a)   The commercial business' total solid waste collection service is
two cubic yards or more per week and organic waste subject to collection in a
blue container or green container comprises less than 20 gallons per week per
applicable container of the business' total waste; or
         (b)   The commercial business' total solid waste collection service is
less than two cubic yards per week and organic waste subject to collection in a
blue container or green container comprises less than ten gallons per week per
applicable container of the business' total waste.
      (3)   Notify city if circumstances change such that commercial business'
organic waste exceeds threshold required for waiver, in which case waiver will
be rescinded.
      (4)   Provide written verification of eligibility for de minimis waiver
every five years, if city has approved de minimis waiver.
   (B)   Physical space waivers. City may waive a commercial business' or
property owner's obligations (including multifamily residential dwellings) to
comply with some or all of the recyclable materials and/or organic waste
collection service requirements if the city has evidence from its own staff, a
hauler, licensed architect, or licensed engineer demonstrating that the
premises lacks adequate space for the collection containers required for
compliance with the organic waste collection requirements of
Chapter 7.16.
   A commercial business or property owner may request a physical space waiver
through the following process:
      (1)   Submit an application form specifying the type(s) of collection
services for which they are requesting a compliance waiver.
      (2)   Provide documentation that the premises lacks adequate space for
blue containers and/or green containers including documentation from its
hauler, licensed architect, or licensed engineer.
      (3)   Provide written verification to the city that it is still eligible
for physical space waiver every five years, if city has approved application
for a physical space waiver.
   (C)   The city may provide any additional waivers of the requirements of
this chapter to the extent permitted by applicable law. The city manager or
designee shall be responsible for determining the grounds for the waiver, its
scope, and appropriate administration.
   (D)   Review and approval of waivers by city. Review and approval of waivers
will be the responsibility of the city manager or their designee.
(Ord. 2022-07, passed 6-7-2022)
§ 7.17.080 Requirements for commercial edible food generators.
   (A)   Tier one commercial edible food generators must comply with the
requirements of this section commencing June 1, 2022, and tier two commercial
edible food generators must comply commencing January 1, 2023.
   (B)   Large venue or large event operators not providing food services, but
allowing for food to be provided by others, shall require food facilities
operating at the large venue or large event to comply with the requirements of
this section, commencing January 1, 2023.
   (C)   Commercial edible food generators shall comply with the following
requirements:
      (1)   Arrange to recover the maximum amount of edible food that would
otherwise be disposed.
      (2)   Contract with, or enter into a written agreement with, food
recovery organizations or food recovery services for:
         (a)   The collection of edible food for food recovery; or
         (b)   Acceptance of the edible food that the commercial edible food
generator self-hauls to the food recovery organization for food recovery.
      (3)   Shall not intentionally spoil edible food that is capable of being
recovered by a food recovery organization or a food recovery service.
      (4)   Allow city's designated enforcement entity or designated third-
party enforcement entity to access the premises and review records pursuant to
14 CCR § 18991.4.
      (5)   Keep records that may be provided to the city upon request that
include the following information, or as otherwise specified in 14 CCR §
18991.4:
         (a)   A list of each food recovery service or organization that
collects or receives its edible food pursuant to a contract or written
agreement established under 14 CCR § 18991.3(b).
         (b)   A copy of all contracts or written agreements established under
14 CCR § 18991.3(b).
         (c)   A record of the following information for each of those food
recovery services or food recovery organizations:
            1.   The name, address and contact information of the food recovery
service or food recovery organization.
            2.   The types of food that will be collected by or self-hauled to
the food recovery service or food recovery organization.
            3.   The established frequency that food will be collected or self-
hauled.
            4.   The quantity of food, measured in pounds recovered per month,
collected or self-hauled to a food recovery service or food recovery
organization for food recovery.
   (D)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit or conflict with
the protections provided by the California Good Samaritan Food Donation Act of
2017, the Federal Good Samaritan Act, or share table and school food donation
guidance pursuant to Senate Bill 557 of 2017 (approved by the Governor of the
State of California on September 25, 2017, which added Article 13 (commencing
with § 49580) to Chapter 9 of Part 27 of Division 4 of Title 2 of the Cal.
Education Code, and to amend § 114079 of the Cal. Health and Safety Code,
relating to food safety, as amended, supplemented, superseded and replaced from
time to time).
(Ord. 2022-07, passed 6-7-2022)
§ 7.17.090 Requirements for food recovery organizations and services.
   (A)   Food recovery services collecting or receiving edible food directly
from commercial edible food generators, via a contract or written agreement
established under 14 CCR § 18991.3(b), shall maintain the following records, or
as otherwise specified by 14 CCR § 18991.5(a)(1):
      (1)   The name, address, and contact information for each commercial
edible food generator from which the service collects edible food.
      (2)   The quantity in pounds of edible food collected from each
commercial edible food generator per month.
      (3)   The quantity in pounds of edible food transported to each food
recovery organization per month.
      (4)   The name, address, and contact information for each food recovery
organization that the food recovery service transports edible food to for food
recovery.
   (B)   Food recovery organizations collecting or receiving edible food
directly from commercial edible food generators, via a contract or written
agreement established under 14 CCR § 18991.3(b), shall maintain the following
records, or as otherwise specified by 14 CCR § 18991.5(a)(2):
      (1)   The name, address, and contact information for each commercial
edible food generator from which the organization receives edible food.
      (2)   The quantity in pounds of edible food received from each commercial
edible food generator per month.
      (3)   The name, address, and contact information for each food recovery
service that the organization receives edible food from for food recovery.
   (C)   Food recovery organizations and food recovery services that have their
primary address physically located in the city and contract with or have
written agreements with one or more commercial edible food generators pursuant
to 14 CCR § 18991.3(b) shall report to the city it is located in the total
pounds of edible food recovered in the previous calendar year from the tier one
and tier two commercial edible food generators they have established a contract
or written agreement with pursuant to 14 CCR § 18991.3(b) no later than
February 15 annually.
   (D)   Food recovery capacity planning.
      (1)   Food recovery services and food recovery organizations. In order to
support edible food recovery capacity planning assessments or other studies
conducted by the county, city, special district that provides solid waste
collection services, or its designated entity, food recovery services and food
recovery organizations operating in the city shall provide information and
consultation to the city, upon request, regarding existing, or proposed new or
expanded, food recovery capacity that could be accessed by the city and its
commercial edible food generators. A food recovery service or food recovery
organization contacted by the city shall respond to such request for
information within 60 days, unless a shorter time frame is otherwise specified
by the city.
(Ord. 2022-07, passed 6-7-2022)
§ 7.17.100 Requirements for haulers and facility operators.
   (A)   Requirements for haulers.
      (1)   Permitted haulers providing residential, commercial, or industrial
organic waste collection services to generators within the city's boundaries
shall meet the following requirements and standards as a condition of approval
of a contract, agreement, or other authorization with the city to collect
organic waste:
         (a)   Through written notice to the city annually on or before
February 15 identify the facilities to which they will transport organic waste
including facilities for source separated recyclable materials, source
separated green container organic waste, and mixed waste.
         (b)   Transport source separated recyclable materials, source
separated green container organic waste, and mixed waste to a facility,
operation, activity, or property that recovers organic waste as defined in 14
CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12, Article 2.
         (c)   Obtain approval from the city to haul organic waste, unless it
is transporting source separated organic waste to a community composting site
or lawfully transporting C&D in a manner that complies with 14 CCR § 18989.1, §
7.17.100 of this chapter.
      (2)   Permitted hauler's authorization to collect organic waste shall
comply with education, equipment, signage, container labeling, container color,
contamination monitoring, reporting, and other requirements contained within
its franchise agreement, permit, license, or other agreement entered into with
city.
   (B)   Requirements for facility operators and community composting
operations.
      (1)   Owners of facilities, operations, and activities that recover
organic waste, including, but not limited to, compost facilities, in-vessel
digestion facilities, and publicly owned treatment works shall, upon city
request, provide information regarding available and potential new or expanded
capacity at their facilities, operations, and activities, including information
about throughput and permitted capacity necessary for planning purposes.
Entities contacted by the city shall respond within 60 days.
      (2)   Community composting operators, upon city request, shall provide
information to the city to support organic waste capacity planning, including,
but not limited to, an estimate of the amount of organic waste anticipated to
be handled at the community composting operation. Entities contacted by the
city shall respond within 60 days.
(Ord. 2022-07, passed 6-7-2022)
§ 7.17.110 Self-hauler requirements.
   (A)   Self-haulers shall source separate all recyclable materials and
organic waste generated on site from solid waste in a manner consistent with 14
CCR §§ 18984.1 and 18984.2, or shall haul organic waste to a high diversion
organic waste processing facility as specified in 14 CCR § 18984.3.
   (B)   Self-haulers shall haul their source separated recyclable materials to
a facility that recovers those materials; and haul their source separated green
container organic waste to a solid waste facility, operation, activity, or
property that processes or recovers source separated organic waste.
Alternatively, self-haulers may haul organic waste to a high diversion organic
waste processing facility.
   (C)   Self-haulers that are commercial businesses (including multifamily
residential dwellings) shall keep a record of the amount of organic waste
delivered to each solid waste facility, operation, activity, or property that
processes or recovers organic waste; this record shall be reported to the city
on a quarterly basis. The records shall include the following information:
      (1)   Delivery receipts and weight tickets from the entity accepting the
waste.
      (2)   The amount of material in cubic yards or tons transported by the
generator to each entity.
      (3)   If the material is transported to an entity that does not have
scales on site, or employs scales incapable of weighing the self-hauler's
vehicle in a manner that allows it to determine the weight of materials
received, the self-hauler is not required to record the weight of material but
shall keep a record of the entities that received the organic waste.
   (D)   The quarterly report shall be submitted to the city by the following
dates:
      (1)   First Quarter (January 1 - March 31), Report Due: April 21.
      (2)   Second Quarter (April 1 - June 30), Report Due: July 21.
      (3)   Third Quarter (July 1 - September 30), Report Due: October 21.
      (4)   Fourth Quarter (October 1 - December 31), Report Due: January 21.
   (E)   A residential organic waste generator that self-hauls organic waste is
not required to record or report information in division (C) of this section.
(Ord. 2022-07, passed 6-7-2022)
§ 7.17.120 Inspections and investigations by city.
   (A)   City representatives are authorized to conduct inspections and
investigations, at random or otherwise, of any collection container, collection
vehicle loads, or transfer, processing, or disposal facility for materials
collected from generators, or source separated materials to confirm compliance
with this chapter by organic waste generators, commercial businesses (including
multifamily residential dwellings), property owners, commercial edible food
generators, haulers, self-haulers, food recovery services, and food recovery
organizations, subject to applicable laws. This section does not allow the city
to enter the interior of a private residential property for inspection.
   (B)   Regulated entity shall provide or arrange for access during all
inspections (with the exception of residential property interiors) and shall
cooperate with the city or its designee during such inspections and
investigations. Such inspections and investigations may include confirmation of
proper placement of materials in containers, edible food recovery activities,
records, or any other requirement of this chapter described herein. Failure to
provide or arrange for:
      (1)   Access to an entity's premises; or
      (2)   Access to records for any inspection or investigation is a
violation of this chapter and may result in penalties described.
   (C)   Any records obtained by a city during its inspections, and other
reviews shall be subject to the requirements and applicable disclosure
exemptions of the Public Records Act as set forth in Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 6250 et
seq.
   (D)   City representatives are authorized to conduct any inspections, or
other investigations as reasonably necessary to further the goals of this
chapter, subject to applicable laws.
   (E)   City shall receive written complaints from persons regarding an entity
that may be potentially non-compliant with SB 1383 regulations, including
receipt of anonymous complaints.
(Ord. 2022-07, passed 6-7-2022)
§ 7.17.130 Enforcement.
   (A)   Violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute grounds
for issuance of a notice of violation and assessment of a fine by a city
enforcement official or representative. Enforcement actions under this chapter
are issuance of an administrative citation and assessment of a fine. Fines will
follow the schedule for infractions as defined in § 1.04.030 subject to any
minimum fine amounts set forth in the SB 1383 regulations. The city's
procedures on imposition of administrative fines are hereby incorporated in
their entirety, as modified from time to time, and shall govern the imposition,
enforcement, collection, and review of administrative citations issued to
enforce this chapter and any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this
chapter, except as otherwise indicated in this chapter.
   (B)   Other remedies allowed by law may be used, including civil action or
prosecution as misdemeanor or infraction. City may pursue civil actions in the
California courts to seek recovery of unpaid administrative citations. City may
choose to delay court action until such time as a sufficiently large number of
violations, or cumulative size of violations exist such that court action is a
reasonable use of city staff and resources.
   (C)   Responsible entity for enforcement.
      (1)   Enforcement pursuant to this chapter may be undertaken by the city
enforcement official.
   (D)   Process for enforcement.
      (1)   City enforcement officials will monitor compliance with this
chapter randomly and through compliance reviews, route reviews, investigation
of complaints, and an inspection program. §
7.17.120 establishes city's right to conduct inspections and investigations.
      (2)   City may issue an official notification to notify regulated
entities of its obligations under this chapter.
      (3)   City shall issue a notice of violation requiring compliance within
60 days of issuance of the notice.
      (4)   Absent compliance by the respondent within the deadline set forth
in the notice of violation, city shall commence an action to impose penalties,
via an administrative citation and fine, pursuant to §
7.17.130. All applicable appeals and collection procedures shall apply.
Moreover, during any appeal, the decision-maker shall consider any applicable
factors required by regulation of CalRecycle.
   (E)   Penalty amounts for types of violations. The penalty levels are as
follows:
      (1)   For a first violation, the amount of the base penalty shall be $50
per violation.
      (2)   For a second violation, the amount of the base penalty shall be
$100 per violation.
      (3)   For a third or subsequent violation, the amount of the base penalty
shall be $250 per violation.
   (F)   Compliance deadline extension considerations. The city may extend the
compliance deadlines set forth in a notice of violation issued in accordance
with this section if it finds that there are extenuating circumstances beyond
the control of the respondent that make compliance within the deadlines
impracticable, including the following:
      (1)   Acts of God such as earthquakes, wildfires, flooding, and other
emergencies or natural disasters;
      (2)   Delays in obtaining discretionary permits or other government
agency approvals; or
      (3)   Deficiencies in organic waste recycling infrastructure or edible
food recovery capacity and the city is under a corrective action plan with
CalRecycle pursuant to 14 CCR § 18996.2 due to those deficiencies.
   (G)   Education period for noncompliance. Beginning immediately and through
December 31, 2023, the city will conduct inspections, route reviews or waste
evaluations, and compliance reviews, depending upon the type of regulated
entity, to determine compliance, and if the city determines that organic waste
generator, selfhauler, hauler, tier one commercial edible food generator, food
recovery organization, food recovery service, or other entity is not in
compliance, it shall provide educational materials to the entity describing its
obligations under this chapter and a notice that compliance is required by
January 1, 2023, and that violations may be subject to administrative civil
penalties starting on January 1, 2024.
   (H)   Civil penalties for non-compliance. Beginning January 1, 2024, if the
city determines that an organic waste generator, self-hauler, hauler, tier one
or tier two commercial edible food generator, food recovery organization, food
recovery service, or other entity is not in compliance with this chapter, it
shall document the noncompliance or violation, issue a notice of violation, and
take enforcement action pursuant to this section, as needed.
   (I)   Applicability of chapter. This chapter shall be interpreted consistent
with the city's regulatory authority and shall only apply to local education
agencies and other state or federal entities to the extent permitted by law,
including SB 1383.
(Ord. 2022-07, passed 6-7-2022)
CHAPTER 7.18: RECYCLING AND DIVERSION OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS
Section
   
7.18.010   Purpose.
   
7.18.020   Definitions.
   
7.18.030   Deconstruction and salvage and recovery.
   
7.18.040   Diversion requirements.
   
7.18.050   Projects exempt from this chapter.
   
7.18.060   Submission and required contents of C&D Debris Recycling and Reuse
Plan.
   
7.18.070   Evidence of compliance with C&D Debris Recycling and Reuse Plan.
   
7.18.080   Diversion requirement exemption.
   
7.18.090   On-site practices.
   
7.18.100   Reporting.
   
7.18.110   Enforcement.
   
7.18.120   Violations and penalties.
   
7.18.130   Appeal.
§ 7.18.010   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to increase the recycling and reuse of
construction and demolition (C&D) debris, consistent with the goals of the
California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989.
(Ord. 05-1995, passed 12-20-2005; Ord. 18-05, passed 9-18-2018)
§ 7.18.020   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings unless the context otherwise requires.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure containing no kitchen or bathroom and
located upon the same lot or parcel as the principal use or structure to which
it is an accessory. The structure is customary, incidental and subordinate to
the use of the principal building or the principal use of the land. All
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES shall be constructed with, or subsequent to, the
construction of the principal structure or activation of the principal use.
   APPLICANT. Any individual, firm, limited liability company, association,
partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry,
public or private corporation, or any other entity whatsoever who applies to
the city for the applicable permits to undertake any construction, demolition
or renovation project within the city, as defined in this chapter, and who is,
therefore, responsible for meeting the requirements of this chapter.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The officer or other designated authority charged with
the administration and enforcement of this chapter, or the Building Official’s
duly authorized representative.
   CONSTRUCTION. All building, landscaping, remodeling, including the addition,
removal or destruction of buildings and landscaping.
   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS.
      (1)   Used or commonly discarded materials generally considered to be not
water soluble and non-hazardous in nature, including but are not limited to,
steel, copper, aluminum, glass, brick, concrete, asphalt material, pipe,
gypsum, wallboard and lumber from the construction or destruction of a
structure as part of a construction or demolition project or from the
renovation of a structure and/or landscaping, including rocks, soils, tree
remains, trees, and other vegetative matter that normally results from land
clearing, landscaping and development operations for a construction project; or
      (2)   Remnants of new materials, including but are not limited to,
cardboard, paper, plastic, wood and metal scraps from any construction,
demolition and/or landscape project.
   CONTRACTOR. Any person or entity holding, or required to hold, a
contractor’s license of any type under the laws of the State of California, or
who performs (whether as contractor, subcontractor, owner-builder, or
otherwise) any construction, demolition, remodeling, renovation or landscaping
service relating to buildings or accessory structures in the City of Tulare.
   COVERED PROJECT. Projects subject to California Green Building Standards
code construction and demolition waste diversion requirements, or any project
which consists of one or more of the following:
      (1)   Demolition projects that are 500 square feet or greater;
      (2)   Any project involving renovation of a kitchen and/or bath facility
irrespective of total square footage or value;
      (3)   The renovation, remodel or addition to an existing residential
structure that is equal to or greater than 500 square feet and/or projects that
exceed $20,000;
      (3)   The renovation, remodel or addition to an existing commercial or
multi-family residential structure that is equal to or greater than 1,000
square feet and/or projects that exceed $20,000;
      (4)   Residential development and any new residential structure that is
equal to or greater than 1,000 square feet and/or projects that exceed $20,000;
      (5)   Commercial or multi-family residential development, and any new
structure that is equal to or greater than 1,000 square feet and/or projects
that exceed $20,000;
      (6)   All city sponsored construction, demolition and renovation projects
that are equal to or greater than 1,000 square feet; and
      (7)   All city public works and construction projects which are awarded
pursuant to the competitive bid procedures.
   DECONSTRUCTION. A process to dismantle or remove useable materials from
structures, in a manner which maximizes the recovery of building materials for
reuse and recycling and minimizes the amount of waste transported for disposal
in landfills and transformation facilities.
   DEMOLITION. The deconstructing, razing, ruining, tearing down or wrecking of
any structure, wall, fence or paving, whether in whole or in part, whether
interior or exterior. DEMOLITION needs to be done by a contractor or owner-
builder.
   DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE AND REUSABLE MATERIALS.
   (1)   Inert solids, asphalt and masonry building materials generally used in
construction including, but are not limited to, concrete, rock, stone and
brick.
   (2)   Wood materials including any and all dimensional lumber, fencing or
construction wood that is not chemically treated, creosoted, CCA pressure
treated, contaminated or painted.
   (3)   Vegetative materials including trees, tree parts, shrubs, stumps,
logs, brush or any other type of plants that are cleared from a site for
construction or other use. The following materials are excluded as the
materials are not recyclable and should be landfilled: bamboo, palm fronds and
yucca.
   (4)   Metals including all metal scrap such as, but are not limited to,
pipes, siding, window frames, door frames and fences.
   (5)   Roofing materials including wood shingles and shakes as well as
asphalt, stone and slate based roofing material.
   (6)   Salvageable materials and structures including, but are not limited
to, doors, windows, fixtures, hardwood flooring, sinks, bathtubs and
appliances.
   (7)   Any other materials that the Building Official determines can be
diverted due to the identification of a recycling facility, reuse facility or
market accessible from the city.
   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. The Public Works Director of the City of Tulare or
his or her designee.
   DIVERT and DIVERSION. To use material for any lawful purpose other than
disposal in a landfill, transformation facility or alternative daily cover.
Methods to divert materials from landfills include reuse, salvage and
recycling. DIVERSION does not include illegal dumping.
   EMERGENCY DEMOLITION. An emergency demolition can be performed only when a
facility is determined to be structurally unsound and in danger of imminent
collapse and a state or local government agency has issued an immediate
demolition order. The order for emergency demolition only applies to the part
of the building that is unsound; attached buildings may not be demolished under
this order and must be treated as a regular demolition.
   FACILITIES. Recycling, salvage and reuse establishments and landfills.
   INERT SOLIDS. Includes asphalt, concrete, rock, stone, brick, sand, soil and
fines.
   NON-COVERED PROJECTS. Construction, demolition and renovation projects
within the city that do not meet the established thresholds for covered
projects.
   OWNER-BUILDER. See CONTRACTOR.
   PERMIT. An official document or certificate issued by the Building Official
authorizing performance of a specified activity.
   PROJECT. Any activity involving construction, demolition or renovation, and
which requires issuance of a permit from the City of Tulare.
   RECYCLABLES. Materials which would otherwise become solid waste but which
are capable of or suitable for recycling.
   RECYCLING. The process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating and
reconstituting or converting construction and demolition debris that would
otherwise become solid waste, and returning them to the economic mainstream in
the form of raw materials for new, reused or reconstituted products which meet
the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace or in the form of
useable energy. RECYCLING does not include transformation.
   RECYCLING AND REUSE PLAN. A form provided by the city for the purpose of
compliance with this chapter that must be submitted by the applicant for any
covered project.
   RENOVATION. Any change, addition or modification to an existing structure.
   REUSE. Further or repeated use of construction and demolition debris.
   SALVAGE. The controlled removal of materials from a covered project for the
purpose of recycling, reuse or storage for later reuse.
   SOURCE SEPARATED. Recyclables that have been segregated from solid waste by
or for the generator thereof on the premises at which they were generated for
handling different from that of solid waste.
   STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any
kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined
together in some definite manner.
(Ord. 05-1995, passed 12-20-2005; Ord. 18-05, passed 9-18-2018)
§ 7.18.030   Deconstruction and salvage and recovery.
   Recovered and salvaged designated recyclable and reusable materials from the
deconstruction phase shall be counted towards the diversion requirements of
this chapter.
(Ord. 05-1995, passed 12-20-2005; Ord. 18-05, passed 9-18-2018)
§ 7.18.040   Diversion requirements.
   (A)   One hundred percent of inert solids and at least 50% by weight of the
remaining construction and demolition debris resulting from the project shall
be diverted to an approved facility or by salvage. The project’s overall
diversion rate must meet California Green Building Standards Code minimum
requirements for construction and demolition waste diversion.
   (B)   For each covered project, the diversion requirements of this chapter
shall be met by submitting and following a C&D Debris Recycling and Reuse Plan
that includes the following:
      (1)   Deconstructing and salvaging all or part of the structure as
practicable;
      (2)   Directing 100% of inert solids to reuse or recycling facilities
approved by the city, and
      (3)   Source separating non-inert materials, such as cardboard and paper,
wood, metals, organic materials, new gypsum wallboard, tile, porcelain
fixtures, and other easily recycled materials, and directing them to recycling
facilities approved by the city and taking the remainder (but no more than 50%
by weight) to a facility for disposal.
   (C)   The applicant for any covered project shall make reasonable efforts to
ensure that all construction and demolition waste diverted or landfilled are
measured and recorded using the most accurate method of measurement available.
To the extent practical, all construction and demolition debris shall be
weighed by measurement on scales that are in compliance with all regulatory
requirements for accuracy and maintenance.
   (D)   Although it may not be an explicit condition of the building permit,
contractors working on non-covered projects are encouraged to divert material
from construction and demolition projects to the maximum extent practicable in
accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 05-1995, passed 12-20-2005; Ord. 18-05, passed 9-18-2018)
§ 7.18.050   Projects exempt from this chapter.
   (A)   Emergency demolition required to protect the public health, safety or
welfare.
   (B)   City-sponsored demolition of a substandard structure or construction
required to protect public health or safety in an emergency.
   (C)   Projects in any single-family residential district, which consist
solely of a swimming pool.
   (D)   Projects for which only a plumbing permit, electrical penult or
mechanical permit is required.
   (E)   A project for which a valid building permit has been lawfully issued
by the city prior to the effective date of this chapter.
   (F)   A project of city public construction for which the notice inviting
bids has been published prior to the effective date of this chapter.
(Ord. 05-1995, passed 12-20-2005; Ord. 18-05, passed 9-18-2018)
§ 7.18.060   Submission and required contents of C&d Debris Recycling and Reuse
Plan.
   (A)   Prior to issuance of permit, every applicant for building or
demolition permits involving any covered project shall complete and submit a
properly completed C&D Debris Recycling and Reuse Plan to the Building
Official, unless an C&D Debris Recycling and Reuse Plan for the project is
already on file with the Public Works Department, and within 30 days following
project completion.
   (B)   A C&D Debris Recycling and Reuse Plan must contain all of the
following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the person applying for the permit.
      (2)   Unless waived by the Building Official or designee, evidence that
the owner or owners of the subject property acknowledge that they are aware of
and understand that a violation of any provision of this chapter may result in
the imposition of penalties and that any unpaid penalties imposed may be
declared a lien on the subject property.
      (3)   A description of the project, including location, scope, required
permit(s) and estimated timeline for completion of the project.
      (4)   The intended salvage, reuse and recycling facilities, chosen from a
list of facilities approved by the city, to use, collect or receive all
construction and/or demolition debris from the project.
      (5)   The names and addresses of all vendors and facilities proposed to
be used to collect, receive, dispose, recycle, reuse or salvage the project C&D
debris.
   (6)   The recycling or reuse percentage rate, as applicable, of each vendor
and facility proposed to be used to recycle or reuse the project C&D debris.
(Ord. 05-1995, passed 12-20-2005; Ord. 18-05, passed 9-18-2018)
§ 7.18.070   Evidence of compliance with C&d Debris Recycling and Reuse Plan.
   (A)   A C&D Debris Recycling and Reuse Plan shall be approved or denied no
later than 30 days after a complete application is made.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no permit shall
be issued for any covered project unless and until the C&D Debris Recycling and
Reuse Plan has been approved.
      (1)   All of the information has been remitted on the C&D Debris
Recycling and Reuse Plan.
      (2)   The C&D Debris Recycling and Reuse Plan establishes a mechanism
such that the diversion requirement shall be met.
   (C)   If the Public Works Director determines that the C&D Debris Recycling
and Reuse Plan application is incomplete or fails to indicate that 100% of
inert solids and at least 50% by weight of all construction and demolition
debris generated by the project will be reused or recycled, he or she shall
either:
      (1)   Return the C&D Debris Recycling and Reuse Plan application to the
Building Official marked “Denied,” including a statement of reasons, which
shall then immediately stop processing the building or demolition permit
application; or
      (2)   Return the C&D Debris Recycling and Reuse Plan to the Building
Official marked “Further Explanation Required.”
   (D)   Within 30 days following project completion, a final compliance report
containing the following information and documentation must be submitted to the
Building Official, listing every vendor or facility that collected, transported
or received any C&D debris.
      (1)   Copies of receipts from every vendor or facility that collected,
transported or received any project C&D debris. Each receipt must specify the
weight of any project C&D debris handled by the vendor or facility and must
clearly demonstrate that all such C&D debris originated from the project site.
      (2)   A calculation of the actual percentage, determined by weight, of
project C&D debris that was recycled or reused for each vendor or facility that
collected, transported or received material.
      (3)   A description of the manner in which the project C&D debris was
recycled or reused and the name and address of all vendors and facilities
employed in the recycling or reuse of project C&D debris, including the
recycling or reuse rate of each vendor or facility, as applicable.
   (E)   Failure to accurately account for and submit the required
documentation for all project C&D debris in the final compliance report
constitutes a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 05-1995, passed 12-20-2005; Ord. 18-05, passed 9-18-2018)
§ 7.18.080   Diversion requirement exemption.
   (A)   Application. If an applicant for a covered project experiences
circumstances that the applicant believes make it infeasible to comply with
established diversion requirements, the applicant may request, in writing, an
exemption from one or all of the waste diversion requirements during the
building permit process.
   (B)   Meeting with Public Works Director. The Public Works Director, or
designee, shall review all exemption request information supplied by the
applicant and may meet with the applicant to assess alternative ways of meeting
waste diversion requirements. Based on the information supplied by the
applicant, the Public Works Director, or designee, shall determine whether it
is possible for the applicant to meet any or all of the diversion requirements
of the project.
   (C)   Granting of exemption. If it is determined that it is infeasible for
the applicant to meet all of the diversion requirements specified herein, the
Public Works Director, or designee, shall determine alternate permit conditions
and the Building Official will inform the applicant, in writing, of any such
alternative requirements.
(Ord. 05-1995, passed 12-20-2005; Ord. 18-05, passed 9-18-2018)
§ 7.18.090   On-site practices.
   During the term of the covered project, the applicant shall according to the
applicant’s C&D Debris Recycling and Reuse Plan recycle, reuse or divert the
required percentages of waste, and keep records of the tonnage. To the maximum
extent feasible, project waste shall be source separated on-site to increase
diversion.
(Ord. 05-1995, passed 12-20-2005; Ord. 18-05, passed 9-18-2018)
§ 7.18.100   Reporting.
   (A)   Progress reports during construction may be required.
   (B)   All documentation is subject to verification by the city.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to submit documentation to the city
under this chapter which that person knows to contain any false statements,
including but not limited to, false statements regarding tonnage of materials
recycled or diverted.
(Ord. 05-1995, passed 12-20-2005; Ord. 18-05, passed 9-18-2018)
§ 7.18.110   Enforcement.
   The Public Works Director or his or her designee shall administer this
chapter and shall enforce the requirements of this chapter, including but not
limited to, the authority to order that work be stopped where any work is being
done contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 05-1995, passed 12-20-2005; Ord. 18-05, passed 9-18-2018)
§ 7.18.120   Violations and penalties.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in §
1.12.010 of this Municipal Code. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a
separate offense for each and every day, or portion thereof, during which any
violation of any such provision of this chapter is committed, permitted or
continued by such person, and shall be punishable therefore as provided herein
above.
(Ord. 05-1995, passed 12-20-2005; Ord. 18-05, passed 9-18-2018)
§ 7.18.130   Appeal.
   (A)   Except as herein provided, all appeals of decisions made by the
Building Official or the Public Works Director, or designee, on matters set
forth in this chapter may be appealed by filing a letter with the City Clerk no
later than ten days after the day on which the decision was made. The appeal
shall state the name of the person making the appeal, the decision that is
being appealed and the reasons for the appeal, including an error, abuse of
discretion or a decision that is not supported by the evidence in the record.
The filing of an appeal shall have the effect of staying the issuance of any
permit or procedure until such time as the matter on appeal is resolved.
   (B)   Within ten calendar days after the date on which written notice of the
decision is mailed or delivered to the owner, applicant or other interested
party, the owner, applicant, other interested party or his authorized designee
may appeal to the Board of Public Utilities Commissioners for review of the
decision. The decision shall be final unless such an appeal is filed within ten
calendar days of the mailing or delivery of notices to the applicant.
(Ord. 05-1995, passed 12-20-2005; Ord. 18-05, passed 9-18-2018)
CHAPTER 7.19: SHARPS WASTE MANAGEMENT
Section
   
7.19.010   Purpose.
   
7.19.020   Definitions.
   
7.19.030   Sharps management.
   
7.19.040   Enforcement.
   
7.19.050   Severance clause.
   
7.19.060   Effect of headings in chapter.
§ 7.19.010 Purpose.
   The Tulare City Council finds and declares all of the following purposes for
this chapter:
   (A)   To achieve the mandates imposed by the Integrated Waste Management Act
of 1989 (AB 939) on a regional basis;
   (B)   To enact a comprehensive and innovative system for the proper and
legal management of home-generated sharps waste, as defined in §
7.19.020, in the City of Tulare in accordance with Section 118286 of the Cal.
Health and Safety Code;
   (C)   To enact a law that establishes a program that is convenient for
consumers and the public to return and ensure the safe and environmentally
sound disposal of home-generated sharps waste, and to provide a "no-cost"
system for consumers for the return of home-generated sharps waste;
   (D)   To assure that the costs associated with the handling and disposal of
home-generated sharps waste are the responsibility of the producers and
retailers of home-generated sharps waste, and not local governments or their
service providers, state or local government, or taxpayers;
   (E)   To reduce the likelihood of the illegal disposal of home-generated
sharps waste;
   (F)   To ensure that all costs associated with the proper management of
home-generated sharps waste are internalized by the producers and retailers of
home-generated sharps waste at or before the point of purchase, and not at the
point of discard;
   (G)   To assure that manufacturers and retailers of sharps, while working to
achieve the goals and objectives of this chapter, shall have the flexibility to
partner with each other, with governmental programs, and with private and
nonprofit business enterprises that provide collection and processing services,
to develop and promote a safe and effective home-generated sharps waste
management system; and
   (H)   To provide for the safe and convenient collection and disposal of 100%
of the home-generated sharps waste discarded in the City of Tulare at no cost
to the consumer and to comply with the requirements pursuant to State Health
and Safety Code prohibiting the disposal of home-generated sharps waste in
trash, recycling, yard waste, or landfills as of February 1, 2014.
(Ord. 13-08, passed 1-21-2014)
§ 7.19.020 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings unless the context otherwise requires.
   CONSUMER. An individual who has purchased sharps for personal use for humans
or animals.
   DISTRIBUTOR. A person who sells sharps to a retailer.
   HOME-GENERATED. All sharps as defined below derived from a household,
including a multifamily residence, or a single family residence.
   PROPER DISPOSAL OF HOME-GENERATED SHARPS WASTE. Disposal in compliance with
the applicable provisions of the California Health and Safety Code by means of
an approved/certified medical waste disposal company.
   RECEPTACLE. A rigid puncture-resistant container with a sealable lid
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for the purpose of
transporting sharps for disposal.
   RETAILER. Any entity, including but not limited to, a person or business, of
whatever form of organization, which sells to the general public sharps in the
area to a consumer, including a manufacturer of sharps who sells sharps
directly to a consumer.
   SHARPS. Hypodermic needles, pen needles, intravenous needles, lancets, and
other devices that are used to penetrate the skin for the delivery of
medications, to humans or animals.
   TULARE AREA. The geographic area that includes the boundaries of the City of
Tulare, California.
(Ord. 13-08, passed 1-21-2014)
§ 7.19.030 Sharps Management.
   (A)   By February 1, 2014, every retailer of sharps sold in the City of
Tulare shall establish within the retail outlet a system for the acceptance and
collection of home-generated sharps waste for proper disposal.
   (B)   Each system established by a retailer for the acceptance and
collection of home-generated sharps waste during the retailer's normal hours of
operation, for proper disposal shall, at a minimum, include all of the
following elements:
      (1)   A convenient location within the retail establishment for the
"take-back" from the consumer of home-generated sharps waste at no cost to that
consumer.
      (2)   Appropriate signage, prominently displayed within 5 feet of any
entrance to the retail establishment and easily visible to the consumer,
indicating that the retail establishment accepts and collects home-generated
sharps waste from consumers.
      (3)   An appropriate receptacle or receptacles for the collection of
home-generated sharps waste within the retail establishment. The retailer shall
assure that all home-generated sharps waste is placed in the receptacle(s).
      (4)   Assurance that the collected home-generated sharps wastes are
disposed within the time period established by applicable state law, as
determined, from time to time by the Tulare County Environmental Health Service
Department, acting as the Local Enforcement Agency.
      (5)   Comply with all applicable provisions of the California Medical
Waste Management Act, Health and Safety Code Sections 117600 et seq.
   (C)   A retailer who is required to accept home-generated sharps waste shall
at a minimum provide the following take back services:
      (1)   The take-back from the consumer of home-generated sharps waste that
the retailer sold or previously sold to the consumer, at no cost to that
consumer. In that event, the retailer may require proof of purchase of the
prior sales. The retailer shall only be required to accept home-generated
sharps waste in an amount not to exceed the amount previously sold to the
consumer.
      (2)   The take-back of home-generated sharps waste from a consumer
purchasing sharps from the retailer, at no cost to the consumer. In that event,
the retailer shall only be required to accept home-generated sharps waste in an
amount not to exceed the amount being purchased.
      (3)   The take-back from the consumer of home-generated sharps waste that
the retailer did not sell or previously sell to the consumer, at no cost to
that consumer. The retailer shall only be required to accept home-generated
sharps waste in an amount not to exceed the equivalent of one 2 quart-size
sharps container per week per consumer from any consumer who resides in the
City of Tulare area.
(Ord. 13-08, passed 1-21-2014)
§ 7.19.040 Enforcement.
   (A)   The city may enforce the provisions of this chapter through a civil
action for civil penalties in the amounts established herein, and any other
civil remedy, including prohibitory and mandatory injunctive relief, filed in
the Superior Court for the County of Tulare to compel and enforce the
provisions herein against any retailer within the city who sells sharps in
violation of this chapter. In addition to any relief available to enforce this
chapter, the city shall also be entitled to recover its reasonable attorneys'
fees and costs incurred in enforcing this chapter.
   (B)   For any violation of this chapter, the city may sue to recover civil
penalties in the amount of $1,000.00 per day for every day on which a violation
exists. For purposes of calculating the civil penalties to be established
hereunder, each day on which the retailer fails to comply with the requirements
of this chapter, after having received a written notice of violation issued by
the city, shall constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   In addition to the civil relief available to the city as set forth
above, any violation of this city chapter shall also constitute a criminal
offense punishable under the laws of the State of California. The District
Attorney, the County Counsel, or any City Attorney shall be authorized to
enforce the provisions of this chapter within their respective jurisdictions
and shall have the authority to determine whether to prosecute the matter as a
misdemeanor, or to elect for good cause to reduce the charge to an infraction.
In the event of such criminal enforcement, the following criminal penalties
apply to violations of this chapter:
      (1)   Penalty for misdemeanor. Any retailer found to be in violation of
any provision of this chapter, or who fails to comply with any of its
requirements, shall upon conviction thereof be punished by imprisonment in the
county jail for not more than six months, or be fined not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by both. Each day such violation continues
shall be considered a separate offense.
      (2)   Penalty for an infraction. Any retailer found to be in violation of
any provision of this chapter, or who fails to comply with any of its
requirements, shall upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine of not more
than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Each day such violation continues
shall be considered a separate offense.
   (D)   To the extent that the city has adopted a code enforcement ordinance
applicable to its jurisdiction, this chapter shall be enforceable under that
ordinance as land-use- or code-enforcement violations consistent with that
ordinance.
(Ord. 13-08, passed 1-21-2014)
§ 7.19.050 Severance Clause.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is
for any reason held to be unconstitutional, ineffective or in any manner in
conflict with the laws of the United States, or the State of California, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this
chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof,
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsection, sentence,
clause or phrase be declared unconstitutional, ineffective, or in any manner in
conflict with the laws of the United States or the State of California.
(Ord. 13-08, passed 1-21-2014)
§ 7.19.060 Effect of Headings in Chapter.
   Title, division, part, chapter, article, and section headings contained
herein do not in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 13-08, passed 1-21-2014)
CHAPTER 7.20: SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
Section
   
7.20.010   Purpose.
   
7.20.020   Abbreviations and definitions.
   
7.20.030   Administration—Officers responsible.
   
7.20.040   Right of entry—Inspection and sampling.
   
7.20.050   Search warrants.
   
7.20.060   Dangerous and insanitary condition.
   
7.20.070   Dangerous and insanitary condition—Declared a public nuisance.
   
7.20.080   Abatement.
   
7.20.090   Hearing on abatement costs.
   
7.20.100   Confirmation of costs.
   
7.20.110   Collection of assessment.
   
7.20.120   General requirements before installing sewers.
   
7.20.130   Disposal of wastes.
   
7.20.140   Damage to drainage system or public sewer.
   
7.20.150   Septic tank—Unlawful use.
   
7.20.160   Duty to connect to municipal sewer.
   
7.20.170   Sewer connection required.
   
7.20.180   Septic tank—Construction and connections.
   
7.20.190   Permit required.
   
7.20.200   Application for permit.
   
7.20.210   To whom permits may be issued.
   
7.20.220   Unlawful acts under permit.
   
7.20.230   Expiration of permit.
   
7.20.240   All work to be inspected.
   
7.20.250   Notification.
   
7.20.260   Excavations.
   
7.20.270   Minimum standards.
   
7.20.280   Markings.
   
7.20.290   Piping and fittings.
   
7.20.300   Approved materials and methods.
   
7.20.310   Workmanship.
   
7.20.320   New materials and methods of construction.
   
7.20.330   Building court main sewer.
   
7.20.340   Separate sewers.
   
7.20.350   Use of existing sewers.
   
7.20.360   Size and slope—Building sewer.
   
7.20.370   Elevation—Building sewer.
   
7.20.380   Exception.
   
7.20.390   Sewage lift.
   
7.20.400   Building sewer connection to public sewer.
   
7.20.410   Building sewer maintenance.
   
7.20.420   Backwater protection.
   
7.20.430   Types of drain waters prohibited into sewers.
   
7.20.440   Drainage disposition.
   
7.20.450   Protection from damage or misuse.
   
7.20.460   Swimming pools.
   
7.20.470   Prohibited discharge standards.
   
7.20.480   Specific wastewater limitations.
   
7.20.490   Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
   
7.20.495   Fats, oils, and grease (FOG) control program ordinance.
   
7.20.500   Timing.
   
7.20.510   Signatories and certification.
   
7.20.520   Reporting requirements for industrial users subject to categorical
pretreatment.
   
7.20.530   Reporting requirements for significant industrial users not subject
to categorical pretreatment standards.
   
7.20.540   Notification of violation— Resampling requirements.
   
7.20.550   Notification of potential problems, including slug discharge.
   
7.20.560   Notification of changes.
   
7.20.570   Notification of discharge of hazardous wastes.
   
7.20.580   Compliance schedules.
   
7.20.590   Record keeping.
   
7.20.600   Pretreatment facilities.
   
7.20.610   Additional pretreatment measures.
   
7.20.620   Control manholes.
   
7.20.630   Sewage sampling, analysis and flow measurement.
   
7.20.640   Federal categorical pretreatment standards.
   
7.20.650   Dilution prohibited.
   
7.20.660   Salinity control plan.
   
7.20.670   Accidental discharge—Slug control plan.
   
7.20.680   Tenant responsibility.
   
7.20.690   Hauled wastewater.
   
7.20.700   Wastewater survey.
   
7.20.710   Wastewater discharge permit requirement.
   
7.20.720   Mandatory permits.
   
7.20.730   Industrial wastewater discharge permit categories.
   
7.20.740   Wastewater discharge permit application.
   
7.20.750   Wastewater discharge permit contents.
   
7.20.760   Wastewater discharge permit appeals.
   
7.20.770   Wastewater discharge permit modifications.
   
7.20.780   Wastewater discharge permit transfer.
   
7.20.790   Wastewater discharge permit revocation.
   
7.20.800   Wastewater discharge permit reissuance.
   
7.20.810   Confidential information.
   
7.20.820   Publication of industrial users in significant noncompliance.
   
7.20.830   Violation—Penalty.
   
7.20.840   Notification of violation.
   
7.20.850   Consent order.
   
7.20.860   Show cause hearing.
   
7.20.870   Compliance order.
   
7.20.880   Cease and desist order.
   
7.20.890   Administrative fines.
   
7.20.900   Appeals.
   
7.20.910   Emergency suspensions.
   
7.20.920   Termination of discharge permit.
   
7.20.930   Injunctive relief.
   
7.20.940   Civil penalties.
   
7.20.950   Criminal prosecution.
   
7.20.960   Remedies nonexclusive.
   
7.20.970   Pretreatment charges and fees.
   
7.20.980   Monthly sewer service fees.
   
7.20.990   Sewer service fee—Billing.
   
7.20.1000   Persons responsible for payment.
   
7.20.1010   Effective date of sewer service fees.
   
7.20.1015   Actions to collect.
   
7.20.1020   Sewer service fee—Lien.
   
7.20.1030   Disconnection of service.
   
7.20.1040   Extension of sewer main facilities.
   
7.20.1050   Parcel frontage extension for sewer mains.
   
7.20.1060   Minimum size of sewer main.
   
7.20.1070   Applicant to file surety bond.
   
7.20.1080   Sewer main extension facilities— Bill of sale.
   
7.20.1090   Front foot and lateral fees—Sewer main extensions.
   
7.20.1100   Benefit district procedures.
   
7.20.1110   Benefit district refunding.
   
7.20.1120   Benefit district charges to be prepaid.
   
7.20.1125   In-lieu sewer fees.
   
7.20.1126   Surplus.
   
7.20.1130   Oversize.
   
7.20.1140   Severability.
   
7.20.1150   Special agreements.
   
7.20.1160   Affirmative defense—Upset.
   
7.20.1170   Affirmative defense—Prohibited discharge standards.
   
7.20.1180   Affirmative defense—Bypass.
§ 7.20.010 Purpose.
   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for the direct and indirect use
of the Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) of the city in order to comply
with all applicable state and federal standards that are established in
accordance with the Clean Water Act of 1977, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq., as
amended, the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 C.F.R. part 403) and all
related and applicable federal regulations and grant conditions as they are now
constituted or as they may hereafter be amended or recodified. The objectives
of this chapter are:
   (A)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system;
   (B)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will
pass through the system inadequately treated or be incompatible with the
system;
   (C)   To ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant effluent
and sludge is maintained at a level in compliance with state and federal
regulations;
   (D)   To protect city personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge
in the course of their employment and to protect the general public;
   (E)   To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and
sludge from the POTW; and
   (F)   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the costs of
construction and operation of the POTW.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.010) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.020 Abbreviations and definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them.
   ABBREVIATIONS. The following abbreviations shall have the designated
meanings:
   (A)   BOD. Biochemical oxygen demand.
   (B)   CWA. Clean Water Act, as amended (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.).
   (C)   C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations.
   (D)   EPA. Environmental Protection Agency or any successor agency.
   (E)   mg/l. Milligrams per liter.
   (F)   POTW. Publicly Owned Treatment Works.
   (G)   RWQCB. California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Central Valley
Region or any successor agency.
   (H)   SWDA. Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.).
   (I)   U.S.C. United States Code.
   ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
Clean Water Act of 1977, as amended (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.).
   APPLICANT. Any person or group of persons who applies for the use of the
city’s POTW.
   APPROVAL AUTHORITY. California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Central
Valley Region, or any successor agency.
   APPROVED AUTHORITY. Acceptance by the General Manager as to material,
workmanship and type of construction as the results of investigations,
inspections or tests conducted by him or her, or by reason of accepted
principles or tests by the United States Bureau of Standards, American Society
for Testing Materials or other nationally recognized authorities.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE INDUSTRIAL USER.
   (A)   If the industrial user is a corporation:
      (1)   A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-
president, if the industrial user is a corporation;
      (2)   A manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating
facilities, provided, the manager is authorized to make management decisions
which govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the
explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations,
and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term
environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure
that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete
and accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and where
authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures.
   (B)   A general partner or proprietor, if the industrial user is a
partnership or proprietorship, respectively;
   (C)   A director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the
operation, if the industrial user is a federal, state or local government
facility; or
   (D)   A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above,
if the representative is responsible for the overall operation of the
facilities from which the indirect discharge originates.
   BACKWATER VALVE. Any check or other device to prevent the flow of sewage
from the public sewer into the building.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPs. Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement
the general prohibitions, specific prohibitions, and local limits listed in §§
7.20.470, 7.20.480, and 7.20.495 of this chapter. BMPs also include treatment
requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff,
spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials
storage.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD. The quantity of oxygen utilized in
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in
five days at 20°Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l).
   BOARD OF PUBLIC UTILITIES. The five Commissioners that control and manage
the Department of Public Utilities, as provided in the City Charter.
   BUILDING. Any structure erected for the support, shelter and enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind.
   BUILDING COURT. Two or more buildings containing four or more dwelling units
or two or more commercial and/or industrial buildings on premises or parcel
under one ownership and to remain under one ownership.
   BUILDING COURT HOUSE SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the
building court  main sewer, which shall be located within the building lot
boundaries.
   BUILDING COURT MAIN SEWER. The extension from the building court house sewer
to a public sewer or other place of disposal.
   BUILDING DRAIN. House drain.
   BUILDING SEWER. House sewer.
   BYPASS. The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an
industrial user’s pretreatment facility.
   CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER. All industrial users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards.
   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD. Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the United States, in accordance with § 307(b)
and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific category of
industrial users and which appear in 40 C.F.R. Ch. I, Subch. N, parts 405–471,
as may be amended.
   CESSPOOL. An excavation in the ground which receives the discharge of a
drainage system, or part thereof, so designed and constructed as to retain the
organic matter and solids discharged therein, but permitting the liquids to
seep through the bottom and sides.
   CITY. The City of Tulare or its designated representative.
   CITY ATTORNEY. The City Attorney of the City of Tulare.
   CITY BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Building Official for the City of Tulare.
   CLASS OF PREMISES. All types of residential, commercial or industrial
establishments connected to the city’s wastewater system will be classified
into similar classes of dischargers for the purpose of billing and regulations
by the City of Tulare’s Board of Public Utilities.
   COMPLIANCE DETERMINATION. The sampling and analysis conducted on specific
industrial wastes to ascertain compliance with any city code, ordinance or
resolution, or with any more stringent applicable federal or state pretreatment
standard.
   COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE. The period that is allowed by the city in which an
industrial user must  comply with its permit conditions or discharge
requirements.
   COMPOSITE SAMPLE. The sample resulting from the combination of individual
wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either
flow or time.
   COOLING WATER. The water that is discharged from any use, such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration or to which the only pollutant added is
heat.
   COUNTY. The County of Tulare or its designated representatives.
   COUNTY HEALTH OFFICER. The Health Officer for Tulare County.
   DAILY MAXIMUM. The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a
pollutant collected during a calendar day.
   DAILY MAXIMUM LIMIT. The maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant
during a calendar day. Where DAILY MAXIMUM LIMITS are expressed in units of
mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the
day. Where DAILY MAXIMUM LIMITS are expressed in terms of a concentration, the
daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant
concentration derived from all measurements taken that day.
   DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC UTILITIES. The Department of Public Utilities, as
defined in the City Charter.
   DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS. The Department of Public Works, as defined in
the City Charter.
   DOMESTIC WASTEWATER. The water-carried wastes produced from noncommercial or
nonindustrial activities and which result from normal human living processes.
   DRAINAGE SYSTEM or DRAINAGE PIPING. All the piping within public or private
premises which conveys sewage, or other liquid wastes, to a point of disposal,
but shall not include the mains or laterals of a public sewer system.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency  or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for
the Regional Water Management Division Director or other duly authorized
official of the agency.
   EXISTING FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT or EXISTING FSE. Any food service
establishment that has been in continuous operation since before the effective
date of this chapter under the same ownership.
   EXISTING SOURCE. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of
which commenced prior to the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment
standards which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter
promulgated in accordance with § 307 of the Act.
   FOG. Fats, oils, and grease.
   FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS or FSE. Any facility defined in California
Uniform Retail Food Service Establishments Law (CURFFL) § 113785, and any
commercial entity discharging into the city sewer system, operating in a
permanently constructed structure such as a room, building, or place, or
portion thereof, maintained, used, or operated for the purpose of storing,
preparing, serving, or manufacturing, packaging, or otherwise handling food for
sale to other entities, or for consumption by the public, its members or
employees, and which has any process or device that uses or produces FOG, or
grease vapors, steam, fumes, smoke or odors that are required to be removed by
a mechanical exhaust ventilation system, as required in CURFFL § 114296. A
limited food preparation establishment is not considered a FOOD SERVICE
ESTABLISHMENT when engaged only in reheating, hot holding or assembly of ready
to eat food products and as a result, there is no wastewater discharge
containing a significant amount of FOG. A limited food preparation
establishment does not include any operation that changes the form, flavor, or
consistency of food.
   GARBAGE. A putrescible animal, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetable refuse or any
part thereof resulting from the preparation, storage, handling, processing or
consumption of food.
   GENERAL MANAGER. The General Manager of the Department of Public Utilities
or his or her duly authorized representative as provided in § 52(e)(4) of the
City Charter.
   GRAB SAMPLE. Sample which is taken from a waste stream without regard to the
flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes.
   GREASE INTERCEPTOR. A multi- compartment device that is constructed in
different sizes and is generally required to be located, according to the
California Plumbing Code, underground between a FSE and the connection to the
sewer system. This device primarily uses gravity to separate FOG from the
wastewater as it moves from one compartment to the next. This device must be
cleaned, maintained, and have the FOG removed and disposed of in a proper
manner at regular intervals to be effective.
   GREASE REMOVAL DEVICE. Any grease interceptor, grease trap or other
mechanism, device, or process, which attaches to, or is applied to, wastewater
plumbing fixtures and lines, the purpose of which is to trap or collect or
treat FOG prior to it being discharged into the sewer system. GREASE REMOVAL
DEVICE may also include any other proven method to reduce FOG subject to
approval of the General Manager. A GREASE REMOVAL DEVICE is a form of
pretreatment and as such is subject to all regulations pertaining to the
installation and maintenance of pretreatment systems as recognized in this
chapter and in the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 C.F.R.§ 403).
   GREASE TRAP. A grease control device that is used to serve individual
fixtures and have limited effect and should only be used in those cases where
the use of a grease interceptor or other grease removal device is determined to
be impossible or impracticable.
   HOT SPOTS. Areas in sewer lines that have experienced sanitary sewer
overflows or that must be cleaned or maintained frequently to avoid blockages
of the sewer system.
   HOUSE DRAIN, BUILDING DRAIN or MAIN DRAIN. That part of lowest horizontal
piping of a  drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and/
or other drainage pipes of any building and conveys same to the house sewer,
and shall extend two feet beyond the outer face or edge of the building
foundation or footing.
   HOUSE SEWER, BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the house drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal, which is not less than two feet from
any building or structure foundation or footing.
   INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE. The discharge or introduction of pollutants
into the POTW from any nondomestic source that is regulated by the city,
including without limitation any source regulated under § 307(b), (c), or (d)
of the Act.
   INDUSTRIAL USER or USER. A source of indirect discharge.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. Any and all liquid or waterborne wastes from industrial
or commercial processes; as distinct from domestic sewage.
   INSANITARY. A condition which is contrary to sanitary principles or is
injurious to health. Conditions to which the word INSANITARY shall apply
include the following, but shall not be limited thereto:
   (A)   The discharge of sewage to the atmosphere or the ground surface
without proper treatment;
   (B)   Any opening in a drainage system, except where lawful, which would
permit the escape of gases or sewage or would permit persons to make physical
contact with the sewage;
   (C)   Faulty septic tanks or drain fields permitting sewage to seep or stand
on the surface of the ground; and
   (D)   Any connection, cross-connection, construction or condition, temporary
or permanent, which would permit or make possible by any means whatsoever for
any amount of sewage or polluted waters to enter a water distribution system
used for domestic purposes.
   INSTANTANEOUS LIMIT. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be
discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or
composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the
duration of the sampling event.
   INTERFERENCE. A discharge which, either alone or by interaction with other
discharges, inhibits or disrupts the system, its treatment processes or
operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal and is, therefore, a cause
of a violation of any requirement of the city’s water discharge requirements
issued by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, including
without limitation any increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation, or
of the prevention of the use or disposal by the city of sludge in accordance
with the following statutory provisions and regulations: § 405 of the Clean
Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (including Title II, more commonly
referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act and including state
regulations that are contained in any state sludge management plan that is
prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act), the Clean Air
Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act and the Marine Protection, Research and
Sanctuaries Act or 40 C.F.R. part 503 (sewage sludge regulations).
   LOCAL LIMIT. Any requirement or prohibition against pollutant discharges
from any nondomestic user, as established by the city, to address federal,
state and local regulations.
   LOT. A single or individual parcel or area of land legally recorded, on
which is situated a building together with the yards, courts and unoccupied
spaces legally required for the building and which is owned by or is in the
lawful possession of the owner of the building.
   MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
byproducts, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, fomites, etiologic agents,
contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory
wastes and dialysis wastes.
   MONTHLY AVERAGE. The sum of all daily discharges measured during a calendar
month divided by the number of daily discharges measured during that month.
   MONTHLY AVERAGE LIMIT. The highest allowable average of daily discharges
over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all daily discharges measured
during a calendar month divided by the  number of daily discharges measured
during that month.
   MUNICIPAL SEWER SYSTEM or THE SYSTEM. All public sewers heretofore or
hereafter constructed and/or owned by the city, including any device or systems
used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage
or industrial wastes and any conveyances which transport wastewater to the
sewage treatment plant.
   NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD. Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of
the Act, which applies to industrial users. This term includes prohibitive
discharge limits established pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 403.5.
   NEW FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT or NEW FSE. Any food service establishment
that starts operations after the effective date of the FOG Ordinance (§
7.20.495 of this chapter) regardless whether in a newly constructed building, a
remodeled building or using an existing building or space.
   NEW SOURCE.
   (A)   Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is
or may be a discharge, the construction of which commenced after the
publication of proposed pretreatment standards pursuant to § 307(c) of the Act
which will be applicable to the source if the pretreatment standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with the section provided that:
      (1)   The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at
a site at which no other source is located;
      (2)   The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces
the process or production equipment that causes a discharge at an existing
source; or
      (3)   The production of wastewater generating processes of the building,
structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an
existing source at the same site. In determining whether or not the new
building, structure, facility or installation is substantially independent from
the existing source, certain factors, including without limitation the extent
to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as
the existing source, should be considered.
   (B)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create
a new building, structure, facility or meeting the criteria of divisions (A)(2)
or (3) of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to the
existing process or production equipment.
   (C)   Construction of a NEW SOURCE, as defined under this definition, has
commenced if the owner or operator thereof has:
      (1)   Begun or caused to have begun, as a part of a program of continuous
on-site construction that includes:
         (a)   Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
         (b)   Significant site preparation work, including without limitation
the clearing, excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures,
facilities or installations, which is necessary for the placement, assembly or
installation of new source facilities or equipment.
      (2)   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of
facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in the operation within a
reasonable time. Options to purchase contracts that can be terminated or
modified without substantial loss and contracts for feasibility, engineering
and design studies do not constitute contractual obligation under this
paragraph.
   NONCONTACT COOLING WATER. Water used for cooling which does not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or
finished product.
   OIL INTERCEPTOR. A device for retaining oil by gravity-differential
separation from waste effluent, and of a design and capacity approved by the
General Manager.
   OUTSIDE SEWER. Sewer lines owned by the city lying outside the city limits.
   PASS THROUGH. A discharge that exits the POTW in quantities or
concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges
from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any  requirement of the city’s
waste discharge requirements including any increase in the magnitude or
duration of a violation.
   PERMIT. Any written authorization by the General Manager to install or
construct sewers or to connect to and discharge to the POTW pursuant to this or
any other regulation of the city.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state and local governmental
entities.
   pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in
standard units.
   PLUMBING CODE. The California Plumbing Code, as adopted in §
4.04.060 of this code.
   POLLUTANT. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical
wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharge
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural
wastes and certain characteristics of wastewater (including, but not limited
to, pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity or odor).
   POTW TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT. That portion of the POTW which is
designed to provide treatment (including recycling and reclamation) of sewage
and industrial waste.
   PREMISES. Any lot, piece or parcel of land, any building or other structure
or any part of any building or structure used or useful for human habitation or
gathering or for carrying on a business or occupation.
   PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants or the alteration of the nature of the pollutant properties in
wastewater prior to or in lieu of, discharging or otherwise introducing such
pollutants into the POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by
physical, chemical or biological processes; by process changes; or by other
means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by
an applicable pretreatment standard.
   PRETREATMENT FACILITY. Any works or device for the treatment or flow
limitation of sewage, liquid waste or industrial waste prior to its discharge
into the POTW.
   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENT. Any substantive or procedural requirement that is
related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard, that is imposed
upon an industrial user.
   PRETREATMENT STANDARD or STANDARDS. Prohibitive discharge standards,
categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.
   PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. Absolute
prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances which are identified
in this chapter.
   PUBLIC SEWER. Any sewer which is part of the POTW, including any sewer
within any street and any outside sewer.
   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW. A treatment works as defined by §
212 of the Act, which is owned by the city. This definition includes any
devices and systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and
reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes
sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to the POTW
treatment plant. The term also means the municipality as defined in § 502(4) of
the Act, which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the
discharges from such a treatment works.
   REGIONAL ADMINISTRATOR. Region IX of the Environmental Protection Agency or
any successor agency.
   SAND INTERCEPTOR. A device for retaining sand, grit or other mineral
material by gravity-differential separation from waste effluent, and of a
design and capacity approved by the General Manager.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage and wastewater, and to which
storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
   SANITARY SEWER OVERFLOW or SSO. An overflow from the sanitary sewer system
of domestic wastewater, as well as industrial and commercial wastewater.
   SEPTIC TANK. A watertight receptacle which receives the discharge of a
drainage system or part thereof, designed and constructed so as to retain
solids, digest organic matter through a period of detention, and allow the
liquids to discharge into the soil outside of the tank through a system of open
joint piping, or a seepage pit meeting the requirements of this code.
   SEWAGE or SANITARY SEWAGE. Human excrement and graywater (household showers,
dishwashing operations, and the like).
   SEWER. Pipe or conduit for holding and carrying sewage and wastewater
including the manholes and all other appurtenant facilities which are necessary
or convenient to the holding or carrying of sewage and wastewater, but shall
not include house drain or plumbing within the house.
   SEWER CONTRACTOR. A contractor holding a valid license to do sewer work in
the city.
   SEWER FUND. The sewer/wastewater treatment enterprise accounts created for
the collection, treatment and disposal of the city’s domestic, commercial and
industrial sewage or wastewater.
   SEWER LATERAL. Building sewer.
   SEWER MAIN. Public sewer.
   SEWER SERVICE. The services and facilities for treatment and disposal of
sewage furnished or available to premises by the POTW.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.
   (A)   Except as provided in paragraphs (B) and (C) of this definition, the
term SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER means any industrial user which:
      (1)   Is subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 C.F.R. §
403.6 and 40 C.F.R. Ch. I, Subch. N;
      (2)   Discharges 25,000 gallons or more per day of process wastewater to
the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling water and boiler blowdown
wastewater;
      (3)   Contributes a process wastewater which makes up 5% or more of the
average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the treatment plant; or
      (4)   Is designated as significant by the city on the basis that the
industrial user has reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
   (B)   The General Manager may determine that an industrial user subject to
categorical pretreatment standards under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6 and 40 C.F.R. Ch. I,
Subch. N is a non-significant categorical industrial user rather than a
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER on a finding that the industrial user never
discharges more than 100 gallons per day (GPD) of total categorical wastewater
(excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless
specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and the following
conditions are met:
      (1)   The industrial user, prior to General Manager’s finding, has
consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards
and requirements;
      (2)   The industrial user annually submits the certification statement
required in 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(q) together with any additional information
necessary to support the certification statement; and
      (3)   The industrial user never discharges any untreated concentrated
wastewater.
   (C)   Upon a finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria of this
section has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the
General Manager may, at any time, on the General Manager’s own initiative or in
response to a petition received from an industrial user and, in accordance with
40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(6), determine that the industrial user is not a
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.
   SLUG LOAD OR DISCHARGE. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which
could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in this chapter,
or any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited
to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge which has a
reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way
violate the POTW’s regulations, local limits or permit conditions.
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE. A classification pursuant to
the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the U.S. Office of
Management and Budget, 1972, as amended.
   STANDARD METHODS. The current edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association.
   STORM SEWER, STORM DRAINS. A pipe which carries storm sewage and drainage,
but excludes sanitary sewage and polluted industrial wastes.
   STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting from the precipitation, including snowmelt.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended matter that either float on the
surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sewage or other liquids and which
are removable by laboratory filtering; expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/
l). This is also called suspended matter in Standard Methods.
   TOXIC POLLUTANT. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic
in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection
Agency under the provision of § 307(a) of the Act.
   TULARE CITY CODE or CODE. The City Code for the City of Tulare.
   TWENTY-FIVE PERCENT (25%) RULE. A requirement for grease interceptors to be
maintained such that the combined FOG and solids accumulation does not exceed
25% percent of the design hydraulic depth of the grease interceptor.
   USER or INDUSTRIAL USER. A source of indirect discharge.
   WASTEWATER. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from
residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.020) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.030 Administration—Officers responsible.
   (A)   The General Manager shall be responsible for administering,
implementing and enforcing the provisions of this chapter which pertains to:
      (1)   Direct and indirect contributions to the POTW by residential
(domestic) and nonresidential users;
      (2)   Connection of residential and nonresidential sewers to public
sewers;
      (3)   Residential and nonresidential sewers which connect to public
sewers; and
      (4)   Prepare, disseminate and carry out an Enforcement Response Plan
(ERP) as required by the EPA pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(5), which shall
be consistent with the federal regulations and approved by the applicable
Regional Water Quality Control Board of the State of California.
   (B)   Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the General Manager may
be delegated by the General Manager.
   (C)   The County Health Officer or if designated, the General Manager, shall
be responsible for the enforcement of provisions which pertain to the
correction or abatement of insanitary conditions which present an immediate
threat to life and health.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.030) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.040 Right of entry—Inspection and sampling.
   The General Manager shall have the right to enter the premises of any user
to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this
chapter and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users
shall allow the General Manager ready access to all parts of the premises for
the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying and the
performance of any additional duties.
   (A)   Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall
make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation
of suitable identification, the General Manager will be permitted to enter
without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
   (B)   The General Manager shall have the right to set up on the user’s
property, or require installation of, the devices as are necessary to conduct
sampling and/or metering of the user’s operations.
   (C)   The General Manager may require the user to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment shall
be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user
at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality
shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy, according to the frequency
required in the user’s permit.
   (D)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user
at the written or verbal request of the General Manager and shall not be
replaced. The costs of clearing the access shall be borne by the user.
   (E)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the General Manager access to the
user’s premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
   (F)   The aforesaid officers and their authorized agents shall have the
right of entry, during usual business hours, and at any time when, upon
reasonable cause, they believe there is an immediate hazard to life, health or
property, to inspect any and all buildings and premises in the performance of
their duties. The aforesaid officers and their authorized agents shall have the
right to take independent samples of any discharge from any industrial user to
determine compliance with this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.040) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.050 Search warrants.
   If the General Manager has been refused access to a building, structure or
property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need
to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
of the city designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or
order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and
welfare of the community, then the General Manager may seek issuance of a
search warrant from the appropriate judicial officer.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.045) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.060 Dangerous and insanitary condition.
   (A)   Whenever any construction or condition regulated by this chapter is
dangerous, unsafe, insanitary or a menace to life, health or property or is in
violation hereof, the responsible officer shall order any person using or
maintaining any such condition or responsible for the use or maintenance
thereof to discontinue the use of or maintenance thereof or to repair, alter,
change, remove or demolish same as he or she may consider necessary for the
proper protection of life, health or property.
   (B)   Every such order shall be in writing, addressed to the owner, agent or
person responsible for the premises, in which such condition exists, and shall
specify the date or time when the order shall be complied with, which time
shall allow a reasonable period in which the order can be complied with by the
person receiving the order, but shall never exceed the maximum period for which
the construction can be safely used or maintained in the judgment of the
officer. Refusal, failure or neglect to comply with any such notice or order
shall be considered a violation of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.050) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.070 Dangerous and insanitary condition—Declared a public nuisance.
   The existence of any construction or condition of plumbing or sewers on any
premises within the city which is found to be dangerous, unsafe, insanitary or
a menace to life, health or property and an immediate hazard thereto, is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as
hereinafter provided. Without limiting the foregoing declaration, a public
nuisance is hereby declared to include any sewer or plumbing or other
construction or contrivance from which sanitary sewage or gases or moisture
therefrom is emitted or escapes in quantity sufficient to pollute or threaten
to pollute, the air or soil so as to attract or proliferate insects or rodents
or to spread disease or to contaminate water supplies or to otherwise endanger
the life or health of persons or domestic animals or livestock.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.060) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.080 Abatement.
   In the event the county’s Health Officer determines or, upon reasonable
cause, believes that the hazard to life, health or property is so immediate and
urgent that time does not permit the giving of notice, the county’s Health
Officer shall forthwith cause the public nuisance to be abated or corrected.
The work of abatement or correction may be done by employment of a contractor,
or by city forces, in the discretion of the responsible official, and he or she
may call upon the Department of Public Works or other department of the city to
perform the work. The costs thereof shall be a charge upon and paid from the
Sewer Fund.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.070) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.090 Hearing on abatement costs.
   Upon correcting or abating any public nuisance as heretofore provided, the
responsible official shall file a written report with the City Clerk, together
with any supplementary reports he or she may desire to file, and a brief report
on the abatement or correction itemizing the costs of the abatement or
correction. The City Clerk shall then set the matter of confirmation of the
abatement and costs thereof and assessment of the costs upon the parcel or
parcels of real property upon which the public nuisance was located for hearing
before the Board of Public Utilities at a regular meeting not later than 30
days after receipt of the reports and shall cause notice thereof to be given as
hereinafter provided. Notice of the hearing shall be in writing and shall
describe the real property by reference to the street and street number address
or other commonly used designation and also by reference to the Tulare County
Assessor’s description on the last equalized assessment roll, shall state the
time, date and place of hearing and shall refer to the reports on file with the
Clerk for further particulars. Notice shall be delivered personally or sent by
ordinary mail addressed to the owner at his or her address as shown on the last
equalized assessment roll or as otherwise known to the Clerk, and shall be
posted on a conspicuous place upon the front of the premises. Service of notice
by mail shall be deemed completed upon deposit in the mail. Notice shall be
given at least ten days prior to the hearing.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.080) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.100 Confirmation of costs.
   At the time and place fixed for hearing, the Board of Public Utilities shall
consider the reports filed with the Clerk and such evidence as may be presented
by any interested party and shall hear the objections of any owner of the real
property. The hearing may be continued from time to time. Upon conclusion of
the hearing, the Board of Public Utilities shall confirm, modify or disapprove
the abatement proceedings and costs therefor. Upon confirmation, the costs of
abatement constitute a special assessment against the real property and a lien
thereon and a personal obligation against the property owner.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.090) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.110 Collection of assessment.
   (A)   After confirmation of the costs of abatement and their assessment upon
the real property, the City Clerk shall promptly mail a statement of the costs
to the property owner at the address to which notice of the hearing before the
Board of Public Utilities was sent by the City Clerk. Failure to mail the
statement or failure to receive it shall, in no way, affect the assessment,
lien or obligation. If the assessment is not paid within 15 days after its
confirmation, the City Clerk may record a notice of lien in the office of the
County Recorder of the County of Tulare a certificate substantially in the
following form, to-wit:
 
NOTICE OF LIEN
Pursuant to authority of Ordinance No. of the Municipal Code of the City of Tulare, the City of Tulare, a municipal
corporation, located in Tulare County, State of California, did cause a certain public nuisance located on the
hereinafter described real property to be abated, and thereafter, on the _______day of ____________, 20     , did
assess the costs thereof, in the amount of $___________, and impose the costs as a lien against the real property.
The amount of costs has not been paid nor any part thereof and the City of Tulare does hereby claim a lien upon the
real property in the amount. The same shall continue as an assessment and lien upon the real property until the
amount with interest at the rate of 6% per annum thereon from the date of recordation of this instrument in the
office of the County Recorder of the County of Tulare has been paid in full.
The real property hereinabove mentioned and upon which a lien is claimed is that certain piece or parcel of land in
the City of Tulare, County of Tulare, State of California, described as follows, to-wit:
(Description)
Dated this _______ day of ____________, 20     .
CITY OF TULARE
A Municipal Corporation                                               By                                         City
Clerk
 
   (B)   As an alternative to or in addition to recordation of a notice of lien
as hereinabove set forth, the City Clerk may deliver a notice of lien, which
shall also describe the real property by the description used by the County
Assessor for the same property for the then current tax year, to the Auditor of
Tulare County who shall enter the amount of the assessment and lien on the
assessment roll opposite the real property as listed therein. The amount of the
assessment and lien shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner
as other taxes and assessments against the property. All laws applicable to the
levy, collection and enforcement of city taxes and county taxes are hereby made
applicable to such assessment and lien.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.100) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.120 General requirements before installing sewers.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on, or engage in the business
of installing sewers unless the person holds the appropriate state license, a
city business license and has been issued an encroachment permit for work
within the public right-of-way. The installation of sewers, as defined herein,
shall not be classed as plumbing.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.120) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.130 Disposal of wastes.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, suffer or permit the
disposal of sewage, human excrement or other liquid wastes, in any place or
manner except through and by means of an approved plumbing and sewerage system,
installed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and
of the Plumbing Code of the city.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in an insanitary manner upon public or private property within the
city, any animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
city, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted waters, except
where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter and in compliance with state and federal regulations.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.125) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.140 Damage to drainage system or public sewer.
   No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with or prevent access to any structure,
appurtenance or equipment, or other part of the POTW. It shall be unlawful for
any person to deposit by any means whatsoever, into any plumbing fixture, floor
drain, sand trap, sump, receptacle or device, which is connected to any
drainage system, public sewer, private sewer or septic tank, any ashes, cinder,
solids, rags, inflammable, poisonous or explosive liquids or gases, oils,
grease or any other thing whatsoever, which would or could cause damage to the
drainage system or public sewer.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.130) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.150 Septic tank—Unlawful use.
   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.140) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.160 Duty to connect to municipal sewer.
   (A)   The owner of any property used for human occupancy, employment,
recreation or other purpose, which abuts on any street, alley or right-of-way
in which there is located a public sewer of the city, is hereby required, at
his or her expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to
connect the facilities directly with the public sewer in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after date of official notice to do
so, provided that the public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line,
except that any owner receiving the notice may apply in writing to the General
Manager before expiration of the 90-day period for a permit to delay the
installation of such a sewer service not to exceed one year if he or she can
furnish sufficient evidence to the General Manager that:
      (1)   Connection to the sewer at this time would be impractical due to
personal hardship;
      (2)   The premises are now served by a septic tank; and
      (3)   By written report of county’s Health Officer the septic tank is
operating efficiently now and that its continued operation would not create a
hazard to public health.
   (B)   Upon receipt of the evidence to his or her satisfaction, the General
Manager may grant in writing the extension of time for completing the
connection; such a delay shall not be subject to further extensions.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.150) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.170 Sewer connection required.
   (A)   Every building or structure in which plumbing fixtures are installed,
and every premises having piping thereon which conveys sewage or other liquid
waste to an approved point of disposal, shall be connected to the public sewer
if it is available. A public sewer is available, for the purposes of this
chapter, if the public sewer has been constructed and is available for use in
any public street, alley or right-of-way within 100 feet of the property line
from an existing sewer.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, buildings or structures
connected to a private sewage disposal system at the time a public sewer
becomes available shall be connected to the public sewer
      (1)   Upon failure of the private sewage disposal system as determined by
the city's Building Official; or
      (2)   Upon sale of property; or
      (3)   As a condition of issuance of a building permit for any
improvements which exceed 25% of the assessed value of the structure or which
affects an increase in the discharge of wastewater, or if the property has
previously been subject to an earlier connection date by reason of requirements
of a jurisdiction other than the city, then the connection shall be made on or
before the earlier date, provided that if the city's Building Official
determines the continued use of the private sewage disposal system will create
an immediate health menace, the property shall be connected within the time
specified by the city's Building Official. Buildings or structures not
connected as required by this chapter are public nuisances. As to any property
for which deferral is elected following the date that the sewer becomes
available, in addition to the connection charge the owner of the property at
the time of connection shall also pay the interest that accrues at the legal
rate on the cost of connection for that parcel from the date of availability to
the ultimate date of construction.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.160) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.180 Septic tank—Construction and connections.
   (A)   When permitted the house sewer or private sewer shall be connected to
a private sewage disposal system. The private sewage disposal system shall be
constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Plumbing Code and shall
be approved by the General Manager.
   (B)   When, in the opinion of the county’s Health Officer, there is
insufficient lot area or inadequate soil condition for adequate sewage disposal
for the building or land use proposed, no building permit shall be issued and
no private sewage disposal system shall be permitted. No permit shall be issued
for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption
facilities where the area of the lot is less than 6,000 square feet. No septic
tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge into any public sewer or
natural outlet.
   (C)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city.
   (D)   However, the septic tank installations approved by the city shall be
subject to removal and connection to the public sewer, as stated in this
chapter.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.170) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.190 Permit required.
   (A)   No person whose premises are not now connected with the public sewer
shall connect any premises or cause any premises to be connected with the
public sewer without first obtaining a permit to do so.
   (B)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
open into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit approved by the General Manager.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.180) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.200 Application for permit.
   (A)   Every applicant for a permit to install, add to, alter, relocate or
replace sewage facilities or any part thereof, shall state in writing on the
application form provided for that purpose, the work proposed to be done and
the location, ownership, occupancy and use of the premises in connection
therewith. The General Manager may require plans, specifications or drawings
and such other information as he or she may deem necessary.
   (B)   The applicant shall pay for each permit issued and, at the time of
issuance, all applicable fees.
   (C)   Any person who shall commence sewerage work for which a connection
permit is required by this chapter without first having obtained a permit
therefor shall, if subsequently permitted to obtain a permit, pay in addition
to all applicable fees, a penalty of $500. Provided, however, that this
provision shall not apply to emergency work when it shall be proved to the
satisfaction of the General Manager that the work was urgently necessary and
that it was not practical to obtain a permit therefor before the commencement
of the work.
   (D)   In all such cases a permit must be obtained as soon as it is practical
to do so, and if there be an unreasonable delay in obtaining the permit, a
penalty of $500, as herein provided, shall be charged.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.190) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.210 To whom permits may be issued.
   (A)   No permit shall be issued to any person to do, or cause to be done,
any construction or work regulated by this chapter except to a person holding a
valid, unexpired and unrevoked business license except when and as otherwise
herein provided.
   (B)   Any permit required by this chapter may be issued to any person to do
any construction or work regulated by this chapter within the lot limits of a
single-family dwelling provided the person is the owner of the lot and
building, the building is occupied or designed to be occupied by the owner, and
that the owner shall personally purchase all material and shall personally
perform all labor in connection therewith. This does not give anyone other than
a licensed contractor permission to do any work within the public right-of-way.
No sewerage work for which a permit is required shall be commenced until a
permit to do work shall have first been obtained.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.200) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.220 Unlawful acts under permit.
   (A)   The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and
specifications shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for, or an
approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. No permit
presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter
shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which it authorizes is
lawful.
   (B)   The issuance of a permit upon plans and specifications shall not
prevent the General Manager from thereafter requiring the correction of errors
in the plans and specifications or from preventing construction operations
being carried on thereunder when in violation of this chapter or of any
regulations of the city.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.210) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.230 Expiration of permit.
   Every permit issued by the General Manager under the provisions of this
chapter shall expire by limitation and become null and void, if the work
authorized by the permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date of the
permit, or if the work authorized by the permit is suspended or abandoned at
any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 days. Before the work
can be recommenced, a new permit shall be obtained to do so.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.220) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.240 All work to be inspected.
   All pipes, fittings and other appurtenances relative to a sewerage system
shall be inspected by the General Manager to insure compliance with all the
requirements of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.230) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.250 Notification.
   All pipes, fittings and other appurtenances relative to a sewer or drainage
system shall be inspected by the General Manager to insure compliance with all
the requirements of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.240) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.260 Excavations.
   It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized by the permit,
to notify the city by calling the city's designated "call-in" inspection
telephone line or in writing, that the work is ready for inspection. The
notification shall be given not less than 24 hours before the work is to be
inspected (Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excluded).
(1995 Code, § 7.20.250) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.270 Minimum standards.
   All excavations required to be made for the installation of a sewer or
drainage system, or part thereof, within or without a building shall be kept
open until the piping has been tested, inspected and approved. If any sewer or
drainage system or part thereof is covered or concealed before being regularly
inspected, tested and approved, as herein prescribed, it shall be exposed upon
the direction of the General Manager.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.260) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.280 Markings.
   Each length of cast or ductile iron soil pipe and each cast or ductile iron
fitting used in a sewerage system shall be stamped or indelibly marked with
weight or grade thereof and the marker’s mark or name.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.270) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.290 Piping and fittings.
   All material used for piping and fittings shall meet the minimum
requirements of the current city standard specifications and standard details
and the Plumbing Code, and must meet the approval of the General Manager.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.280) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.300 Approved materials and methods.
   Repairs to sewer or drainage systems shall be made with the materials, and
by such methods as are provided for in the city standard specifications and
standard details and Plumbing Code. In case of conflict between the provisions
of this chapter and the Plumbing Code, this chapter shall govern. In case of
conflict between the city standard specifications and standard details and the
Plumbing Code, the city standard specifications and standard details shall
govern.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.290) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.310 Workmanship.
   All workmanship shall be of such character as fully to secure the results
sought to be obtained in all sections of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.300) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.320 New materials and methods of construction.
   The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the use of any
material or any method of construction not specifically prescribed herein,
provided any such alternate has been approved and its use authorized by the
General Manager. The General Manager may approve any such alternate, provided
he or she finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the
intent of this chapter and that the material or method of work offered is for
the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that herein prescribed in
quality, strength, effectiveness, durability and safety. The General Manager
shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate
any claims that may be made regarding the sufficiency of any such proposed
material or type of construction.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.310) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.330 Building court main sewer.
   (A)   A building court main sewer shall be not less than six inches in
diameter and shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment; a
standard riser shall be installed at the end of all building court mains.
   (B)   A building court main serving not more than ten dwelling units or the
equivalent shall be connected to the public sewer at a wye branch. Cleanouts
shall be installed as required.
   (C)   A building court main serving more than ten dwelling units or the
equivalent shall have installed in the following locations:
      (1)   A manhole at the connection to the public sewer;
      (2)   A manhole at any change in direction or grade; and
      (3)   A manhole at intervals not to exceed 350 feet.
   (D)   Five sets of drawings prepared by a registered civil engineer showing
plan and profile of the proposed installation shall be submitted for approval.
Grades for building court main sewers shall be staked by a registered civil
engineer in accordance with the approved drawings.
   (E)   Building courthouse sewers shall meet the requirements for house
sewers.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.320) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.340 Separate sewers.
   (A)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building with the following exceptions:
      (1)   Where there is a building in the rear of a lot and there is to be
an additional building built directly in front of the building, then the same
building sewer may serve both buildings.
      (2)   The same rule shall apply where the conditions are reversed and the
front building is built first, or where both buildings are built at the same
time.
   (B)   Where two single-family dwellings are on the same parcel and the
frontage of the parcel does not exceed 75 feet, separate connections are not
required.
   (C)   A group of buildings constituting a building court by definition may
be connected to a building court main sewer.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.330) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.350 Use of existing sewers.
   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when
they are found, on examination and tests by the General Manager, to meet all
requirements of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.340) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.360 Size and slope—Building sewer.
   The size and slope of the building sewer within the public right-of-way
shall be subject to the approval of the General Manager and the size shall be
not less than that at the house drain and, in no event, shall the diameter be
less than four inches.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.350) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.370 Elevation—Building sewer.
   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an
elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to
and within the soil bearing area of the footing of any bearing wall which might
be weakened thereby. The depth shall be sufficient to afford a minimum of one
foot cover. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight
alignment. Where direct alignment is not practical, changes in direction not to
exceed 60 degrees may be made in the portion of the house sewer within the lot
boundaries. Properly curved pipe and fittings shall be used.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.360) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.380 Exception.
   When alterations are made to an existing house plumbing system, changes in
direction of the house sewer not to exceed 90 degrees may be made with the
curved portion constructed of properly curved pipe and fittings, and a cleanout
to grade shall be installed.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.370) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.390 Sewage lift.
   In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity
flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted
by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.380) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.400 Building sewer connection to public sewer.
   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made in
the following manner:
   (A)   If the diameter of the building sewer is equal to the diameter of the
public sewer, connection shall be made at a wye branch in the public sewer at a
location specified by the General Manager.
   (B)   When the diameter of the building sewer is less than the diameter of
the public sewer and no properly located wye branch is available, a cored hole
may be cut into the public sewer to receive the building sewer and shall be
fitted with a special saddle connection. The saddle connection shall be
equipped with complete annular shoulder to prevent it from slipping into the
inner surface of the public sewer and a neoprene seal to make a watertight
connection. The saddle adapter shall be securely fastened in place by a minimum
of two stainless steel bands.
   (C)   Other special fittings may be used for connection only when approved
by the General Manager.
   (D)   The top of the pipe of the building sewer at the point of connection
shall be at the same or at a higher elevation than the top of pipe of the
public sewer.
   (E)   The portion of the building sewer in the street shall be at right
angles to the right-of-way lines and at least two and one-half feet below the
gutter flow line grade. When the building sewer is less than two and one-half
feet below the gutter flow line grade, the same must be covered with at least
six inches of concrete to protect the same from breakage, or shall be of cast
or ductile iron pipe.
   (F)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the General
Manager when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the
public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the General
Manager.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.390) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.410 Building sewer maintenance.
   Maintenance of the building sewer shall be the responsibility of the owner
of the property served.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.400) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.420 Backwater protection.
   If the lowest fixture or outlet in any building is below the rim elevation
of the nearest manhole, cleanout or riser upstream from the connection to the
public sewer, a backwater valve or overflow device of an approved type shall be
installed in the building sewer.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.410) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.430 Types of drain waters prohibited into sewers.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to introduce any storm, flood, rain or
roof waters into any sewer in the city or to make or cause to be made or
maintain, or cause to be maintained any collection to a sewer by which the same
may enter any sewer in the city or which is a part of the POTW. Each person
making or causing to be made, or maintaining or causing to be maintained any
such connection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and each connection made and
each day any such connection is maintained shall be considered as a separate
violation of this section.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.420) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.440 Drainage disposition.
   Storm water shall be discharged to such pipes specifically designed as storm
sewers or to a natural outlet as approved by the General Manager. Industrial
cooling water and unpolluted process water, and swimming pool drains, overflows
or filter backwashes may be discharged subject to state and federal regulations
upon approval of the General Manager to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.430) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.450 Protection from damage or misuse.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenant or
equivalent which is a part of the POTW. No person shall introduce or deposit
any water, wastes or any other matter into the POTW other than through a legal
connection for which a permit has been issued.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.440) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.460 Swimming pools.
   (A)   Permission shall be obtained in writing from the General Manager to
discharge swimming pool water into the public sewer or storm drain, and a copy
of the permission stating the maximum size of waste line between the
interceptor and the sewer shall accompany any application for a permit to
construct the swimming pool.
   (B)   Provisions shall be made to prevent discharge of swimming pool water
into public sewers during times of rain or during a period of one hour
thereafter. No swimming pool water may be drained into a public sewer until the
General Manager has been notified and approval issued therefor.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.450) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.470 Prohibited discharge standards.
   A user may not introduce into a POTW any pollutant(s) which cause pass
through or interference. These general prohibitions and the specific
prohibitions in divisions (A) through (N) of this section apply to each user
introducing pollutants into the POTW whether or not the user is subject to
other national pretreatment standards or any national, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements. In addition, no user shall discharge or
cause to be discharged any of the following described substances into the POTW:
   (A)   Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW
resulting in interference, but in no case heat in such quantities that the
temperature at the POTW treatment plant exceeds 104°F (40°C);
   (B)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure or any other solid or viscous
pollutants in amounts which will cause obstruction to the flow in the POTW
resulting in interference;
   (C)   Any pollutants, such as gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas which creates a fire or explosive
hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-
cup flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40
C.F.R. § 261.21;
   (D)   Pollutants which will cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW,
but in no case discharges with a pH lower than 7.0 in accordance with 40 C.F.R.
§ 403.5;
   (E)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous substances or
resulting in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a
quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of
the treatment plant;
   (F)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or other wastewater
which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to
create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the
sewers for maintenance or repair;
   (G)   Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants, (BOD, etc.)
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference
with the POTW;
   (H)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin, in amounts which will cause interference or pass through;
   (I)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the city;
   (J)   Any radioactive wastes. In the event of an accidental spill of
radioactive material into any public sewer, the person responsible shall:
      (1)   Immediately notify the General Manager; and
      (2)   Render such technical or other assistance to the city within its
power to prevent the POTW from becoming contaminated with radioactivity.
   (K)   Any dispersed biodegradable oils and fats, such as lard, tallow or
vegetable oil in amounts that will cause interference or pass through in the
POTW;
   (L)   Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard meter at the
point of discharge into, or at any point in, the city’s public sewer of more
than 10% or any single reading over 5% of the lower explosive limit of the
meter;
   (M)   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the city in a
wastewater discharge permit; and
   (N)   Sludges, membrane retentates, spent chemical solutions or other wastes
generated during the reclamation, recycling, purification, or recovery of
water, chemical solutions, brines or other industrial process flow streams,
except for reclamation of clean-in-place solutions for recycling. Upon approval
by the General Manager, substances prohibited by this division may be allowed
if the user’s wastewater discharge is within full compliance with the
requirements of this chapter, and the substances will not cause a violation of
this chapter. The allowance will be specified in the user’s wastewater
discharge permit. The General Manager may deny acceptance of these discharges
at any time.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.460) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.480 Specific wastewater limitations.
   (A)   Generally. No person shall discharge wastewater containing
constituents in excess of the maximum allowable specific pollutant limitations
established by the Board of Public Utilities to protect against pass through
and interference. Notwithstanding the limitations that are set forth by the
Board of Public Utilities, the General Manager may impose more restrictive
limitations, or mass limitations in addition to or in place of concentration
based limitations, through any industrial user’s discharge permit.
   (B)   Local limits. The following pollutant limits are established to
protect against materials which are toxic to humans, animals, the local
environment or which will cause interference or pass through in the POTW. No
person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following local
limits. With the exception of pH, for which the local limit is an instantaneous
limit, and EC, for which the local limit is a monthly average limit, all local
limits are daily maximum limits.
Parameter Local Limit
          (mg/l unless otherwise noted)
Parameter                         Local Limit
                                  (mg/l unless otherwise noted)
Arsenic                           0.026
Boron                             0.630
Cadmium                           0.020
Chloride                          128
Chromium (total)                  0.155
Copper                            0.532
Electrical conductivity, (µmhos/ (source water + 500) - 4.0 µmhos/cm per mg/L (NH3-N + NO3-
cm)                               N)
Iron                              1.912
Lead                              0.090
Manganese                         0.044
Mercury                           0.013
Molybdenum                        0.065
Nickel                            0.136
pH (standard units)(allowable     7-11
range)
Selenium                          0.070
Silver                            0.198
Sodium                            113
Total oil and grease              400
Zinc                              0.300
 
      (1)   The above limits may be revised from time to time by the city as
may be deemed necessary to protect the POTW from interference and pass through,
or as may be required by the applicable federal, state or local pretreatment
standards.
      (2)   The General Manager may impose more restrictive standards or
requirements on a discharge he or she deems necessary to comply with the
objectives of this chapter, specific prohibitions or the terms of the city’s
waste discharge requirements.
      (3)   The General Manager may authorize discharges containing higher
concentrations on a site-specific basis, provided that the concentrations of
such discharges shall not cause pass through or interference. Upon approval by
the General Manager, site-specific limitations shall be established through the
terms specified in the user’s wastewater discharge permit. The General Manager
may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, concentration-based
limitations, due to reduced water usage by an industrial user.
      (4)   Excursions above the pH of 11.0 will be allowed, by the General
Manager, only when the pH is measured by continuous recorders, and only under
the following conditions:
         (a)   Time interval for the excursion does not exceed 15 minutes for
one individual excursion.
         (b)   Total time for all excursions does not exceed 60 minutes a day
(four 15-minute intervals), or 15 minutes per a six-hour time period.
         (c)   No excursions of any duration are allowed for pH measurements
below 7.0 (federal pH minimum, per 40 C.F.R. § 403.5).
   (C)   Slugs and equalized discharges. No person shall cause the discharge of
slugs of water or wastes. Each person producing a discharge of a slug into the
public sewers shall construct and maintain, at his or her own expense, a
suitable storage and flow control facility to insure the equalization of the
discharge over a 24-hour period. The facility shall have a capacity of at least
80% of the total normal volume discharged during a 24-hour production period,
unless a smaller size is approved by the General Manager, and the outlet to the
sewer shall be equipped with a rate discharge controller or other device
approved by the General Manager, the regulation of which shall be directed by
the General Manager.
   (D)   BMPs. The General Manager may develop best management practices
(BMPs), by ordinance or in individual wastewater discharge permits, to
implement local limits and the requirements of §
7.20.470.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.465) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.490 Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
   (A)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided by the user when,
in the opinion of the General Manager, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any
flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients; except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the General
Manager, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection. All interceptors are large devices and shall be
exterior, in ground installations, provided that as to dischargers at existing
locations as of June 30, 2003, where it is physically impossible to locate an
interceptor at an exterior, in- ground location, the General Manager may grant
an exception allowing the interceptor to be placed in an approved interior
location.
   (B)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature.
They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily
removable covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight.
   (C)   Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be
maintained by the owner, at his or her expense, in continuously efficient
operation at all times. It is specifically prohibited to maintain interceptors
by bacteriological, chemical or enzymatic addition or treatment.
   (D)   Wastewater discharge permits may be issued to users of grease, oil and
sand interceptors. Permits shall establish minimum requirements for the design,
operation, maintenance and performance of the equipment. Permits may include
other information as described in §
7.20.750.
   (E)   The discharge of waste to a grease, oil and sand interceptor is
subject to all sections of this chapter.
   (F)   Purchase and installation of the interceptor shall be at the user’s
expense. No exceptions shall be made to the requirements of this section due to
expense, size of the installation or difficulties in locating the interceptor
within the site boundary.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.470) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.495 Fats, oils, and grease (FOG) control program ordinance.
   (A)   Title. This section shall be referred to as the “City of Tulare FOG
Control Program Ordinance” or “FOG Ordinance.”
   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of the FOG Control Program Ordinance is to reduce
sanitary sewer overflows and blockages, and to protect public health and the
environment by minimizing public exposure to unsanitary conditions. By
controlling the discharge of fats, oils and grease to the wastewater collection
system, excessive buildup in sewer lines can be lessened, thereby increasing
the system’s operating efficiency and reducing the number of sewer line
blockages and overflows.
   (C)   General FOG discharge prohibitions. No food service establishment
(FSE) shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the sewer system FOG that
may accumulate and/or cause or contribute to blockages in the sewer system or
at the sewer lateral which connects the FSE to the sewer system.
   (D)   Specific FOG prohibitions. The following specific prohibitions shall
apply to all FSEs:
      (1)   Discharge of any FOG-containing wastewater that is not connected to
a grease removal device is prohibited.
      (2)   Non-grease laden sources such as, but not limited to, hand-wash
sinks, toilets, urinals, and stormwater, shall not be connected to a grease
removal device.
      (3)   No dishwasher shall be connected to a grease trap.
      (4)   Discharge of wastewater with temperatures in excess of 140°F (60°C)
into any grease trap is prohibited.
      (5)   Direct disposal of any waste cooking oil into any drain or cleanout
that is connected to the sewer system is prohibited.
      (6)   Introduction of any additive into a grease removal device or
directly into the sewer system for the purpose of emulsifying FOG,
biologically/chemically treating FOG for grease remediation, or as a supplement
to any grease removal device maintenance is prohibited, unless specifically
authorized in writing by the General Manager.
      (7)   Discharge of any waste which has been removed from a grease removal
device into the sewer system is prohibited.
   (E)   FOG wastewater discharge permit required. All FSEs shall obtain a FOG
wastewater discharge permit. Nothing in the permit is intended to relieve the
FSE of any local, state, or federal regulation. Any denial of a permit may be
appealed under §
7.20.900.
   (F)   Permit application requirements. FOG wastewater discharge permit
applications shall include the following information:
      (1)   Name, address, telephone number, description of the FSE and service
activities.
      (2)   Name of any and all principals/owners of the FSE.
      (3)   Name and address of property owner or lessor and the property
manager where the FSE is located.
      (4)   Floor, site and plumbing plans showing detailed sewer connections
and grease removal devices.
      (5)   Specifications of all grease removal devices.
      (6)   Operational statement of FSE.
      (7)   Any other information as may be specified in the application form.
   (G)   FOG wastewater discharge permit conditions.
      (1)   FOG wastewater discharge permits must contain the following:
         (a)   A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit
duration.
         (b)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable.
         (c)   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of permit and FOG ordinance.
      (2)   FOG wastewater discharge permits may contain the following
conditions or limits if found necessary to meet the intent of this FOG Control
Program Ordinance by the General Manager:
         (a)   Limits on discharge of FOG and other pollutants.
         (b)   Requirements to install, operate, and maintain adequate
pretreatment devices including grease removal devices.
         (c)   Requirements for proper operation and maintenance of all
pretreatment devices.
         (d)   Grease removal device maintenance frequency and schedule.
         (e)   Requirements for implementing, maintaining, and reporting on the
status of best management practices (BMPs).
         (f)   Requirements for maintaining and submitting logs and records,
including waste hauling records and manifests and to have such records
available for inspection.
         (g)   Requirements to self-monitor.
         (h)   Additional requirements as may be determined to be reasonably
appropriate by the General Manager or as specified by other regulatory agencies
to protect the collection system.
         (i)   Other terms and conditions, which may be reasonably applicable
to ensure compliance with the FOG control program.
   (H)   FOG wastewater discharge permit modifications. FOG wastewater
discharge permit modifications are subject to §
7.20.770 of this chapter consistent with the terms, requirements, and policies
in this section.
   (I)   Best management practices. All FSEs shall implement BMPs in an effort
to minimize the discharge of FOG to the sewer system, including, but not
limited to, the following, as applicable:
      (1)   Installation of drain screens. Drain screens shall be installed on
all drainage pipes in food preparation areas.
      (2)   Segregation and collection of waste cooking oil. All waste cooking
oil shall be collected and stored properly in recycling receptacles such as
barrels or drums. Such recycling receptacles shall be maintained properly to
insure that they do not leak. Licensed waste haulers or an approved recycling
facility must be used to dispose of waste cooking oil.
      (3)   Disposal of food waste. All food waste should be disposed of
directly into the trash or garbage and not into sinks and shall be disposed of
in a manner that will ensure against leakage in the trash container or anywhere
else.
      (4)   Employee training. Employees of the FSE shall be trained by
ownership/management periodically as specified in the FOG wastewater discharge
permit on the following subjects:
         (a)   Dry-wiping pots, pans, dishware and work areas before washing to
remove grease.
         (b)   Properly disposing food waste and solids in plastic bags prior
to disposal in trash bins or containers to prevent leaking and odors.
         (c)   The location and use of absorption products to clean under fryer
baskets and other locations where grease may be spilled or dripped.
         (d)   Properly disposing grease or oils from cooking equipment into a
proper grease receptacle without spilling.
         (e)   Training shall be documented along with employee signatures.
Training records shall be available for review at any time by authorized
representatives of the city.
      (5)   Maintenance of mechanical exhaust ventilation filters. Filters
shall be cleaned as frequently as necessary to be maintained in good operating
condition. The wastewater generated from cleaning exhaust filters shall be
disposed of properly.
      (6)   Kitchen signage. Best management and waste minimization practices
shall be posted conspicuously in the food preparation and dishwashing areas at
all times.
   (J)   FOG pretreatment required for new and existing FSEs. FSEs are required
to install, operate, and maintain an approved type and adequately sized grease
interceptor necessary to maintain compliance with the objectives of this
section, subject only to the variance and waiver provisions and other
exceptions of this section. The grease interceptor shall be adequate to
separate and remove FOG contained in wastewater discharges from FSEs prior to
discharge to the sewer system. Fixtures, equipment, and drain lines located in
the food preparation and cleanup areas of FSEs that are sources of FOG
discharges shall be connected to the grease interceptor.
      (1)   New FSEs shall include and install grease interceptors prior to
commencing discharges of wastewater to the sewer system.
      (2)   Existing FSEs shall install grease interceptors in any of the
following circumstances:
         (a)   When the FSE changes ownership;
         (b)   When any change in operation results in or has the potential to
result in the increase of the amount of FOG generated and/or discharged by FSE
in an amount that alone or collectively causes or creates a potential SSO to
occur;
         (c)   When it is determined by the General Manager that the FSE caused
or contributed to grease-related blockages in the sewer system, has sewer
laterals connected to hot spots, or has been determined to contribute
significant FOG to the sewer system, based on inspection and sampling;
         (d)   During a remodel; or
         (e)   Any other time the General Manager reasonably determines that
installation of a grease interceptor is necessary to avoid an adverse impact to
the sewer system.
      (3)   Any existing FSE that receives a notice from the General Manager to
install a grease interceptor must install the interceptor within 180 days
unless otherwise required by the General Manager.
   (K)   Variance of grease interceptor requirement. Notwithstanding any other
provision in this section, an existing FSE may obtain a variance, at the
General Manager’s discretion, from the grease interceptor requirement to allow
alternative pretreatment technology that is equally effective in controlling
the FOG discharge in lieu of a grease interceptor. One such type of alternative
pretreatment technology is a grease trap. Consideration of granting the
variance will be based on the following:
      (1)   There is insufficient space for installation and/or maintenance of
a grease interceptor.
      (2)   There is inadequate slope for gravity flow between kitchen plumbing
fixtures and the grease interceptor and/or between the grease interceptor and
the private collection line or the public sewer.
      (3)   The FSE can demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the General
Manager, that the alternative pretreatment technology is equivalent or better
than a grease interceptor in controlling FOG. In addition, the FSE must be able
to demonstrate, after installation of the proposed alternative pretreatment
technology, its continued ability to effectively control FOG discharge.
      (4)   The variance may be rescinded if subsequent monitoring shows
accumulation of FOG in the sewer lateral or the collection system downstream of
the FSEs connection or if the FSE caused or contributed to a sanitary sewer
overflow. A grease interceptor must be installed within 180 days of the
rescission of a variance. Denial or revocation of a variance may be appealed
pursuant to § 7.20.900.
   (L)   Cost recovery. All costs incurred for cleaning the sewer line to
remove FOG buildup caused or contributed to by an FSE shall be reimbursed to
the city by the FSE. Factors for determining responsible parties for cost
recovery charges include the FSEs that are discharging into the affected sewer
line, the presence of grease removal devices or alternative pretreatment in the
FSE, proper maintenance of grease removal devices by the FSE, implementation of
BMPs, and any waivers or variances granted.
   (M)   Drawing submittal requirements. At the time of obtaining a FOG
wastewater discharge permit or upon request by the General Manager:
      (1)   FSEs may be required to submit copies of design and as-built
facility site plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all
sewer locations and connections. The documents shall be in a form acceptable to
the General Manager for review of existing grease control devices, monitoring
facilities, metering facilities and operating procedures. The review of plans
and procedures shall in no way relieve the FSE of the responsibility to modify
the facilities or procedures in the future, as necessary to produce an
acceptable discharge and to meet the requirements of this FOG control program.
      (2)   FSEs may be required to submit a schematic drawing of the grease
removal device or alternative pretreatment, piping and instrumentation diagram,
and wastewater characterization report.
      (3)   At the General Manager’s discretion, all drawings and/or reports
may be required to be prepared by a California registered civil, chemical, or
electrical engineer.
   (N)   Grease interceptor requirements. Any FSE that is required to provide
FOG pretreatment shall install, operate and maintain an approved type and
properly sized grease interceptor, or other grease removal device authorized
under an approved variance, necessary to maintain compliance with the purpose
of the FOG control program.
      (1)   Approved grease interceptor sizing and installation shall conform
to the latest approved edition of the California Uniform Plumbing Code.
      (2)   Grease interceptors shall be constructed in accordance with the
design approved by the General Manager and shall have a minimum of two
compartments with fittings designed for grease retention.
      (3)   Grease interceptors shall be installed at a location where it shall
be at all times easily accessible for inspection, cleaning and removal of
accumulated grease.
         (a)   Grease interceptors may not be installed in any part of the
building where food is handled.
         (b)   If a location is not available on the property of the FSE, a
street encroachment permit may be requested to authorize installation of a
grease interceptor in a public access area such as the street or sidewalk area.
         (c)   There will be no obstruction from landscaping or parked
vehicles, with the exception of parked vehicles in a public access area as
granted through a street encroachment permit.
      (4)   Access manholes, with a minimum diameter of 24 inches, shall be
provided over each grease interceptor chamber and sanitary tee. The manholes
shall also have readily removable covers to facilitate inspection, grease
removal and wastewater sampling activities.
      (5)   The original design of the grease interceptor shall not be modified
unless the manufacturer recommends the modification in writing.
         (a)   Any modification will be at the FSE’s expense.
         (b)   The city is not liable for any non-compliance as a result of any
modification.
      (6)   The General Manager may require other pretreatment measures or
modifications to improve the effectiveness of the grease interceptor.
      (7)   Connections to the grease interceptor shall be approved by the
General Manager, and the General Manager may require connections to be removed.
   (O)   Grease interceptor maintenance requirements. Grease interceptors shall
be maintained in efficient operating condition by periodic complete removal of
all contents of the devices including wastewater, accumulated FOG, floating
materials, sludge and solids.
      (1)   No FOG that has accumulated in a grease interceptor shall be
allowed to pass into any sewer lateral, sewer system, storm drain, or public
right-of-way during maintenance activities.
      (2)   FSEs that are located in an area that is considered to be a hot
spot will be required to submit data and information necessary to establish a
maintenance frequency for their grease interceptor.
      (3)   The maintenance frequency for all FSEs with a grease interceptor
shall be determined in one of the following methods:
         (a)   Grease interceptors shall be fully pumped out and cleaned at a
frequency such that the combined FOG and solids accumulation does not exceed
the 25% rule. Regardless, the interval between cleaning shall not exceed three
months.
         (b)   The owner/operator of a FSE may submit a request to the General
Manager asking for a change in the maintenance frequency at any time. The FSE
has the burden of responsibility to prove that the change reflects actual
operating conditions based on the average FOG accumulation over time, and meets
the requirements of the 25% rule. The FSE must also show that it is in full
compliance with the conditions of its FOG wastewater discharge permit and this
section. Upon approval by the General Manager, the FOG wastewater discharge
permit will be modified accordingly to reflect the change in maintenance
frequency.
         (c)   If the grease interceptor contains, at any time, FOG and solids
accumulation that exceeds the 25% rule, the FSE shall be required to have the
grease interceptor serviced immediately so that all FOG, sludge and other
materials are completely removed from the interceptor. If necessary, the FSE
may be required to increase the maintenance frequency of the grease interceptor
from its current frequency.
      (4)   Wastewater, accumulated FOG, floating materials, sludge, solids,
and other materials removed from the grease interceptor shall be disposed
offsite properly by licensed waste haulers or recyclers in accordance with
federal, state, and/or local regulations.
   (P)   Grease trap requirements. Grease traps may be authorized by the
General Manager through a variance under division (K) of this section with the
following conditions:
      (1)   Grease traps shall be installed in waste lines leading from drains,
sinks and other fixtures or equipment where grease may be introduced into the
sewer system in quantities that can cause blockage.
      (2)   Grease traps shall be properly sized and installed in accordance
with the latest approved edition of the California Uniform Plumbing Code.
      (3)   The original design of the grease trap shall not be modified unless
the manufacturer recommends the modification in writing.
         (a)   Any modification will be at the FSE’s expense.
         (b)   The city is not liable for any non-compliance as a result of any
modification.
      (4)   Grease traps shall be maintained in efficient operating conditions
by removing accumulated grease. The interval between cleaning will be
established by the General Manager, but shall not exceed four weeks. Baffles
shall be removed and cleaned during the maintenance process, when applicable.
      (5)   Grease traps shall be kept free of all food residues and any FOG
waste removed during the cleaning and scraping process.
      (6)   Grease traps shall be inspected periodically to check for leaking
seams and pipes and for effective operation of the baffles and flow regulating
devices.
      (7)   Grease traps and their baffles shall be maintained free of all
caked on FOG and waste.
      (8)   Dishwashers and food waste disposal units shall not be connected to
or discharged into any grease trap.
      (9)   The temperature of any water entering a grease trap shall not
exceed 140°F (60°C).
   (Q)   Monitoring requirements.
      (1)   The General Manager may require, through the FOG wastewater
discharge permit or at any time, an FSE to construct and maintain in proper
operating condition, at the FSE’s sole expense, flow monitoring, constituent
monitoring, and/or sampling devices.
      (2)   The location of monitoring or metering devices shall be subject to
approval by the General Manager.
      (3)   At all times, FSEs shall provide immediate, clear, safe and
uninterrupted access to authorized representatives of the city to all
monitoring and metering devices.
      (4)   FSEs may be required by the General Manager to submit waste
analysis plans, contingency plans, and meet other necessary requirements to
ensure proper operation and maintenance of any grease removal device and
compliance with this section.
   (R)   Record keeping requirements. FSEs shall keep all records, including
manifests, receipts and invoices of all cleaning and maintenance of grease
removal devices. All records shall be made available to authorized
representatives of the city upon request. In addition to the above mentioned
documents, records include logbooks of maintenance activity, BMPs and employee
training, sampling data, spill reports, line cleaning reports, and any other
information deemed appropriate by the General Manager to ensure compliance with
the FOG control program and this section.
(Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-2015)
§ 7.20.500 Timing.
   Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility services by the U.S. Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report
shall govern.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.475) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.510 Signatories and certification.
   (A)   Certification of permit applications, user reports and initial
monitoring waiver. The following certification statement is required to be
signed and submitted by users submitting permit applications; users submitting
baseline monitoring reports under §
7.20.520(A)(6), users submitting reports on compliance with the categorical
pretreatment standard deadlines under §
7.20.520(C), users submitting periodic compliance reports required by §§
7.20.520(D) and
7.20.530, and users submitting an initial request to forego sampling of a
pollutant on the basis of §
7.20.520(D)(2)(c). The following certification statement must be signed by an
authorized representative as defined in §
7.20.020:
      “I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage
the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations.”
   (B)   Annual certification for non-significant categorical industrial users.
A facility determined to be a non-significant categorical industrial user by
the General Manager pursuant to §
7.20.020 must annually submit the following certification statement signed by
an authorized representative as defined in §
7.20.020. This certification must accompany an alternative report required by
the General Manager:
      “Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for
managing compliance with the categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR
____, I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief that during the
period from __________, ________ to ________, ________ [months, days, year]:
   (a)   The facility described as ____________________ [facility name] met the
definition of a Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User as described in
Section
7.20.020;
   (b)   The facility complied with all applicable Pretreatment Standards and
requirements during this reporting period; and
   (c)   The facility never discharged more than 100 gallons of total
categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting period.
This compliance certification is based on the following information.
____________________________________ ___
____________________________________ ___”
(Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-2015)
§ 7.20.520 Reporting requirements for industrial users subject to categorical
pretreatment.
   (A)   Baseline monitoring reports. Within 180 days after the effective date
of a categorical pretreatment standard, or 180 days after the final
administrative decision made upon a category determination submission under 40
C.F.R. § 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing industrial users subject to
the categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging to or
scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall be required to submit to the General
Manager a report which contains the information listed in divisions (A)(1)
through (A)(7) of this section. If reports containing this information already
have been submitted to the RWQCB or the Regional Administrator in compliance
with the requirement of 40 C.F.R. § 128.140(b), the industrial user shall not
be required to submit this information again. However, the industrial user
shall provide the General Manager with a copy of the report along with written
verification from the RWQCB that the report items have been received by the
RWQCB. At least 90 days prior to commencement of discharge, new sources and
sources that become industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an
applicable categorical standard, shall be required to submit to the city a
report which contains the information listed in divisions (A)(1) through (A)(5)
of this section. New sources shall also be required to include in this report
information on the method of pretreatment the source intends to use to meet
applicable pretreatment standards. New sources shall give estimates of the
information requested in divisions (A)(4) and (A)(5) of this section.
      (1)   Identifying information. The user shall submit the name and address
of the facility including the name of the operator and owners;
      (2)   Permits. The user shall submit a list of any environmental control
permits held by or for the facility;
      (3)   Description of operations. The user shall submit a brief
description of the nature, average rate of production and standard industrial
classification of the operation(s) carried out by the industrial user. This
description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points
of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes;
      (4)   Flow measurement. The user shall submit information showing the
measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW
from each of the following:
         (a)   Regulated process streams; and
         (b)   Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined waste
stream formula of 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e). (See division (A)(5) of this section.)
The General Manager may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where
justified by cost or feasibility considerations.
      (5)   Measurement of pollutants.
         (a)   The user shall identify the pretreatment standards applicable to
each regulated process.
         (b)   In addition, the user shall submit the results of sampling and
analysis identifying the nature and concentration (or mass, where required by
the standard or General Manager) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from
each regulated process. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass,
where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily
operations. In cases where the standard requires compliance with a best
management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit
documentation as required by the General Manager or the applicable standards to
determine compliance with the standard.
         (c)   The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to
compile the data necessary to comply with the requirements of this division.
         (d)   Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment
facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process
if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated
wastewater prior to pretreatment the user should measure the flows and
concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula of
40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment
standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated
in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e) this adjusted limit along with the
supporting data shall be submitted to the General Manager.
         (e)   Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the
techniques prescribed in 40 C.F.R. part 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40
C.F.R. part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the
pollutant in question, or where the Regional Administrator determines that the
40 C.F.R. part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the
pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using
validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical
procedures, including procedures suggested by the General Manager or other
parties, approved by the Regional Administrator.
         (f)   The General Manager may allow the submission of a baseline
report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides
information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment
measures.
         (g)   The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of
sampling, and methods of analysis, and shall certify that the sampling and
analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant
discharges to the POTW.
      (6)   Certification. The user shall submit a statement, reviewed by an
authorized representative of the industrial user and certified to by a
qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met
on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and
maintenance (O and M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the
industrial user to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
      (7)   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O and M will
be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the user shall submit the
shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide such additional
pretreatment and/or O and M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be
later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment
standard.
         (a)   Where the industrial user’s categorical pretreatment standard
has been modified by a removal allowance (40 C.F.R. § 403.7), the combined
waste stream formula (40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e)), and/or a fundamentally different
factors variance (40 C.F.R. § 403.13) at the time the user submits the report
required by division (B) of this section, the information required by divisions
(A)(6) and (A)(7) of this section shall pertain to the modified limits.
         (b)   If the categorical pretreatment standards are modified by a
removal allowance (40 C.F.R. § 403.7), the combined waste stream formula (40
C.F.R. § 403.6(e)), and/or a fundamentally different factors variance (40
C.F.R. § 403.13) after the user submits the report required by this division
(A), any necessary amendment to the information requested by divisions (A)(6)
and (A)(7) of this section shall be submitted by the user to the General
Manager within 60 days after the modified limit is approved.
      (8)   Signature. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and
certified in accordance with §
7.20.510 of this chapter.
   (B)   Compliance schedule for meeting categorical pretreatment standards.
The following conditions apply to the compliance schedule required by §
7.20.520(A)(7) of this chapter.
      (1)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction
and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable categorical pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not
limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans,
executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing
construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation, and the like).
      (2)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months.
      (3)   Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the
final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a progress report
to the General Manager including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with
the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which
it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and
the steps being taken by the industrial user to return the construction to the
schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between
the progress reports to the General Manager.
   (C)   Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline.
      (1)   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards or in the case of a new source
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any
industrial user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit
to the General Manager a report containing the information described in
divisions (A)(4) through (A)(6) of this section.
      (2)   For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration
limits established by the city in accordance with the procedures in 40 C.F.R. §
403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user’s long
term production rate.
      (3)   For all other industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the
user’s actual production during the appropriate sampling period.
      (4)   All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance
with §
7.20.510 of this chapter.
   (D)   Periodic reports on continued compliance.
      (1)   Except as specified in division (D)(3) of this section, any
industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard, after the
compliance date of the pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new source,
after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit to the General
Manager during the months of June and December of each year, unless required
more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the General Manager or the
approval authority, a report indicating the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such categorical pretreatment
standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of measured or
estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period for the
discharge reported in division (A)(4) of this section, except that the General
Manager may require more detailed reporting of flows. In cases where the
pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice (or
pollution prevention alternative), the user shall submit documentation required
by the General Manager or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the
compliance status of the user. At the discretion of the General Manager and in
consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget
cycles, and the like, the General Manager may agree to alter the months during
which above reports are to be submitted.
      (2)   The General Manager may authorize the industrial user subject to a
categorical pretreatment standard to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated
by a categorical pretreatment standard if the industrial user has demonstrated
through sampling and other technical factors that the pollutant is neither
present nor expected to be present in the discharge, or is present only at
background levels from intake water and without any increase in the pollutant
due to activities of the industrial user. This authorization is subject to the
following conditions:
         (a)   The General Manager may authorize a waiver where a pollutant is
determined to be present solely due to sanitary wastewater discharged from the
facility provided that the sanitary wastewater is not regulated by an
applicable categorical standard and otherwise includes no process water.
         (b)   The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of the
effective period of the permit or other equivalent individual control
mechanism, but in no case longer than five years. The user must submit a new
request for the waiver before the waiver can be granted for each subsequent
control mechanism.
         (c)   In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the
industrial user must provide data from at least one sampling of the facility’s
process wastewater prior to any treatment present at the facility that is
representative of all wastewater from all processes. The request for a
monitoring waiver must be signed in accordance with paragraph (1) of this
section, and include the certification statement in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)(2)
(ii). Non-detectable sample results may only be used as a demonstration that a
pollutant is not present if the EPA approved method from 40 C.F.R. part 136
with the lowest minimum detection level for that pollutant was used in the
analysis.
         (d)   Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the General Manager must
be included as a condition in the user’s control mechanism. The reasons
supporting the waiver and any information submitted by the user in its request
for the waiver must be maintained by the General Manager for three years after
expiration of the waiver.
         (e)   Upon arrival of the monitoring waiver and revision of the user’s
control mechanism by the General Manager, the industrial user must certify on
each report with the statement below, that there has been no increase in the
pollutant in its wastestream due to activities of the industrial user:
      “Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for
managing compliance with the pretreatment standard for 40 CFR [specify the
applicable National Pretreatment Standard part(s)], I certify that, to the best
of my knowledge and belief, there has been no increase in the level of [list
pollutant(s)] in the wastewaters due to the activities at the facility since
filling of the last periodic report under 40 CFR 403.12(e)(1).”
         (f)   In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or
is expected to be present based on changes that occur in the user’s operations,
the user must immediately: comply with the monitoring requirements of division
(D)(1) of this section or other more frequent monitoring requirements imposed
by the General Manager, and notify the General Manager.
         (g)   This provision does not supersede certification processes and
requirements established in categorical pretreatment standards, except as
otherwise specified in the categorical pretreatment standard.
      (3)   The General Manager may reduce the requirement in division (D)(1)
of this section to a requirement to report no less frequently than once a year,
unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the approval
authority, where the industrial user meets all of the following conditions:
         (a)   The industrial user’s total categorical wastewater flow does not
exceed any of the following:
            1.   One one-hundredth percent (0.01%) of the design dry weather
hydraulic capacity of the POTW, or 5,000 gallons per day, whichever is smaller,
as measured by a continuous effluent flow monitoring device unless the
industrial user discharges in batches;
            2.   One one-hundredth percent (0.01%) of the design dry weather
organic treatment capacity of the POTW; and
            3.   One one-hundredth percent (0.01%) of the maximum allowable
headworks loading for any pollutant regulated by the applicable categorical
pretreatment standard for which approved local limits were developed by a POTW
in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.5(c) and division (C) of this section.
         (b)   The industrial user has not been in significant noncompliance,
as defined in 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(2)(viii), for any time in the past two
years;
         (c)   The industrial user does not have daily flow rates, production
levels, or pollutant levels that vary so significantly that decreasing the
reporting requirement for this industrial user would result in data that are
not representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period pursuant
to §
7.20.630;
         (d)   The industrial user must notify the General Manager immediately
of any changes at its facility causing it to no longer meet conditions of
divisions (D)(3)(a) or (D)(3)(b) of this section. Upon notification, the
industrial user must immediately begin complying with the minimum reporting in
division (D)(1) of this section; and
         (e)   The General Manager must retain documentation to support the
General Manager’s determination that a specific industrial user qualifies for
reduced reporting requirements under division (D)(3) of this section for a
period of three years after the expiration of the term of the control
mechanism.
      (4)   Where the General Manager has imposed mass limitations on
industrial users as provided for by 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(d), the report required
by division (D)(1) of this section shall indicate the mass of pollutants
regulated by pretreatment standards in the discharge from the industrial user.
      (5)   For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration
limits established by the city in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c), the
report required by division (D)(1) shall contain a reasonable measure of the
user’s long term production rate. For all other industrial users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards expressed only in terms of allowable
pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), the
report required by division (D)(1) shall include the user’s actual average
production rate for the reporting period.
      (6)   All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance
with §
7.20.510 of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.480) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.530 Reporting requirements for significant industrial users not subject
to categorical pretreatment standards.
   The General Manager must require appropriate reporting from those
significant industrial users with discharges that are not subject to
categorical pretreatment standards. Significant noncategorical industrial users
must submit to the General Manager at least once every six months (on dates
specified by the General Manager) a description of the nature, concentration,
and flow of the pollutants required to be reported by the General Manager. In
cases where a local limit requires compliance with a best management practice
or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation
required by the General Manager to determine the compliance status of the user.
These reports must be based on sampling and analysis performed in the period
covered by the report, and in accordance with the techniques described in 40
C.F.R. part 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 C.F.R. part 136 does not
contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or
where the Regional Administrator determines that the 40 C.F.R. part 136
sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in
question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated
analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures
suggested by the POTW or other persons, approved by the Regional Administrator.
This sampling and analysis may be performed by the city in lieu of the
significant noncategorical industrial user.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.484) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.540 Notification of violation— Resampling requirements.
   (A)   If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user shall
notify the General Manager within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation.
   (B)   The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the
results of the repeat analysis to the General Manager within 30 days after
becoming aware of the violation. Where the General Manager has performed the
sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user, the General Manager must
perform the repeat sampling and analysis unless it notifies the user of the
violation and requires the user to perform the repeat analysis. Resampling is
not required if:
      (1)   The General Manager performs sampling at the industrial user’s
facility at a frequency of at least once per month; or
      (2)   The General Manager performs sampling at the industrial user’s
facility between the time when the initial sampling was conducted and the time
when the user or the General Manager receives the results of this sampling.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.486) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.550 Notification of potential problems, including slug discharge.
   (A)   In the case of any discharge including, but not limited to, accidental
discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch
discharge, a slug discharge or a slug load which may cause potential problems
or damage to the POTW (including a violation of the prohibited discharge
standards or specific limitations in this chapter), it is the responsibility of
all users to telephone and notify the General Manager within 24 hours of the
incident. This notification shall include the location of discharge, type of
waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the
industrial user.
   (B)   Within five days following such discharge, the industrial user shall,
unless waived by the General Manager, submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the
industrial user to prevent similar future occurrences. The notification shall
not relieve the industrial user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability
which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or
any other damage to person or property; nor shall the notification relieve the
industrial user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be
imposed by this chapter.
   (C)   Failure to notify the General Manager of potential problem discharges
shall be deemed a separate violation of this chapter.
   (D)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the industrial user’s bulletin
board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of
a discharge described in division (A) above. Employers shall ensure that all
employees, who may cause or suffer such a discharge to occur, are advised of
the emergency notification procedure.
   (E)   Significant industrial users are required to notify the General
Manager immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for
a slug discharge.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.488) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.560 Notification of changes.
   Each user must notify the General Manager of any planned significant changes
to the user’s operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or
volume of its wastewater at least 90 days before the change. The user may be
required to submit the information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the
changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit
application. The General Manager may issue a wastewater discharge permit
application or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit in response to
the changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.490) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.570 Notification of discharge of hazardous wastes.
   (A)   Every user shall notify the General Manager, the EPA Regional Waste
Management Division Director and state hazardous waste authorities in writing
of any discharge into the POTW of a substance, which, if otherwise disposed of,
would be a hazardous waste under 40 C.F.R. part 261, or Cal. Code of
Regulations Title 22. The notification must include the name of the hazardous
waste as set forth in 40 C.F.R. part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and
the type of discharge (continuous, batch or other). If the industrial user
discharges more than ten kilograms of the waste per calendar month to the POTW,
the notification shall also contain the following information:
      (1)   An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the
wastes;
      (2)   An estimation of the mass and concentration of the constituents in
the waste stream discharged during that calendar month; and
      (3)   An estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream
expected to be discharged during the following 12 months.
   (B)   All notifications must take place within ten days after the discharge
commences. Any notification under this division need be submitted only once for
each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed discharges
must be submitted under §
7.20.560. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to
pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements of this
chapter.
   (C)   In the case of any new regulations under § 3001 of RCRA identifying
additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional
substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user shall notify the General
Manager, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state
hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of the substances within 30 days
of the effective date of the regulations.
   (D)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the
industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the
volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has been
determined to be economically practical.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.495) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.580 Compliance schedules.
   Any industrial user not in compliance with this chapter or any discharge
limitations shall abide by the provisions of a compliance schedule developed by
the General Manager. The General Manager may require:
   (A)   The development of a compliance schedule by each industrial user for
the installation of technology required to meet applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements; and
   (B)   The submission of all notices and self-monitoring reports from
industrial users as are necessary to assess and assure compliance by industrial
users with pretreatment standards and requirements, including but not limited
to the reports required in §
7.20.520.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.500) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.590 Record keeping.
   Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain,
and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information
obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter and any
additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities
undertaken by the user independent of the requirements and documentation
associated with best management practices established under §
7.20.520(A)(5)(b). Records shall include the date, exact place, method and time
of sampling and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates
analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques
or methods used; and the results of the analyses. These records shall remain
available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be
automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user
or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer
retention period by the General Manager.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.505) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.600 Pretreatment facilities.
   Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this
chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in this chapter within the
time limitations specified by EPA, the state or the General Manager, whichever
is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided,
operated and maintained at the user’s expense. Detailed plans describing such
facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the General Manager
for review, and shall be acceptable to the General Manager before the
facilities are constructed. The review of the plans and operating procedures
shall, in no way, relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the
facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under
provisions of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.510) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.610 Additional pretreatment measures.
   (A)   Whenever deemed necessary, the General Manager may require industrial
users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that
certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or
consolidate points of discharge, separate domestic waste streams from
industrial waste streams and such other conditions as may be necessary to
protect the POTW and determine the industrial user’s compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   The General Manager may require any person discharging into the POTW
to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable
storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater
discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
   (C)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.520) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.620 Control manholes.
   When required by the General Manager, the owner of any property served by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the wastes. The manhole, when required, shall be accessible and
safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with the plans approved
by the General Manager, and the manhole shall be installed by the owner at his
or her expense and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and
accessible to the city at all times.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.530) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.630 Sewage sampling, analysis and flow measurement.
   (A)   Except in the case of non-significant categorical users, the reports
required in §
7.20.520(A), (B), (C), and §
7.20.530 of this chapter shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of
the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or
production and mass where requested by the General Manager, of pollutants
contained therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards.
This sampling and analysis may be performed by the General Manager in lieu of
the industrial user. Where the POTW performs the required sampling and analysis
in lieu of the industrial user, the user will not be required to submit the
compliance certification required in this section. In addition, where the POTW
itself collects all the information required for the report, including flow
data, the industrial user will not be required to submit the report.
   (B)   The reports required in §
7.20.520(A), (B), (C), and §
7.20.530 of this chapter must be based upon data obtained through appropriate
sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report, which
data are representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period.
The General Manager shall require that frequency of monitoring necessary to
assess and assure compliance by industrial users with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements. Grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total
phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organic compounds. For all other
pollutants, 24-hour composite samples must be obtained through flow-
proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite
sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the General Manager. Where time-
proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the General
Manager, the samples must be representative of the discharge and the decision
to allow the alternative sampling must be documented in the industrial user
file for the facility or facilities. Using protocols (including appropriate
preservation) specified in 40 C.F.R. part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance,
multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior
to the analysis as follows: For cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the
samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile
organics and oil and grease the samples may be composited in the laboratory.
Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures
as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the General
Manager, as appropriate.
   (C)   For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day
compliance reports required in §
7.20.520, a minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total
phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities
for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which
historical sampling data are available, the General Manager may authorize a
lower minimum. For the periodic reports on continued compliance and the reports
required in §
7.20.520, the General Manager shall require the number of grab samples
necessary to assess and assure compliance by industrial users with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements.
   (D)   If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirements in
periodic reports on continued compliance, monitors any regulated pollutant at
the appropriate sampling location more frequently than required by the General
Manager, using the procedures prescribed in division (A)(5)(e) of this section,
the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
   (E)   The General Manager may use a grab sample(s) to determine
noncompliance with pretreatment standards.
   (F)   All samples for laboratory analyses of the characteristics of water
and wastes determined in accordance with 40 C.F.R. part 136, as described in §§
7.20.520 and
7.20.530, shall be collected at the control manhole. In the event that no
special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to
be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected.
   (G)   The General Manager shall have reasonable access onto the industrial
user’s property to collect samples and perform tests, as defined in §
7.20.040.
   (H)   Periodic measurements of flow rates, flow volumes, BOD and suspended
solids for use in determining the monthly industrial wastewater treatment
service charge and such measurements of other constituents believed necessary
by the General Manager shall be made by all industrial users, unless
specifically relieved of the obligation by the General Manager.
   (I)   All such sampling, analyses and flow measurements of industrial
wastewaters shall be performed by a state-certified independent laboratory, by
a laboratory operated by an industrial user and approved by the General Manager
or by personnel of the city. Prior to submittal to the General Manager of data
developed in the laboratory of an industrial user, the results shall be
verified by a responsible administrative official of the industrial user under
the penalty of perjury.
   (J)   All users making periodic measurements shall furnish and install at
the control manholes or other appropriate location a calibrated flume, weir,
flow meter or similar device approved by the General Manager and suitable to
measure the industrial wastewater flow rate and total volume. A flow
indicating, recording and totalizing register may be required by the General
Manager. In lieu of wastewater flow measurement, the General Manager may accept
records of water usage and adjust the flow volumes by suitable factors to
determine peak and average flow rates for the specific industrial wastewater
discharge.
   (K)   The minimum requirement for self- monitoring shall be at least two
times per year for significant industrial users, whether or not they are
subject to national categorical standards.
   (L)   Industrial users with large fluctuations in quantity or quality of
wastewater may be required to provide continuous sampling and analyses for
every day of operation. When required by the General Manager, users shall
install and maintain automatic flow proportional sampling equipment and/or
automatic analysis and recording equipment, approved by the General Manager.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.540) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.640 Federal categorical pretreatment standards.
   The national categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 C.F.R. Ch. I,
Subch. N, parts 405–471, as amended, are hereby incorporated.
   (A)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms
of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the
General Manager may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in
accordance with division (C) of this section.
   (B)   When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed
only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the General Manager
may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of
pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for purposes of
calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual industrial users.
   (C)   When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed
only in terms of pollutant concentrations, an industrial user may request that
the General Manager convert the limits to equivalent mass limits. The
determination to convert concentration limits to mass limits is within the
discretion of the General Manager. The General Manager may establish equivalent
mass limits only if the industrial user meets all the following conditions in
divisions (C)(1)(a) through (C)(1)(e) of this section.
      (1)   To be eligible for equivalent mass limits, the industrial user
must:
         (a)   Employ, or demonstrate that it will employ, water conservation
methods and technologies that substantially reduce water use during the term of
its individual wastewater discharge permit;
         (b)   Currently use control and treatment technologies adequate to
achieve compliance with the applicable categorical pretreatment standard, and
not have used dilution as a substitute for treatment;
         (c)   Provide sufficient information to establish the facility’s
actual average daily flow rate for all wastestreams, based on data from a
continuous effluent flow monitoring device, as well as the facility’s long-term
average production rate. Both the actual average daily flow rate and the long-
term average production rate must be representative of current operating
conditions;
         (d)   Not have daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant
levels that vary so significantly that equivalent mass limits are not
appropriate to control the discharge; and
         (e)   Have consistently complied with all applicable categorical
pretreatment standards during the period prior to the industrial user’s request
for equivalent mass limits.
      (2)   An industrial user subject to equivalent mass limits must:
         (a)   Maintain and effectively operate control and treatment
technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the equivalent mass limits;
         (b)   Continue to record the facility’s flow rates through the use of
a continuous effluent flow monitoring device;
         (c)   Continue to record the facility’s production rates and notify
the General Manager whenever production rates are expected to vary by more than
20% from its baseline production rates determined in division (C)(1)(c) of this
section. Upon notification of a revised production rate, the General Manager
will reassess the equivalent mass limit and revise the limit as necessary to
reflect changed conditions at the facility; and
         (d)   Continue to employ the same or comparable water conservation
methods and technologies as those implemented pursuant to division (C)(1)(a) of
this section so long as it discharges under an equivalent mass limit.
      (3)   A General Manager which chooses to establish equivalent mass
limits:
         (a)   Must calculate the equivalent mass limit by multiplying the
actual average daily flow rate of the regulated process(es) of the industrial
user by the concentration-based daily maximum and monthly average standard for
the applicable categorical pretreatment standard and the appropriate unit
conversion factor;
         (b)   Upon notification of a revised production rate, will reassess
the equivalent mass limit and recalculate the limit as necessary to reflect
changed conditions at the facility; and
         (c)   May retain the same equivalent mass limit in subsequent control
mechanism terms if the industrial user’s actual average daily flow rate was
reduced solely as a result of the implementation of water conservation methods
and technologies, and the actual average daily flow rates used in the original
calculation of the equivalent mass limit were not based on the use of dilution
as a substitute for treatment pursuant to § 7.20.650. The industrial user must
also be in compliance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.17 (regarding the prohibition of
bypass).
      (4)   The General Manager may not express limits in terms of mass for
pollutants such as pH, temperature, radiation, or other pollutants which cannot
appropriately be expressed as mass.
   (D)   The General Manager may convert the mass limits of the categorical
pretreatment standards at 40 C.F.R. parts 414, 419, and 455 to concentration
limits for purposes of calculating limitations applicable to individual
industrial users under the following conditions. When converting such limits to
concentration limits, the General Manager must use the concentrations listed in
the applicable subparts of 40 C.F.R. parts 414, 419, and 455 and document that
dilution is not being substituted for treatment as prohibited by §
7.20.650.
   (E)   Equivalent limitations calculated in accordance with divisions (C),
(D), (E), and (F) of this section are deemed pretreatment standards for the
purposes of § 307(d) of the Act and this part. The General Manager must
document how the equivalent limits were derived and make this information
publicly available. Once incorporated into its control mechanism, the
industrial user must comply with the equivalent limitations in lieu of the
promulgated categorical standards from which the equivalent limitations were
derived.
   (F)   Many categorical pretreatment standards specify one limit for
calculating maximum daily discharge limitations and a second limit for
calculating maximum monthly average, or four-day average, limitations. Where
such standards are being applied, the same production or flow figure shall be
used in calculating both the average and the maximum equivalent limitation.
   (G)   Any industrial user operating under a control mechanism incorporating
equivalent mass or concentration limits calculated from a production based
standard shall notify the General Manager within two business days after the
user has a reasonable basis to know that the production level will
significantly change within the next calendar month. Any user not notifying the
General Manager of such anticipated change will be required to meet the mass or
concentration limits in its control mechanism that were based on the original
estimate of the long term average production rate.
   (H)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the General Manager
shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40
C.F.R. § 403.6(e).
   (I)   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard
if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive portions of
40 C.F.R. § 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally
different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical
pretreatment standard.
   (J)   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.15.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.550) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.650 Dilution prohibited.
   No industrial user shall increase the use of process water, or in any way
attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly
authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The General
Manager may impose mass limitations on industrial users which are using
dilution to meet applicable standards or requirements, or in other cases when
the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.560) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.660 Salinity control plan.
   (A)   Any discharger using bulk salt (greater than 100 pounds per day) for
product preparation and/or ancillary plant operations (such as water softeners
for boilers) or other chemicals that contribute salinity to the discharge,
shall implement and submit to the General Manager a salinity control plan by
the effective date of this chapter. The salinity control plan shall use best
management practices to reduce the electrical conductivity discharges below the
maximum concentration limitation provided in §
7.20.480. The salinity control plan shall contain the following items, at a
minimum:
      (1)   Determinations or best estimates of the identities and approximate
quantities of salts used and discharged;
      (2)   Descriptions of the major salting operations and locations of
potential salt release points on site drawing;
      (3)   A spill prevention, control and countermeasures (SPCC) plan;
      (4)   A description of the methods of salt waste removal and disposal;
      (5)   A description of the employee training program for salinity
control; and
      (6)   Identification of the person responsible for implementation of the
salinity control plan.
   (B)   The salinity control plan shall be implemented and submitted to the
General Manager by the effective date of this chapter and endorsed by industry
officials.
   (C)   The salinity control plan shall be updated by the discharger during
renewal of the wastewater discharge permit.
   (D)   In the case of any accidental slug or batch discharge of salt wastes
that causes the discharger’s wastewater electrical conductivity to exceed the
maximum concentration limitation provided in §
7.20.480, the discharger shall immediately notify the General Manager days of
such discharge and submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of
the discharge and the measures to be taken by the discharger to prevent similar
future occurrences.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.565) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.670 Accidental discharge—Slug control plan.
   The General Manager shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user
needs an accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan or other action to
control slug discharges. The General Manager may require any user to develop,
submit for approval, and implement such a plan or take such other action that
may be necessary to control slug discharges. Alternatively, the General Manager
may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug discharge
control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:
   (A)   Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
   (B)   Description of stored chemicals;
   (C)   Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental or
slug discharge, as required by §
7.20.550 of this chapter; and including any discharge that would violate a
prohibition under 40 C.F.R. § 403.5(b) with procedures for follow-up written
notification within five days; and
   (D)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site run-off, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.570) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.680 Tenant responsibility.
   Where an owner of property leases premises to any other person as a tenant
under any rental or lease agreement, if either the owner or the tenant is an
industrial user, either or both may be responsible for compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.580) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.690 Hauled wastewater.
   (A)   Septic tank waste, grease, oil and sand interceptor waste may be
accepted into the POTW at a designated receiving structure within the treatment
plant area, and at such times as are established by the General Manager,
provided such wastes do not violate this chapter or any other requirements
established or adopted by the city. Wastewater discharge permits for individual
vehicles to use the facilities shall be issued by the General Manager.
   (B)   The discharge of hauled industrial wastes as “industrial septage”
requires prior approval and a wastewater discharge permit from the General
Manager. The General Manager shall have authority to prohibit the disposal of
such wastes, if such disposal would interfere with the treatment plant
operation. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other
sections of this chapter.
   (C)   All hauled wastes shall be identified by the type of discharge, volume
of discharge, source address and owner before being allowed to discharge. The
General Manager may require random or routine testing of these dischargers.
   (D)   Fees for dumping hauled wastes will be established as part of the
industrial user fee system as authorized by resolution of the Board of Public
Utilities.
   (E)   Wastewater discharge permits issued to haulers subject to this section
shall contain requirements for maintaining proper records and manifests, and
any other information as described in §
7.20.660.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.590) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.700 Wastewater survey.
   (A)   The General Manager is authorized to identify and locate all possible
industrial users which might be subject to the POTW pretreatment program. Any
compilation, index or inventory of industrial users made under this section
shall be made available to the approval authority of Regional Administrator
upon request.
   (B)   When requested by the General Manager all industrial users must submit
information on the nature and characteristics of their wastewater by completing
a wastewater survey prior to commencing their discharge. The General Manager is
authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require
industrial users to update the survey. Failure to complete this survey shall be
reasonable grounds for terminating service to the industrial user and shall be
considered a violation of this chapter.
   (C)   The General Manager shall notify industrial users identified under
division (A) of this section of applicable local, state or federal pretreatment
standards and any applicable requirements under §§ 204(b) and 405 of the Act
and divisions (C) and (D) of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, or any
other requirements of local, state or federal law. Within 30 days of the list
approval pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(6) of a list of SIUs, the General
Manager shall notify each SIU of its status and all requirements applicable to
it as a result of the status.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.600) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.710 Wastewater discharge permit requirement.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any significant industrial user to discharge
wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit
from the General Manager. Any violation of the terms and conditions of a
wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and
subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in this
chapter. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee
of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards
or any other requirement of federal, state and local law.
   (B)   The General Manager may require other industrial users, including
liquid waste haulers, to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to
carry out the purposes of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.610) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.720 Mandatory permits.
   The General Manager shall have the authority to deny or condition new or
increased contributions of pollutants or changes in the nature of pollutants to
the POTW by industrial users where the contributions do not meet applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements or where the contributions would cause
the city to violate its waste discharge requirements.
   (A)   Any industrial user which discharges industrial waste into the POTW
prior to the effective date hereof and who wishes to continue the discharges in
the future, shall, within 90 days after the date, apply to the General Manager
for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with this chapter, and shall
not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 180 days of the
effective date hereof except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit
issued by the General Manager.
   (B)   Any industrial user proposing to begin or recommence discharging
industrial wastes into the POTW must obtain a wastewater discharge permit prior
to the beginning or recommencing of the discharge. An application for this
wastewater discharge permit must be filed at least 90 days prior to the date
upon which any discharge will begin.
   (C)   Any existing industrial user located beyond the city limits and which
utilizes the city’s public sewer system to discharge industrial waste shall
submit a wastewater discharge permit application, in accordance with this
chapter, within 90 days of the effective date hereof. New industrial users
located beyond the city shall submit the applications to the General Manager 90
days prior to any proposed discharge into the system.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.620) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.730 Industrial wastewater discharge permit categories.
   Industrial wastewater discharge permits shall be issued under the following
categories as determined by the General Manager after review of the permit
application as described in §
7.20.740. The General Manager may determine, upon review of the permit
application, that no permit is required for certain small industries and
commercial users.
   (A)   General industrial/commercial user permits (Class “P” dischargers).
General industrial/ commercial user permits shall be issued to certain small
industries and some commercial users whose individual discharges do not
significantly impact the POTW, degrade wastewater quality or contaminate
sludge. Industries that have the potential to discharge a non-domestic or
process waste stream, but at the present time discharge only sanitary waste,
may also be included in this group.
   (B)   Significant industrial user (SIU) permits (Class “S” dischargers). SIU
permits shall be issued to those industries which are determined by the General
Manager to be significant industrial users (SIUs) as defined in §
7.20.020. The General Manager may require other users to obtain an SIU permit
as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
   (C)   Waste haulers. All waste haulers from septic tanks, grease traps, sand
traps and haulers of industrial wastes will be classified as Class “SH”
dischargers.
   (D)   Food service establishments. All food service establishments will be
classified as Class “F” discharges.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.625) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.740 Wastewater discharge permit application.
   All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a
permit application. The General Manager may require all users to submit as part
of an application the following information:
   (A)   Information required by §
7.20.510 of this chapter, if applicable;
   (B)   Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at
the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged
to the POTW;
   (C)   Number and type of employees, hours of operation and proposed or
actual hours of operation;
   (D)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate
of production;
   (E)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per
day);
   (F)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to
show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and
elevation, and all points of discharge;
   (G)   Time and duration of discharges; and
   (H)   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the General
Manager to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. Incomplete or
inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user
for revision.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.630) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.750 Wastewater discharge permit contents.
   (A)   Wastewater discharge permits shall include such conditions as are
reasonably deemed necessary by the General Manager to prevent pass through or
interference, protect the quality of the effluent from the treatment plant,
protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal,
protect ambient air quality and protect against damage to the POTW.
   (B)   Each wastewater discharge permit shall be expressly subject to all of
the provisions of this chapter and all other regulations, user charges and fees
that are established by the city. The conditions of all wastewater discharge
permits shall be uniformly enforced in accordance with this chapter and
applicable federal and state regulations.
   (C)   Wastewater discharge permits must contain:
      (1)   A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration,
which in no event shall exceed five years;
      (2)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable;
      (3)   Effluent limits applicable to the user including best management
practices based on applicable standards in federal, state and local law;
      (4)   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and record
keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of
pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency and sample
type based on federal, state and local law;
      (5)   Statement of applicable civil, criminal and administrative
penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any
applicable compliance schedule. The schedule may not extend the time for
compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state or local law;
      (6)   Requirements to control slug discharges, if determined by the POTW
to be necessary;
      (7)   The process for seeking a waiver from monitoring for a pollutant
neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge in accordance with
§
7.20.520(D); and
      (8)   Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the General Manager (§
7.20.520(D)) must be included as a condition in the user’s permit.
   (D)   The conditions of each wastewater discharge permit may, without
limitation, include any or all of the following:
      (1)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees that must be
paid by the permittee in order for the wastewater to be discharged into the
POTW from its facilities;
      (2)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
      (3)   Limits on the instantaneous, daily and monthly average and/or
maximum concentration, mass or other measure of identified wastewater
pollutants or properties;
      (4)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed
to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW;
      (5)   Development and implementation of spill control plans or other
special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately
prevent accidental unanticipated or routine discharges;
      (6)   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
      (7)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment;
      (8)   Calibration frequency requirements for all devices used to measure
wastewater flow and quality;
      (9)   The compliance schedules that are required for the permittee’s
facilities;
      (10)   The analyses of the wastewater discharges from the permittee’s
facilities that are to be established by the General Manager through an annual
notification process and are to be performed, as a part of the permittee’s
compliance effort, by a laboratory that is approved by the General Manager;
      (11)   The requirements for maintaining, and for affording the General
Manager access to, the records of the permittee’s facilities that relate to its
wastewater discharges;
      (12)   The requirements for the notification of the General Manager of
any introduction of new constituents or any substantial change in the volume or
character of the existing constituents of the wastewater discharges from the
permittee’s facilities;
      (13)   The requirements for the notification of the General Manager of
slug upset or bypass discharges from the permittee’s facilities;
      (14)   The requirement that an amended application must be filed within
ten working days after
any condition that is contained in the original application is changed;
      (15)   A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all
applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which
become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and
      (16)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the General Manager to
ensure compliance with this chapter and state and federal laws, rules and
regulations.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.640) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.760 Wastewater discharge permit appeals.
   Any person, including the industrial user, may petition the General Manager
to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 60 days of its
issuance.
   (A)   Failure to submit timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a
waiver of the administrative appeal.
   (B)   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and
the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater
discharge permit.
   (C)   The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be
stayed pending the appeal.
   (D)   If the General Manager fails to act within 90 days, a request for
reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a
wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not
to modify a wastewater discharge permit, shall be considered final
administrative action for purposes of judicial review.
   (E)   Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the
Superior Court for Tulare County within 90 days.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.650) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.770 Wastewater discharge permit modifications.
   (A)   The General Manager may modify the wastewater discharge permit for
good cause including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
      (2)   To address significant alterations or additions to the industrial
user’s operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time
of wastewater discharge permit issuance;
      (3)   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
      (4)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat
to the POTW, city personnel or the receiving waters;
      (5)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge
permit;
      (6)   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
      (7)   Revision of, or a grant of, variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 403.13; and
      (8)   To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater
discharge permit.
   (B)   The filing of a request by the permittee for a wastewater discharge
permit modification does not stay any wastewater discharge permit condition.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.660) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.780 Wastewater discharge permit transfer.
   Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific
operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred
or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, a new or changed
operation or remodel of an existing facility which is retained by the current
owner.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.670) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.790 Wastewater discharge permit revocation.
   Any user who performs the following actions, or who violates any condition
of the permit, of this chapter, or of applicable state and federal regulations,
is subject to having his or her permit revoked in accordance with the
procedures of this chapter:
   (A)   Failure to notify the General Manager of significant changes to the
wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
   (B)   Failure to provide prior notification to the General Manager of
changed condition pursuant to any requirement in this chapter;
   (C)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application;
   (D)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
   (E)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
   (F)   Refusing to allow the General Manager timely access to the facility
premises and records;
   (G)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
   (H)   Failure to pay fines;
   (I)   Failure to pay sewer charges;
   (J)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
   (K)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge
permit application;
   (L)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted
facility; and/or
   (M)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of
the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter. A wastewater discharge permit
shall be voidable upon nonuse, cessation of operations or transfer of business
ownership. An existing wastewater discharge permit is void upon the issuance of
a new wastewater discharge permit.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.680) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.800 Wastewater discharge permit reissuance.
   An industrial user shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance 60
days prior to the expiration of the industrial user’s existing wastewater
discharge permit.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.690) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.810 Confidential information.
   Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports, surveys,
wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits and
monitoring programs, and from the General Manager’s inspection and sampling
activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the
industrial user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the General Manager, that the release of such information would
divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection
as trade secrets under applicable state law. When requested and demonstrated by
the industrial user furnishing a report that the information should be held
confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or
secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but
shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for
uses related to discharge permits or the pretreatment program, and in
enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater
constituents and characteristics and other “effluent data,” as defined by 40
C.F.R. § 2.302, will not be recognized as confidential information.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.700) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.820 Publication of industrial users in significant noncompliance.
   The General Manager shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general
circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions
served by the POTW, a list of the industrial users which, at any time during
the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements. The term SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE
shall be applicable to all significant industrial users (or any other
industrial user that violates divisions (C), (D), or (H) of this section) and
shall mean:
   (A)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined herein as
those in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant
parameter taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits as defined
in §
7.20.020;
   (B)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined herein as those in
which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter
during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as
defined by §
7.20.020 multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils
and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
   (C)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by §
7.20.020 (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative
standard) that the General Manager determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
   (D)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the General Manager’s
exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
   (E)   Failure to meet, within 90 days after the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or
attaining final compliance;
   (F)   Failure to provide within 45 days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with
categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports,
and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
   (G)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
   (H)   Any other violation(s) which may include a violation of best
management practices, which the General Manager determines will adversely
affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.710) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.830 Violation—Penalty.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this
chapter. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, any violation of the
provisions herein shall constitute a misdemeanor. Notwithstanding the
classification of a violation of this chapter as a misdemeanor, at the time an
action is commenced to enforce the provisions of the chapter, the trial court,
upon recommendation of the City Attorney, may reduce the charged offense from a
misdemeanor to an infraction.
   (B)   Any person convicted on a misdemeanor under this chapter shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $2,500 or by imprisonment not exceeding six
months, or by both the fine and imprisonment.
   (C)   Any person convicted of an infraction under this chapter shall be
punished by:
      (1)   A fine not exceeding $50 for a first violation;
      (2)   A fine not exceeding $100 for a second violation of this chapter
within one year; and
      (3)   A fine not exceeding $250 for each and every additional violation
of this chapter within one year.
   (D)   Each day that a violation continues shall be regarded as a new and
separate offense.
   (E)   In addition to the penalty set forth hereinabove for the conviction of
a misdemeanor and/or infraction for violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter, any person so convicted shall further be required to pay restitution
to the city for all costs, including city staff time and reasonable attorney’s
fees, related to the enforcement of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.715) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.840 Notification of violation.
   Whenever the General Manager finds that any user has violated or is
violating this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the General Manager may serve
upon the user a written notice of violation. Within ten days of the receipt of
this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory
correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall
be submitted by the user to the General Manager. Submission of this plan in no
way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after
receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the
authority of the city to take any action, including emergency actions or any
other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.720) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.850 Consent order.
   The General Manager is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders,
assurances of voluntary compliance or other similar documents establishing an
agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. The orders will include
specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a
time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same
force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to this chapter
and shall be judicially enforceable.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.730) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.860 Show cause hearing.
   The General Manager may order any user which causes or contributes to
violations of this chapter, wastewater discharge permit, or orders issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before
the General Manager and show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not
be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for
the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for the action, and a
request that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should
not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by
certified mail at least 15 days prior to the hearing. The notice may be served
on any authorized representative of the user. Whether or not the user appears
as ordered, immediate enforcement action may be pursued following the hearing
date. A show cause hearing shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other
action against the user.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.740) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.870 Compliance order.
   When the General Manager finds that a user has violated or continues to
violate this chapter, wastewater discharge permit or orders issued hereunder,
or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, he or she may issue an order
to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into
compliance within a specified time frame. If the user does not come into
compliance within the time provided, sewer service shall be discontinued unless
adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are
installed and properly operated. Compliance orders may also contain other
requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-
monitoring, and management practices designed to minimize the amount of
pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the
deadline for compliance established for a federal pretreatment standard or
requirement, nor does a compliance order release the user of liability for any
violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order
shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other action against the user.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.750) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.880 Cease and desist order.
   When the General Manager finds that a user is violating this chapter, the
user’s wastewater discharge permit, any order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user’s past violations are
likely to recur, the General Manager may issue an order to the user directing
it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to
immediately comply with all requirements and take such appropriate remedial or
preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or
threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the
discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a prerequisite to
taking any other action against the user.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.760) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.890 Administrative fines.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter, any user that is
found to have violated any provision of this chapter, its wastewater discharge
permit, and orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement shall be fined in any amount not to exceed $1,000 per incident. The
fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of
monthly or other long term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed
for each day during the period of violation.
   (B)   Assessments may be added to the user’s next scheduled sewer service
charge and the General Manager shall have such other collection remedies as may
be available for other service charges and fees.
   (C)   Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request with
the General Manager to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine
amount within 30 days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit,
the General Manager shall convene a hearing on the matter within 30 days of
receiving the request from the industrial user. In the event the user’s appeal
is successful, the payment together with any interest accruing thereto shall be
returned to the industrial user. The city may add the costs of preparing
administrative enforcement actions such as notices and orders to the fine.
   (D)   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.770) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.900 Appeals.
   Any person affected by any decision, action or determination by the General
Manager, interpreting or implementing the provisions of this chapter,
including, without limitations, the provisions of this chapter, or any
industrial wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder by the General Manager,
excepting therefrom any decision, action or determination of the General
Manager to pursue either criminal penalties or civil judicial enforcement, may
file with the City Clerk, within ten days of the date of service of the
decision, action or determination, a notice of appeal to the Board of Public
Utilities appealing the decision, action or determination by the General
Manager. The notice of appeal shall set forth in detail all facts supporting
the industrial user’s appeal of the decision of the General Manager. The filing
of the notice of appeal shall stay all further action required under any notice
of violation or cease and desist orders and accumulation of interest upon
penalties thereon, pending final decision by the Board of Public Utilities on
the appeal; provided, however, that nothing stated herein shall limit the
authority of the General Manager to take the action or to make the directives
as the General Manager deems necessary to stop or prevent an ongoing or
threatened violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, including
actions or directives to prevent or stop threatened damage to the system, pass
through, or threatened harm to the health or safety of the public. The action
shall include, without limitation, continuing to physically block the
industrial user’s access to the sewer until the appeal is heard and decided by
the Board of Public Utilities.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.775) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.910 Emergency suspensions.
   The General Manager may immediately suspend a user’s discharge permit
whenever such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, or which
threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents or may
present an endangerment to the environment.
   (A)   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge permit shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user’s
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
General Manager shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate
severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW,
or endangerment to any individuals. The General Manager shall allow the user to
recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of
the General Manager that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the
termination proceedings set forth in this chapter are initiated against the
user.
   (B)   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment, shall submit a detailed written statement
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence, to the General Manager, prior to the date of any
show cause or termination hearing under this chapter. Nothing in this section
shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension
under this section.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.780) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.920 Termination of discharge permit.
   (A)   In addition to any provisions of this chapter, any user that violates
the following conditions of this chapter, wastewater discharge permit, or
orders issued hereunder, is subject to discharge termination:
      (1)   Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
      (2)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
      (3)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;
      (4)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the purpose
of inspection, monitoring or sampling; and
      (5)   Violation of the pretreatment standards in this chapter or
resolution of the Board of Public Utilities.
   (B)   The user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge
and be offered an opportunity to show cause under procedures in this chapter
why the proposed action should not be taken.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.790) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.930 Injunctive relief.
   Whenever a user has violated a pretreatment standard or requirement or
continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, wastewater discharge
permit or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the
General Manager may petition the Superior Court of the State of California
through the City Attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent
injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance
of the wastewater discharge permit, order or other requirement imposed by this
chapter on activities of the industrial user. Such other action as appropriate
for legal and/or equitable relief may also be sought by the city. A petition
for injunctive relief need not be filed as a prerequisite to taking any other
action against a user.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.800) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.940 Civil penalties.
   (A)   Any user which has violated or continues to violate this chapter, any
order or wastewater discharge permit hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement shall be liable to the General Manager for a maximum
civil penalty of $25,000 per violation per day. In the case of a monthly or
other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day
during the period of the violation.
   (B)   The General Manager may recover reasonable attorney’s fees, court
costs and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including
sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred
by the city.
   (C)   In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take
into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any
economic benefit gained through the user’s violation, corrective actions by the
user, the compliance history of the user and any other factor as justice
requires.
   (D)   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a prerequisite for
taking any other action against a user.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.810) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.950 Criminal prosecution.
   (A)   A person who negligently introduces into the POTW any pollutant or
hazardous substance which person knew, or reasonably should have known, could
cause personal injury or property damage which causes the POTW to violate any
effluent limitation or condition in any permit issued to the POTW, shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $2,500 nor more than $25,000 per day of
violation, or by imprisonment for not more than one year, or by both. If a
conviction of a person is for violation committed after a first conviction of
the person under this division, punishment shall be by a fine of not more than
$50,000 per day of violation, or by imprisonment of not more than two years, or
by both.
   (B)   Any person who knowingly introduces into the POTW any pollutant or
hazardous substance which the person knew or reasonably should have known could
cause personal injury or property damage, or which causes the POTW to violate
any effluent limitation or condition in a permit issued to the POTW shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $5,000 nor more than $50,000 per day of
violation, or by imprisonment of not more than three years, or by both. If a
conviction of a person for a violation committed after a first conviction of
such person under this division, punishment shall be by a fine of not more than
$100,000 per day of violation, or by imprisonment of not more than six years,
or by both.
   (C)   Any person who knowingly makes a false material statement,
representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or
other document, filed or required to be maintained under this chapter, or who
knowingly falsifies, tampers with or renders inaccurate any monitoring device
or method required to be maintained under this chapter, shall upon conviction
be punished by a fine of not more than $10,000, or by imprisonment for not more
than two years, or by both. If a conviction of a person is for a violation
committed after a first conviction of the person under this division,
punishment shall be by a fine of not more than $20,000 per day of violation, or
by imprisonment of not more than four years, or by both.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.820) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.960 Remedies nonexclusive.
   The enforcement procedures, penalties and remedies provided in this chapter
are not exclusive, but are in addition to any other enforcement procedures,
penalties and remedies that may be provided elsewhere in this chapter or by any
federal, state or local law, regulation or rule. The General Manager reserves
the right to take any, all or any combination of these enforcement procedures,
penalties and remedies against any person who violates a provision of this
chapter.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.830) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.970 Pretreatment charges and fees.
   The Board of Public Utilities may adopt reasonable charges and fees for
reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city’s pretreatment
program which may include:
   (A)   Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost
of processing the applications;
   (B)   Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures including
the cost of collection and analyzing an industrial user’s discharge, and
reviewing monitoring reports submitted by industrial users;
   (C)   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures
and construction;
   (D)   Fees for filing appeals; and
   (E)   Other fees as the Board of Public Utilities may deem necessary to
carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the
matters covered by this chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines and
penalties chargeable by the city.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.840) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.980 Monthly sewer service fees.
   For the purpose of providing funds for payment at or before the maturity of
the principal of and interest on all sewer revenue bonds heretofore or
hereafter issued by the city for the purpose of the acquisition, construction,
improvement and financing of the municipal sewer system and for the purpose of
defraying the cost of maintenance and operation of the municipal sewer system,
there are hereby levied and assessed upon all premises having or required
hereby to have any sewer connections with or discharging or required hereby to
discharge, sewage into or through the municipal sewer system, monthly sewer
service fees for the services and facilities for the collection, treatment and
disposal of sewage furnished or available to the premises, the public sewer
system. The fees shall be determined by the Board of Public Utilities and
adopted by the City Council by resolution.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.850) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.990 Sewer service fee—Billing.
   (A)   Each sewer service fee shall become due and payable to and at the
Finance Department on the date stated on the bill for payment thereof and shall
become delinquent on the twentieth day after the stated date.
   (B)   All bills for such fees shall be issued by the Finance Department.
They shall be combined with bills or statements for water service rendered by
the municipal water system. The bills shall state their purpose (water and
sewer service), shall give the name and last known address of the person
responsible for payment, and shall list separately the fee for water service
and the total fee for both services. Neither fee may be paid separately from
the other, and any partial payment of the total fee for both services shall be
applied first to the fee for sewer service before application thereof is made
for the fee for the water service. If a premises with sewer service is not
connected with the municipal water system, a separate bill shall be rendered
for sewer service only.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.860) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.1000 Persons responsible for payment.
   (A)   In the case of any person whose premises is connected with the
municipal water system, the person responsible for payment shall be that person
who requested the connection to the municipal water system, his or her
successor in interest or any person requesting that the bill be charged to him
or her.
   (B)   In the case of any person whose premises is not connected to the
municipal water system, the person responsible for payment shall be that person
who requested the connection to the municipal sewer system, his or her
successor in interest, or if no such request is made, then to the owner of
record of the premises on the date on which the premises is required hereby to
connect to the municipal sewer system, the successor in interest to the person,
or any person requesting that the bill be charged to him or her.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.870) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.1010 Effective date of sewer service fees.
   Sewer service fees shall become effective immediately to all premises
connected to the municipal sewer system and thereafter the charges shall become
effective against all premises not then connected to the municipal sewer system
immediately upon connection or within 30 days from the time that a connection
to the municipal sewer system could be made as provided herein, whichever is
the earliest.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.880) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.1015 Actions to collect.
   Any utility service fees (sewer, water, refuse) required to be paid by a
service user under the provisions of this city code shall be deemed a debt owed
by the service user to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the
provisions of this city code shall be liable to an action brought in the name
of the city for the recovery of such amount, including penalties and interest,
along with any collection costs incurred by the city as a result of the
person’s noncompliance, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney’s
fees. In the event that the debt is the result of overbilling or failure of the
city to bill the service user for utility service fees, the city is limited to
one year of refund or collection for utility service fees.
(Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-2015)
§ 7.20.1020 Sewer service fee—Lien.
   Each sewer service fee levied by or pursuant to this chapter on any premises
within the city limits is hereby made a lien upon the premises and any steps
authorized by law may be taken by the city to enforce payment of the lien.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.890) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.1030 Disconnection of service.
   In each case where any bill for both water service and sewer service remains
unpaid for 20 days after the date stated in the bill for payment, the bill
shall become delinquent and the General Manager shall disconnect the premises
from the municipal water system, and he or she may also disconnect the premises
from the municipal sewer system. Whenever a premises has been disconnected from
either the municipal water system or the municipal sewer system for nonpayment
of water or sewer service fees, the premises shall not be reconnected to either
the municipal water system or the municipal sewer system until all delinquent
fees and penalties have been paid, together with such reasonable charges for
reconnection as may be set by resolution from time to time by the Board of
Public Utilities.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.900) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.1040 Extension of sewer main facilities.
   Sewer main facilities may be extended by the city or by an applicant in
accordance with plans and specifications approved by the General Manager. If
the applicant elects to install the sewer main facilities, the applicant shall
pay the city prior to its performing services, the engineering plan review,
public improvement inspection, administration and benefit district creation
fees as set forth by City Council resolution. The applicant shall pay the soil
testing firm directly for compaction tests.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.910) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.1050 Parcel frontage extension for sewer mains.
   When a main is to be extended to serve a parcel, the main shall extend the
full frontage of the parcel unless it is determined by the General Manager that
the main is not likely to be extended to serve any other property.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.920) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.1060 Minimum size of sewer main.
   The inside diameter of every sewer main to be installed shall be not less
than eight inches, except as may be determined by the General Manager.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.930) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.1070 Applicant to file surety bond.
   In the event the applicant installs sewer main extensions facilities, he or
she shall furnish the city a surety company bond to be approved by the General
Manager as to sufficiency and the City Attorney as to form in an amount equal
to at least 50% of the General Manager’s estimate of the installation costs to
guarantee faithful performance by the applicant, and a surety company bond in
an equal amount to guarantee claims of persons who furnish labor, materials,
supplies and implements used by applicant on the work. Provided, however, when
the extension is a condition of a subdivision or parcel map, the surety bond
amounts shall be at least 100% of the General Manager’s estimate of the
installation costs to guarantee faithful performance by the applicant, and a
surety bond in an amount equal to at least 50% of the estimate to guarantee
claims of persons who furnish labor, materials, supplies and implements used by
applicant on the work. Except, however, where the applicant is a “nonprofit
entity,” as defined in Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 64999 and 64999.3, the provisions of
those sections as they may apply to the entities in securing the performance of
work under this section shall be applicable.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.940) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.1080 Sewer main extension facilities— Bill of sale.
   When sewer main extension facilities and laterals if applicable have been
installed by the city, refunding procedures, as outlined in this chapter shall
also apply in accordance with the actual cost on record including an amount
attributable to interest in accordance with §
8.60.040 per foot of installing the main and cost per lateral. When sewer main
extension facilities and laterals if applicable are installed and upon the
execution and delivery by applicant of a good and sufficient bill of sale of
the facilities to the city, sewer service shall be furnished to applicant’s
property.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.950) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.1090 Front foot and lateral fees— Sewer main extensions.
   (A)   Whenever an applicant applies for a permit to connect property
fronting a main, the installation cost of which main was paid by the city or by
a previous applicant and approved by the city, such subsequent applicant shall
pay to the city prior to the granting of the permit an amount calculated as “A”
in the following formula:
         A = F x C x .60 wherein
      F = the number of feet of applicant’s property fronting on main, except
as provided herein for corner lots
      C = cost per foot of installing main
      .60 = factor composed of .50 (for one of the two sides fronting on the
main) and .10 (for street intersection allowance)
   (B)   Provided, however, when the General Manager determines that only one
side of a street can be benefitted by a main installed by the city or by a
previous applicant, subsequent applicant for permits to connect thereto shall
pay to the city prior to the granting of such permits an amount calculated as
“A” in the following formula:
         A = F x C x 1.10 wherein
      F = the number of feet of applicant’s property fronting on main, except
as provided herein for corner lots
      C = cost per foot of installing main
      1.10 = a factor composed of 1.00 (the total cost of the installation) and
.10 (for street intersection allowance)
   (C)   When a commercial or multi-unit complex fronts more than one street,
“F” shall be the longest frontage, regardless of what side the building faces.
   (D)   When a single-family dwelling fronts more than one street, “F” shall
be the side that the house is facing. Whenever an applicant applies for a
permit to connect property where a lateral has already been installed by the
city or a previous applicant and approved by the city, such subsequent
applicant shall pay to the city a sewer lateral charge equal to the total cost
of the lateral.
   (E)   Amounts collected as provided herein shall be retained by the city
when such sewer main facilities and laterals if applicable were paid by the
city or shall be paid by the city to the applicant who paid the cost of
installing the main and laterals until the applicant has received an amount
calculated as “R” in the formula in §
7.20.1110.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.960) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.1100 Benefit district procedures.
   When the General Manager finds that it is necessary to install a sewer main
or when a sewer main was previously installed and paid for by the city, he or
she shall delineate the area which may be served from the main and thereby be
benefitted as provided in §
8.60.020.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.970) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.1110 Benefit district refunding.
   (A)   If the applicant elects to install the required sewer main under
benefit district procedures and does install the sewer main in accordance with
regulations concerning main extensions, the General Manager shall establish and
administer reimbursement procedures as follows: The General Manager shall
establish a frontage fee for the cost of an eight-inch main and shall prepare a
benefit district refunding agreement to be executed by the applicant and the
president of the Board of Public Utilities Commissioners in accordance with the
provisions of Title 8,
Chapter 8.60 of this code. The difference in cost between an actual main larger
than eight inches and an eight-inch main shall be reimbursed in accordance with
the provisions of Title 8,
Chapter 8.64 of this code. The cost per foot “C” shall be calculated by
dividing the total cost of the eight-inch main by the total footage of the main
installed. Whenever costs are referred to in this section, they shall be
limited to the costs as specified in §
8.60.030. The frontage fee shall be calculated as “A” in the following formula:
         A = F x C x .60 wherein
      F = the number of feet of an applicant’s property fronting on the main
      C = cost per foot of installing an eight-inch main
      .60 = factor composed of .50 (for one of the two sides fronting on the
main) and .10 (for the street intersection allowance)
   (B)   Provided, however, when the General Manager determines that only one
side of a street can be benefitted by a main installed by a previous applicant,
the frontage fee shall be calculated as “A” in the following formula:
         A = F x C x 1.10 wherein
      F = the number of feet of an applicant’s property fronting on the main
      C = cost per foot of installing an eight-inch main
      1.10 = a factor composed of 1.00 (the total cost of the eight-inch
installation) and .10 (for street intersection allowance)
   (C)   Amounts collected as provided herein shall be paid by the city to the
applicant who paid the cost of installing the main, until the applicant has
received an amount equal to “R” as calculated in the following formula:
         R = T - (.60 x C x F) - Z wherein
      T = total cost of installing eight-inch main and laterals
      C = cost per foot of installing eight-inch main
      F = number of feet of installing applicant’s property fronting on main
      Z = installing applicant’s lateral(s) cost
   (D)   Provided, however, when the General Manager determines that only one
side of a street can be benefitted and has made collections on that basis,
amounts so collected shall be paid by the city to the applicant who paid the
cost of installing the main, until the applicant has received an amount equal
to “R” as calculated in the following formula:
         R = T- (1.10 x C x F) - Z wherein
      T = total cost of installing eight-inch main and laterals
      C = cost per foot of installing eight-inch main
      F = number of feet of installing applicant’s property fronting on main
      Z = installing applicant’s lateral(s) cost.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.980) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.1120 Benefit district charges to be prepaid.
   An applicant for sewer service within the sewer benefit district shall pay
to the city for frontage charge for each foot of property fronting the main and
a lateral charge if applicable before sewer service is granted to him or her.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.990) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.1125 In-lieu sewer fees.
   Whenever the City Engineer determines it is impractical or unreasonable for
an applicant to install a sanitary sewer main on a street frontage for which
such installation would otherwise be required, the applicant shall pay to the
city an in-lieu fee for their fair share of the future installation of the
main. The fee shall be the same front foot fee as established in §
7.20.1120.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.995) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.1126 Surplus.
   Any surplus of monies remaining after the applicant has been reimbursed in
accordance with the applicable provisions of this code may be expended for
construction or reconstruction of the facilities including raising of
facilities to grade or work for which the funds were collected.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.996) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.1130 Oversize.
   When an applicant installs sewer mains larger than eight inches as directed
by the General Manager, the General Manager shall prepare a reimbursement
agreement after the main has been installed and actual costs determined to be
executed by the applicant and the president of the Board of Public Utilities
pursuant to the provisions of Title 8,
Chapter 8.64 of this code. The amount of oversize reimbursement shall be equal
to the difference in cost between an eight-inch main and the actual size of
main installed. Provided, however, when the General Manager determines that the
installing applicant requires larger than an eight-inch main to serve the
applicant’s whole property, the amount of oversize reimbursement shall be equal
to the difference in cost between the size of main needed by the applicant to
serve the applicant’s whole property and the actual size of main installed.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.1000) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.1140 Severability.
   If any section, division, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter is held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court
or tribunal of competent jurisdiction, the decision shall not affect the
validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this chapter, or any
part thereof.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.1020) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.1150 Special agreements.
   Special agreements and arrangements between the city and any persons or
agencies regarding wastewater treatment and sewerage facilities may be entered
into when in the opinion of the city, unusual or extraordinary circumstances
compel special terms and conditions. However, no special agreements between the
city and any user shall be allowed to contravene federal categorical
pretreatment standards, state or local pretreatment standards.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.1030) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.1160 Affirmative defense—Upset.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, UPSET means an exceptional incident
in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical
pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the
user. An UPSET does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by
operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance or careless or improper
operation.
   (B)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought
for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements
of division (C), below, are met.
   (C)   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs or other
relevant evidence that:
      (1)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
      (2)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
      (3)   The user has submitted the following information to the Director of
Public Works within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset. If this
information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within
five days:
         (a)   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
         (b)   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or,
if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
         (c)   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
   (D)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
   (E)   Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards.
   (F)   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.1040) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.1170 Affirmative defense—Prohibited discharge standards.
   A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought
against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in §
7.20.470 of this chapter or the specific prohibitions in §
7.20.480 of this chapter if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason
to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other
sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either:
   (A)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in
compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or
interference; or
   (B)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially
in nature or constituents from the user’s prior discharge when the city was
regularly in compliance with its WDR/NPDES permit, and in the case of
interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal
requirements.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.1050) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
§ 7.20.1180 Affirmative defense—Bypass.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section,
   BYPASS. The definition provided in §
7.20.020.
   SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE. Substantial physical damage to property, damage to
the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable or substantial
and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to
occur in the absence of a bypass. SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE does not mean economic
loss caused by delays in production.
   (B)   A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment
standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential
maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to
the provision of divisions (C) and (D) of this section.
   (C)   (1)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall
submit prior notice to the Director of Public Works, at least ten days before
the date of the bypass, if possible.
      (2)   A user shall submit oral notice to the Director of Public Works of
an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within
24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission
shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of
the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass
and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times,
and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected
to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent
reoccurrence of the bypass. The Director of Public Works may waive the written
report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24
hours.
   (D)   (1)   Bypass is prohibited, and the Director of Public Works may take
an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:
         (a)   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury
or severe property damage;
         (b)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
         (c)   The user submitted notices as required under division (C) of
this section.
      (2)   The Director of Public Works may approve an anticipated bypass,
after considering its adverse effects, if the Director of Public Works
determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in division (D)(1) of
this section.
(1995 Code, § 7.20.1060) (Ord. 17-03, passed 3-21-2017; Ord. 15-02, passed 5-5-
2015)
CHAPTER 7.21: RECYCLED WATER ORDINANCE
Section
   
7.21.010   Purpose.
   
7.21.020   Definitions.
   
7.21.030   Authority.
   
7.21.040   Scope.
   
7.21.050   Public health.
   
7.21.060   Approved uses of recycled water.
   
7.21.070   Reclamation agreements.
   
7.21.080   Use area acceptance.
   
7.21.090   Reclamation agreement issuance and renewal.
   
7.21.100   Operation, maintenance, and management.
   
7.21.110   General requirements.
   
7.21.120   Enforcement.
   
7.21.130   Service termination.
§ 7.21.010 Purpose.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide the General Manager with the
authority to enforce the recycled water rules and regulations established
herein. The city is required to implement these rules and regulations based on
the Waste Discharge Requirements and Master Recycling Permit (WDR Order No. R5-
2013-0019) issued in 2013 and in compliance with the water recycling criteria
established in Cal. Code of Regulations (CCR) Title 22.
   (B)   The city owns and operates a recycled water system, which provides
undisinfected, secondary effluent for approved purposes to recycled water
customers (users). The city is authorized, under the terms and conditions of
the WDR, to distribute recycled water to users. The city is required to obtain
necessary approvals from the California Department of Public Health (CDPH) and
the RWQCB in accordance with this Recycled Water Ordinance before distributing
the recycled water to new users.
(Ord. 13-05, passed 10-1-2013)
§ 7.21.020 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings unless the context otherwise requires:
   APPLICANT. Any person or groups of persons who applies for recycled water
service.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE. A person(s) authorized by the General Manager,
CDPH, or the RWQCB to act on their behalf.
   CCR. California Code of Regulations.
   CDPH. The California Department of Public Health.
   CITY. The City of Tulare or its designated representative.
   COUNTY. The County of Tulare or its designated representative.
   GENERAL MANAGER. The General Manager of the Department of Public Utilities
or his or her duly authorized representative as provided in § 52(e)(4) of the
City Charter.
   OWNER. Legal property owner of the use area.
   POTABLE WATER or DOMESTIC WATER. Water which conforms to federal, state, and
local standards for human consumption.
   RECLAMATION AGREEMENT. A written agreement between the city and the user for
the distribution of recycled water.
   RECYCLED WATER or RECLAIMED WATER. Non-potable undisinfected secondary
effluent as defined by Title 22, which, as a result of treatment of wastewater,
which is suitable for the uses approved in this chapter.
   RECYCLED WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM. A system of transmission and
distribution pipelines, pump stations, storage reservoirs, meters, and minor
appurtenant facilities intended for the delivery of recycled water to the
property line of the user. The RECYCLED WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM is owned,
operated, and maintained by the city. Recycled water pipelines within the
user’s property and owned by the user must still comply with all applicable
requirements of Cal. Code of Regulations Titles 17 and 22.
   RULES AND REGULATIONS. The terms and conditions for the distribution and end
use of the recycled water, as set forth in this chapter.
   RWQCB. The California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Central Valley
Region or any successor agency.
   TITLE 22. California Code of Regulations Title 22, Division 4.
   TREATED EFFLUENT or TREATED WATER. Recycled water.
   TULARE CITY CODE, CITY CODE, or CODE. The City Code for the City of Tulare.
   USE AREA. The approved area of recycled water use with defined boundaries.
   USER or CUSTOMER. A recycled water customer of the city.
(Ord. 13-05, passed 10-1-2013)
§ 7.21.030 Authority.
   (A)   This chapter establishes the city’s rules and regulations governing
the distribution and use of recycled water. These rules and regulations have
been developed by the city’s Public Works Department and are enforceable by
authority of the General Manager.
   (B)   The General Manager shall be responsible for administering,
implementing, and enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the General Manager may
be delegated by the General Manager.
   (D)   This chapter applies to any distributor or user of recycled water and
shall govern the design, construction, and use of the distribution system
operated by the city and recycled water systems operated by users.
   (E)   The use and distribution of recycled water shall be in accordance with
this chapter and all applicable federal, state and local laws, permits, and
regulations including Cal. Code of Regulations Titles 17 and 22 as may be
amended from time to time.
(Ord. 13-05, passed 10-1-2013)
§ 7.21.040 Scope.
   This chapter establishes the minimum requirements for recycled water use and
the provision of recycled water service by the city to recycled water users.
The city reserves the right to modify this chapter as is deemed necessary.
Recycled water users will be notified of any and all changes.
(Ord. 13-05, passed 10-1-2013)
§ 7.21.050 Public health.
   (A)   The city reserves the right to take any action deemed necessary, with
respect to the operation of the distribution system and onsite recycled water
systems, to safeguard public health. If the city perceives real or potential
hazards any time during construction or operation of an onsite recycled water
system, the General Manager reserves the right and has the authority to
terminate recycled water service immediately, without notice. These hazards
include, but are not limited to, cross-connections with a potable water system,
improper signage, or unapproved/ prohibited uses.
   (B)   The use of recycled water shall not cause pollution, contamination, or
nuisance, as defined by Cal. Water Code § 13050 or any other applicable laws.
(Ord. 13-05, passed 10-1-2013)
§ 7.21.060 Approved uses of recycled water.
   (A)   Non food-bearing trees, fodder and fiber crops, seed crops not eaten
by humans, food crops that must undergo commercial pathogen-destroying
processing before being consumed by humans, and ornamental nursery stock and
sod farms may be irrigated with recycled water (provided no irrigation with
recycled water occurs for a period of 14 days prior to harvesting, retail sale,
or allowing access to the crops by the general public).
   (B)   Undisinfected recycled water shall not be discharged to orchard or
vineyard crops.
   (C)   Grazing of milking animals within the use area is prohibited.
   (D)   No recycled water used for irrigation, or soil that has been irrigated
with recycled water, shall come into contact with the edible portion of food
crops that may be eaten raw by humans.
(Ord. 13-05, passed 10-1-2013)
§ 7.21.070 Reclamation agreements.
   Every user intending to irrigate a use area with recycled water must have a
reclamation agreement with the city prior to receiving recycled water.
Reclamation agreements will only be issued after the use area has met all the
reclamation agreement conditions. Following reclamation agreement execution, a
use area may receive recycled water in accordance with the provisions of the
reclamation agreement and this chapter.
(Ord. 13-05, passed 10-1-2013)
§ 7.21.080 Use area acceptance.
   (A)   Use areas, eligible for application of recycled water, will be
assessed on a case-by-case basis and must be specifically approved by the city
through a reclamation agreement. Use areas are limited to only those approved
by the General Manager and for which the city has obtained CDPH and RWQCB
approval.
   (B)   All requests for recycled water service must be made by an applicant
who is responsible for the property. Applicant will be required to complete and
sign the appropriate city application forms. Public Works will review the
application and, in the General Manager’s sole discretion, may prescribe
special requirements and conditions that are specific to the proposed use area,
including but not limited to needed facilities, special connection
requirements, and the allowable uses of recycled water. Such requirements and
conditions will be issued in writing by the General Manager to the applicant
and made part of the reclamation agreement.
   (C)   The General Manager has the right to inspect the use area during the
application process. The General Manager will recommend recycled water system
needs in order to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   Before any new onsite recycled water system is constructed, or any
existing onsite recycled water system is modified, site drawings prepared by
the applicant must be approved by the General Manager. Approval will be
contingent upon evidence that all applicable requirements for the use area are
satisfied and that the onsite recycled water system as designed can be operated
in accordance with this chapter. No work shall begin by the applicant until
plans have been approved by the General Manager and any necessary fees have
been paid.
   (E)   The following information is required on the site drawings:
      (1)   Site location including a map showing the specific boundaries of
the use area and the County Assessor’s parcel number, if appropriate.
      (2)   All sources of water.
      (3)   Location and size of recycled water flow meters.
      (4)   Locations of irrigation wells and confirmation of installation of
airgaps.
      (5)   Locations of tailwater recovery systems and tailwater ponds.
      (6)   Location of all pipelines (including recycled, potable, auxiliary
non-potable water systems, and well discharge lines) crossing the use area.
      (7)   Identification of all adjacent streets.
      (8)   Locations of any wells, lakes, ponds, reservoirs, or other
impoundments located within the use area or within 150 feet of the use area and
indicate the type of water source.
      (9)   The enumeration of methods and devices to be used to prevent
backflow of recycled water into the public water system. Evidence that the
separation between potable and recycled water lines meets minimum requirements.
Depiction of sleeving and other cross-connection prevention measures where
applicable.
      (10)   Type and location of the outlets and plumbing fixtures that will
be accessible to the public.
      (11)   Plan notes relating to recycled water specific installation and
use requirements.
      (12)   The proposed locations for all recycled water signs.
   (F)   In addition, the applicant must supply the following general use area
information:
      (1)   Use area property owner name and contact information.
      (2)   User name and contact information.
      (3)   The specific use to be made of the recycled water, the use area
acreage, the type of vegetation/crops to which the recycled water will be
applied, and the anticipated volume of recycled water that will be used.
      (4)   Supervisor or property manager name, title, and contact
information.
      (5)   Tenant(s) name and contact information.
      (6)   Onsite well locations including total number and type of well
(domestic or irrigation).
      (7)   Wells on adjacent sites located within 100 feet of use area.
      (8)   Certification that the new use area conforms to this chapter.
   (G)   The General Manager has the right to conduct onsite inspections during
the construction phase of the onsite recycled water systems to ensure that
materials, installation, and procedures are in accordance with the approved
site drawings, specifications, and all applicable regulations.
   (H)   Prior to connection of the onsite recycled water system to the
recycled water distribution system, the General Manager will perform a final
inspection to ensure all requirements have been met. During the lifetime of the
onsite recycled water system, the General Manager will periodically inspect the
use area to ensure compliance with all applicable rules and regulations and the
reclamation agreement.
(Ord. 13-05, passed 10-1-2013)
§ 7.21.090 Reclamation agreement issuance and renewal.
   Upon approval of the application by the General Manager, a non-transferable
reclamation agreement shall be executed between the city and applicant
authorizing the applicant to receive recycled water service subject to the
terms and conditions of this chapter, federal, state, and regulatory agency
rules and regulations. The reclamation agreement shall include, but not be
limited to, the use area location, an estimate of the quantity (including
seasonal schedule) of recycled water to be used, and permitted uses of recycled
water.
(Ord. 13-05, passed 10-1-2013)
§ 7.21.100 Operation, maintenance, and management.
   The operation, maintenance, and management of use areas are the
responsibilities of users while the operation and maintenance of the
distribution system is the responsibility of the city.
(Ord. 13-05, passed 10-1-2013)
§ 7.21.110 General requirements.
   (A)   The following general requirements may pertain to both the city and
the users, as applicable, for recycled water system components within their
respective purview:
      (1)   Unauthorized use of recycled water on a site requires immediate
notification to the General Manager.
      (2)   Use areas shall be designed, maintained, and operated to comply
with the following setback requirements:
 
Setback Definition                           Minimum Irrigation Setback (feet)
Edge of use area to property boundary        25
Edge of use area to public road right of way 30
Edge of use area to manmade or natural       50
surface water drainage course 1
Edge of use area to domestic water supply    150
well or irrigation supply well
Toe of recycled water impoundment berm to
domestic water supply well or irrigation     150
supply well
1 Excluding ditches used exclusively for tailwater return from land
application area and land application areas separated by levees or other
permanent physical barriers from surface waters or drainage courses.
 
      (3)   Tailwater runoff and spray of recycled water shall not be
discharged outside of the use areas except in minor, incidental amounts that
cannot reasonably be eliminated by implementation and good maintenance of best
management practices.
      (4)   There shall be at least a ten-foot horizontal and a one-foot
vertical separation between all pipelines transporting recycled water and those
transporting domestic supply, and the domestic supply pipeline shall be located
above the recycled water pipeline.
      (5)   A public water supply or auxiliary water supply shall not be used
as backup or supplemental source of water for a recycled water system unless
the connection between the two systems is protected by a backflow preventer
(e.g., an air gap separation) which complies with the requirements of Cal. Code
of Regulations Title 17.
      (6)   Any backflow prevention device installed to protect a public water
system shall be inspected and maintained in accordance with Cal. Code of
Regulations Title 17. The recycled water system shall be tested for possible
cross connections at least once every four years. The inspections and the
testing shall be performed by a cross connection control specialist certified
by the California-Nevada section of the American Water Works Association or an
organization with equivalent certification requirements.
      (7)   All recycling equipment, pumps, piping, valves, and outlets shall
be marked to differentiate them from potable water facilities. All recycled
water piping (above and below ground) and appurtenances in new installations
and in retrofit installations shall be colored purple or distinctively wrapped
with purple tape in accordance with Cal. Health and Safety Code § 116815.
      (8)   Recycled water controllers, valves, and similar appurtenances shall
be fixed with recycled water warning signs, and shall be equipped with
removable handles or locking mechanisms to prevent public access or tampering.
      (9)   Quick couplers, if used, shall be different than those used in
potable water systems.
      (10)   Hose bibs and unlocked valves, if used, shall not be used in areas
accessible to the public.
      (11)   Public contact with recycled water shall be controlled using
fences, signs, and/or other appropriate means. Signs, visible to the public,
stating “RECYCLED WATER - DO NOT DRINK” and “AGUA DE DESPERDICIO RECLAMADA - NO
TOME” shall be placed at all areas of public access and around the perimeter of
the areas used for effluent disposal or conveyance to alert the public of the
use of recycled water. The signs will be no less than four inches high by eight
inches wide.
      (12)   Irrigation of the use area(s) shall occur only when appropriately
trained personnel are on duty.
      (13)   Field perimeters shall be graded to prevent ponding along public
roads or other public areas and prevent runoff to adjacent properties.
      (14)   Irrigating with recycled water shall not be performed within 24
hours of a forecasted storm, during or within 24 hours after any precipitation
event, nor when the ground is saturated.
      (15)   No physical connection shall exist between any recycled water
system and any separate system conveying potable water, domestic water supply
well or irrigation well.
      (16)   Workers shall be educated regarding proper hygienic procedures to
ensure personal and public safety. User is responsible for training employees
in the use of recycled water. It is recommended that training be conducted at
the beginning of each irrigation season. New employees shall be instructed
before any handling of recycled water.
      (17)   User is responsible for application fees and annual RWQCB fees if
applicable.
      (18)   User is responsible for installing a delivery pipeline and all
necessary air gap devices on irrigation wells. Upon completion of construction
and verification of expenditures, city shall pay user a one-time “mitigation
fee” equal to actual costs incurred by user.
      (19)   User is responsible for keeping records of water use and
associated nitrogen loading and reporting to the city.
      (20)   The annual nutrient loading of the use area, including the
nutritive value of organic and chemical fertilizers and recycled water, shall
not exceed crop demand.
      (21)   Hydraulic and nutrient loading of recycled water and supplemental
irrigation water shall be at reasonable agronomic rates designed to:
         (a)   Maximize crop nutrient uptake;
         (b)   Maximize breakdown of organic waste constituents in the root
zone;
         (c)   Minimize the percolation of waste constituents; and
         (d)   Minimize erosion within the use areas.
      (22)   The General Manager shall provide user with a copy of all reports
required by the applicable WDR.
      (23)   The General Manager has the right to inspect the use area on
regular basis to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the
reclamation agreement.
      (24)   A copy of the reclamation agreement and this chapter shall be
maintained at the user’s facilities and be available at all times for
inspection by the authorized representatives of the city, the RWQCB, or CDPH.
      (25)   The use area(s) shall be managed to prevent breeding of
mosquitoes. In particular:
         (a)   There shall be no standing water 48 hours after irrigation
ceases;
         (b)   Tailwater ditches shall be maintained essentially free of
emergent, marginal, and floating vegetation; and
         (c)   Low-pressure and unpressurized pipelines and ditches accessible
to mosquitoes shall not be used to store recycled water.
      (26)   User will manage the use of the recycled water to:
         (a)   Minimize contact with workers.
         (b)   Maintain application or recycled water at reasonable rates
considering the crops, soil, climate, irrigation management system, nutrient
loading, and crop demand.
(Ord. 13-05, passed 10-1-2013)
§ 7.21.120 Enforcement.
   (A)   The General Manager may employ any of the following enforcement
procedures in order to return a user to compliance with a reclamation
agreement, this chapter or any federal, state, or local regulation.
   (B)   Authorized representatives of the city, the RWQCB, or CDPH shall have
the right to enter use area during reasonable hours, for any of the following
reasons:
      (1)   Monitoring and inspecting of onsite recycled water systems to
ascertain compliance with this chapter and other regulatory requirements.
      (2)   Installing, maintaining, repairing, and/or collecting measurements
from city-owned facilities serving the use area.
   (C)   The General Manager shall investigate all reports of noncompliance
with any provision of this chapter and/or the reclamation agreement to
determine the validity of the complaint and seriousness of the violation if
any.
   (D)   The General Manager will issue a “notice of default” to the user for
any violation of the reclamation agreement. As long as an emergency is not
occurring, as determined by the General Manager, the user will receive a
written notice of default describing:
      (1)   The nature of the violation.
      (2)   Requirements for submittal of a corrective action plan.
      (3)   Setting a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory mitigation of
the violation.
      (4)   A date for follow-up inspection.
   (E)   The user will have 15 calendar days to respond to the General Manager
with a “default response.” If the user disputes the violation in the default
response, the General Manager and user will meet and attempt to resolve the
issue. If the dispute is not resolved, the General Manager or user may pursue
all other remedies provided by law and the reclamation agreement.
   (F)   For breaches of the reclamation agreement that support a temporary
restraining order and preliminary injunction, the General Manager may make take
such action without first issuing a notice of default.
   (G)   The General Manager may terminate service to a user who uses recycled
water or manages the onsite recycled water system in violation of this chapter
or in violation of any regulatory agency rules and regulations. The General
Manager reserves the right to suspend the recycled water service immediately
and without notice if the serious nature of the violation requires immediate
action.
   (H)   The RWQCB may initiate enforcement action against any user, including
but not limited to the termination of the recycled water supply, who:
      (1)   Discharges recycled water in violation of any applicable discharge
requirement prescribed by the RWQCB or in a manner, which creates or threatens
to create conditions of pollution, contamination, or nuisance, as defined in
Cal. Water Code § 13050.
      (2)   Uses, transports, or stores recycled water in violation of the
rules and regulations governing the design, construction, and use of the
recycled water distribution and disposal systems issued by the General Manager.
(Ord. 13-05, passed 10-1-2013)
§ 7.21.130 Service termination.
   (A)   The initial term of the reclamation agreement shall be five
consecutive years. The agreement may be renewed for successive five-year terms.
Either party may terminate the agreement without cause, by giving at least
three years written notice to the other party.
   (B)   The General Manager may discontinue a user’s service for any of the
following reasons:
      (1)   Noncompliance. Service may be discontinued for a user who uses,
transports, or stores recycled water in violation with the terms and conditions
of the reclamation agreement, any other applicable laws and this chapter.
      (2)   Water quality. Service may be discontinued by the city if the
recycled water does not meet the quality requirements of the city or applicable
regulatory agency(s).
      (3)   For noncompliance with regulations. Service may be suspended or
terminated at any time if the user’s operations do not conform to this chapter
as determined by the General Manager. Where safety of water supply or public
health is endangered, or regulatory agency regulations have been violated,
service may be suspended immediately without notice. Otherwise, all defects
noted shall be corrected within the period of time specified by the General
Manager.
      (4)   For misuse of recycled water. In order to protect against misuse of
recycled water, the General Manager may suspend service if such wasteful
practices are not remedied after notice to such effect has been provided to the
user.
      (5)   For unauthorized use of recycled water. If the General Manager
discovers an unauthorized use, the service may be suspended without notice.
   (C)   The General Manager shall have the right to refuse to reestablish
service following termination of service for violation of this chapter or the
terms of the reclamation agreement. Any request to reestablish service
subsequent to the termination of recycled water service shall be in the manner
prescribed for initially obtaining recycled water service from the city. In
order to resume or continue service that has been suspended, the user may be
required to pay a restoration fee, as determined by the General Manager.
(Ord. 13-05, passed 10-1-2013)
CHAPTER 7.24: CAMPGROUNDS
Section
   
7.24.010   Definitions.
   
7.24.020   Conformance to chapter required.
   
7.24.030   Living in nonconforming camp prohibited.
   
7.24.040   License required.
   
7.24.050   Form of application.
   
7.24.060   Term—Transferability.
   
7.24.070   Denial of license.
   
7.24.080   Issuance of license.
   
7.24.090   Revocation of license.
   
7.24.100   Posting of license—Inspection.
§ 7.24.010   Definitions.
   As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings herein ascribed to them.
   AUTO CAMPS. Does not include any “auto camp”, as defined in §
5.12.010 of Title 5 of this code.
   CAMP. Any place where, within the area of any one acre, ten or more persons
or two or more families are occupying or living in automobiles, vehicles, camp
wagons, tents, temporary shelter or without any shelter.
   LABOR CAMPS. Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any camp maintained by
an employer for the exclusive use of his or her employees who are then and
there actually employed by him or her.
(1995 Code, § 7.24.010)
§ 7.24.020   Conformance to chapter required.
   No person shall establish, construct, maintain or operate any camp, as here
defined, except as hereinafter provided.
(1995 Code, § 7.24.020)
§ 7.24.030   Living in nonconforming camp prohibited.
   It is unlawful for any person to resort to, live in or to remain at or in
any camp established, constructed, maintained or operated in violation of the
provisions of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 7.24.030)
§ 7.24.040   License required.
   Any person desiring to establish, construct, maintain or operate any camp
coming within the provisions of this chapter shall make application to and
secure from the Council a license therefor.
(1995 Code, § 7.24.040)
§ 7.24.050   Form of application.
   (A)   The application shall be in writing and shall be signed by the
applicant or his or her duly authorized agent or in the event of a co-
partnership, corporation or association shall be signed by the managing agent
or executive officer thereof.
   (B)   The application shall particularly describe the property upon which
the camp is to be established and a brief description of the water and sanitary
facilities.
(1995 Code, § 7.24.050)
§ 7.24.060   Term—Transferability.
   The license may be issued for such time as the Council may deem fit under
the circumstances, shall be nontransferable and shall entitle the licensee to
operate only one camp, and that camp only at one place described in the
license.
(1995 Code, § 7.24.060)
§ 7.24.070   Denial of license.
   No license shall be granted:
   (A)   If it appears after investigation that the applicant or its managing
agent does not bear a good reputation for honesty and integrity, and peace and
quiet;
   (B)   If the premises are inadequately supplied with proper sanitation; and/
or
   (C)   If the applicant or any of its managing agents or officers has
previously held a license which has been revoked under the provisions of this
chapter.
(1995 Code, § 7.24.070)
§ 7.24.080   Issuance of license.
   If the Council approves the application, it shall direct its Chairperson to
issue a license in accordance therewith and the same shall be attested by the
Clerk.
(1995 Code, § 7.24.080)
§ 7.24.090   Revocation of license.
   Any license so issued shall be revokable at any time by the Council without
notice.
(1995 Code, § 7.24.090)
§ 7.24.100   Posting of license—Inspection.
   Any person obtaining a license to establish, construct, maintain or operate
any camp in accordance with this chapter shall keep the license posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the camp and shall, at all times, permit any peace
officer or other officer of the city to inspect the same and the camp mentioned
therein.
(1995 Code, § 7.24.100)
CHAPTER 7.28: NUISANCES GENERALLY
Section
   
7.28.010   Purpose.
   
7.28.020   Definitions.
   
7.28.030   Declaration of nuisance.
   
7.28.040   Defective plumbing.
   
7.28.050   Carcasses—Hogs.
   
7.28.060   Offensive trades or acts.
   
7.28.070   Vehicles on sidewalks.
   
7.28.080   Trains.
   
7.28.090   Keeping of articles on sidewalks.
   
7.28.100   Openings in sidewalk.
   
7.28.110   Water running onto thoroughfare.
   
7.28.120   Crowds obstructing thoroughfare.
   
7.28.130   Mistletoe prohibited.
   
7.28.140   Exterior lighting.
   
7.28.150   Abatement.
   
7.28.160   Authorization for City Manager.
   
7.28.170   Notification of nuisance.
   
7.28.180   Appeal.
   
7.28.190   Time limit for compliance.
   
7.28.200   Abatement to city.
   
7.28.210   Report—Hearing on assessment.
   
7.28.220   Inspection fees.
   
7.28.230   Service on owner of statement of costs.
   
7.28.240   Assessment of costs of lien against the property.
   
7.28.250   Alternatives.
   
7.28.260   Emergency abatement.
   
7.28.270   Penalty—Violations.
§ 7.28.010   Purpose.
   The acts and things enumerated in this chapter committed or being within the
City of Tulare are hereby declared to be a nuisance. It is further declared to
be in the public interest to promote the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the city by providing a summary procedure for the declaration of
and for abatement of nuisances, which abatement procedures shall be in addition
to all other proceedings by this code or otherwise by law.
(1995 Code, § 7.28.010) (Ord. 02-1909, passed - -2002)
§ 7.28.020   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meaning given in this chapter.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. Any vehicle, which has been left on private property or
public property in such inoperable or neglected condition that the owner's
intention to relinquish all further rights or interests in it may be reasonably
concluded; except, if the vehicle is stored as provided in §
7.29.030(B) of the city code. A vehicle shall not be considered abandoned if it
is on property owned or occupied by the owner of the vehicle.
   ABATEMENT. The demolition, removal, repair, rehabilitation, maintenance,
construction, reconstruction, replacement or reconditioning of structures,
appliances, or equipment; or the removal, transportation, disposal, and
treatment of waste and abandoned materials and equipment capable of harboring,
breeding, or attracting rodents or insects or producing odors or blight.
   ACCESSORY VEHICLE. Means and includes recreational vehicles, travel
trailers, campers, motor homes, caravans, tent trailers, pop-up trailers,
boats, watercraft, and/or utility, vehicle, or dump trailers.
   ATTRACTIVE NUISANCE. Any condition, instrumentality, or machine which is
unsafe and unprotected and thereby dangerous to children by reason of their
inability to appreciate the peril which exists, and which may reasonably be
expected to attract young children to the premises and risk injury by playing
with, in, or on it. ATTRACTIVE NUISANCES may include, but shall not be limited
to:
      (1)   Abandoned and/or broken equipment;
      (2)   Hazardous pools, ponds, culverts, excavations;
      (3)   Neglected machinery; and
      (4)   Dangerous structures.
   BUILDING. Any structure including, but not limited to any house, garage,
duplex, apartment, condominium, stock cooperative, mobile home or other
residential structure or any portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented
or leased to be occupied or otherwise is intended for supporting or sheltering
any use or occupancy, and any commercial, industrial or other establishment,
warehouse, kiosk or other structures affixed to or upon real property, used for
the purpose of conducting a business, storage or other activity.
   CITY. The City of Tulare.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The Code Enforcement Officer for the City of
Tulare.
   CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS. Any material discarded as a result of the building or
destruction of structures, roads and bridges and includes concrete, rocks,
asphalt, plasterboard, wood, and other related material.
   DISMANTLED VEHICLE. Any vehicle that is partially or wholly disassembled.
   EXCAVATION. Any wells, shafts, basements, cesspools, septic tanks, fishponds
and other like or similar conditions more than six inches in diameter and 18
inches in depth.
   FOUL. Very annoying to the senses of reasonable persons of normal
sensitivity or which endangers the comfort, repose, health, or peace of the
public or of any person using or occupying other property in the vicinity.
   GARBAGE. Any putrescible animal, fish, fowl, food, fruit, or vegetable
matter resulting from the cultivation, preparation, storage, handling, decay,
or consumption of the substance.
   GOOD REPAIR. The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing
building or property for the purpose of its maintenance, so as to not become a
hazard to the public in general and conform with the adjoining properties.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND WASTE. Any chemical, compound, mixture, substance,
or article which is identified or listed by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency or an appropriate  agency of the State of California as a
"hazardous waste", as defined in 40 C.F.R. § 261.33, except that for the
purposes of this chapter, hazardous waste also shall include household waste,
as defined in 40 C.F.R. § 261.4(B)(1).
   HEARING OFFICER. The individual appointed by the City Manager to hear the
appeal on a finding that a nuisance exists.
   IMPLEMENT OF HUSBANDRY. Any vehicle, tool or equipment used for farming or
agricultural use.
   IMPROVED SURFACE. Any surface that resists the growth of weeds or
vegetation.
   INOPERATIVE VEHICLE. Means any motor vehicle designed to be operated on a
public roadway that cannot be moved under its own power, or which is not
currently registered for operation with the California Department of Motor
Vehicles. A Planned Non-Operation, PNO, from the California Department of Motor
Vehicles in and of itself is not to be considered a violation.
   NOXIOUS. Hurtful or unwholesome.
   NUISANCE. Activities or conditions which affect the social and economic
stability of neighborhoods, impair property values and which are injurious or
detrimental to the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of
Tulare.
   ODOR. Any smell, scent, or fragrance.
   OWNER. Any person, agent, firm, or corporation having legal or equitable
interest in the property.
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, corporation, association or
organization, or agent of any of the foregoing.
   PREMISES. Any lot or parcel of land upon which a building is situated,
including any portion thereof improved or unimproved, and adjacent streets,
sidewalks, parkways, and parking areas.
   PROPERTY. Any lot or parcel of land, including any alley, sidewalk, parkway,
or unimproved public easement.
   REFUSE. Any putrescible and non-putrescible solid waste, except sewerage,
whether combustible or noncombustible and includes garbage and rubbish.
   RUBBISH. Non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin
cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, and similar
materials.
   UNMERCHANTABLE. Unsalable.
   VEHICLE. Any device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved,
or drawn upon a highway, or upon water, excepting a device moved exclusively by
human power, or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
   VIOLATOR. Any responsible party, including the landowner, or lessee, tenant,
or any other person who had possession or custody of the property.
   WASTE MATTER. Any rubbish or construction material.
   WEEDS. Useless and troublesome plants generally accepted as having no value
and frequently of uncontrolled growth.
   WRECKED VEHICLE. A vehicle which has been wrecked, or which lacks an engine,
transmission, wheels, tires, doors, windshield, or any other part or equipment
necessary to operate safely on the highways of this state.
(1995 Code, § 7.28.020) (Ord. 02-1909, passed - -2002; Ord. 2024-02, passed 3-
19-2024)
§ 7.28.030   Declaration of nuisance.
   It is unlawful and is declared a nuisance when any person owning, leasing,
renting, occupying, charged with the management of or having charge or
possession of any property in the city who maintains or fails to maintain the
property in such a manner that any of the following conditions are present.
   (A)   An unsafe building or structure, as defined in § 283 of the Uniform
Building Code, as adopted and in force within the city;
   (B)   To maintain any building or structure in a condition such that it
would constitute a "dangerous building," as defined in § 302 of the Uniform
Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, or as prepared by the
International Conference of Building Officials and adopted in force within the
city;
   (C)   To maintain any building or structure in a condition that would
constitute a substandard building as defined in Chapter 10 of the Uniform
Housing Code;
   (D)   To abandon or permanently vacate, or cause to be abandoned or
permanently vacated, any building or structure, so that it becomes accessible
to unauthorized persons including, but not limited to, juveniles and vagrants,
for unlawful or hazardous use;
   (E)   To maintain property containing attractive nuisances in the form of:
      (1)   Abandoned or broken equipment or machinery, other than implements
of husbandry kept on a lot in the R-A zone, the U-R zone, or the A zone, which
are stored as provided for in this chapter; and
      (2)   Unfenced or otherwise unprotected wells, swimming pools, spas,
ponds, or excavations.
   (F)   To maintain property, including any sidewalks and parkways adjacent
thereto containing weeds, dry grasses, dead trees, dead shrubs or any other
material which bear seeds of a wingy or downy nature or which by reason of
their size, manner of growth, or location constitute a fire hazard or a threat
to public health, or containing weeds, vegetation, grasses, trees or shrubs,
including but not limited to sagebrush, chaparral and Russian Thistle
(tumbleweed) which, when dry, will in reasonable probability constitute a fire
hazard or be blown onto adjoining property by prevailing winds; except, as
otherwise exempted by
Chapter 3.22 of this code;
   (G)   To maintain property containing refuse, rubbish, broken or discarded
furniture or household equipment visible from the public right-of-way or
adjoining properties. This includes, but is not limited to, the keeping of or
disposing of or the scattering over the property or premises of any of the
following:
      (1)   Junk, trash, or debris; and
      (2)   Abandoned or discarded objects or equipment such as automobiles,
furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans, boxes, or other containers.
   (H)   To maintain property containing stagnant water, refuse, rubbish,
garbage, offal, animal excrement or other waste materials which emit odors that
are unreasonably offensive to the physical senses of a normal person(s), or
which may cause or attract the migration of insects;
   (I)   To maintain premises with garbage or trash containers stored in front
yards and visible from the public right-of-way. Except when in places of
collection, refuse must be placed at a designated location by 6:00 a.m. on the
day set for collection. Empty containers shall be removed the same day, as
permitted by §
7.16.080 of this code. Where the property is a corner lot, this division shall
apply to storage of garbage and trash containers within those side-yard
setbacks, which are adjacent to the street;
   (J)   To operate or maintain, any device, instrument, vehicle or machinery
in such a manner as to create loud or unusual noise, cause vibrations, or
unreasonable light spillage or glare which cause discomfort or annoyance to
reasonable persons of normal sensitivity, or which endangers the comfort,
repose, health or peace of the public or of any person using or occupying other
property in the vicinity;
   (K)   The existence of hazardous substances and waste unlawfully released,
discharged or deposited upon any premises or onto any city property, storm
drain, gutter or public right-of-way;
   (L)   To maintain property in such a manner as to cause a hazard to the
public by obscuring visibility of or at any public right-of-way, road
intersection or pedestrian walkway;
   (M)   To maintain any building or structure, or any part thereof, which has
been constructed or is maintained in violation of any applicable state or local
law or regulation relating to the condition, use or maintenance of buildings;
   (N)   To maintain property in such condition as to create a detriment or
hazard to the public health, safety or general welfare or in such manner as to
constitute a public nuisance as defined by Cal. Civil Code § 3490;
   (O)   To allow or perform the maintenance, repair, restoration or
dismantling of any vehicle, large machinery or large equipment upon any
residential property, walkway, or easement visible from a public street or
sidewalk or from adjoining property. This prohibition shall not apply to work
which is specifically authorized by state or local law or regulation and shall
not apply to minor repair or maintenance of vehicles, machinery or equipment
belonging to the person who resides on the property, and which is performed
inside an enclosed structure such as a garage or which is performed outside but
is not visible for longer than 72 consecutive hours;
   (P)   To maintain any property or structure in such a manner as to cause or
allow the property or structure to become defective, unsightly or in such other
condition of deterioration or disrepair as the same may cause substantial
depreciation of the property values of, or similar detriment to surrounding
properties, as well as an adverse effect on the health, safety, and welfare of
the citizens of the city. This includes but is not limited to any of the
following:
      (1)   Any improvement on the property, including but not limited to
buildings, garages, carports, or roofs or gutters when the condition of the
patio, stucco, siding or other exterior coating, has become so deteriorated as
to permit decay, weathered woodwork, peeling paint, excessive checking,
cracking, broken windows, or warping, rendering the building unsightly and in a
state of disrepair;
      (2)   Buildings or structures which are abandoned, boarded up, partially
destroyed or left in a state of partial construction or repair for an
unreasonable time; a period of 90 days shall serve as a guide in determining
whether an unreasonable time has gone by;
      (3)   Maintenance of property containing abandoned or broken equipment or
machinery, visible from a public street or sidewalk or from adjoining property;
      (4)   Property with excessive trash and debris, visible from a public
street or sidewalk or from adjoining property; and
      (5)   Property, which is not in compliance with the following minimum
standard requirements:
         (a)   Front and visible side yards, except for lots in the R-A zones,
one acre or larger, shall be landscaped (except for improved surfaces including
but not limited to walks and driveways) with ground cover, plant material,
decorative rock, redwood bark and/or lawn, so as to prevent excessive dust,
accumulation of debris, or depreciated values of adjacent properties. Lots in
the R-A zones, five acres or larger, shall comply with the provisions of
Chapter 3.22 of this code relating to the abatement of seasonal and recurrent
weeds.
         (b)   Trees, shrubs, lawns, and other landscaping shall be maintained,
including regular irrigation, pruning of trees, trimming of shrubs, and cutting
of lawns. Parcels in the R-A zones shall comply with the weed abatement
standards in
Chapter 3.22 of this code; and, in any case, dead, decayed, diseased,
overgrown, or hazardous trees, weeds and vegetation, cultivated or
uncultivated, which is likely to harbor rats or vermin, or constitute an
unsightly appearance, or is detrimental to neighboring properties or property
values, shall be abated.
         (c)   All operable vehicles, recreational vehicles, motor homes,
trailers, campers or camper shells and boats shall be parked or stored on an
approved surface and in accordance with §
10.192.050 of this code, as adopted by the city; none of the above shall be
occupied for the purpose of human habitation; nor shall any person sleep in,
inhabit, live in or use any such vehicle for any purpose while the same is
parked in the public right-of-way; nor shall utility connections for water,
sewer, or power electrical cords of any type of power cords extend from any
such vehicle to a permanent structure for the purpose of receiving power to the
vehicle for the purpose of maintaining human habitation.
            1.   It is a violation of this section to store an accessory
vehicle in any zoning district at the following locations:
               a.   In any front yard or street side yard setback in any zone
including driveways;
               b.   On a public street in any zone; or
               c.   Any required off-street parking area in any commercial or
industrial zone except as provided division (P)(5)(c)2. below:
            2.   Exceptions.
               a.    Off-street parking area in any commercial or industrial
zone specifically approved to serve a business whose primary purpose is to
service, sell, repair, or perform maintenance upon an accessory vehicle.
               b.    Mobile or portable structures for city, county, state, and
federal government use are permitted in all zones.
               c.    Construction site temporary offices.
               d.   A motor home or mounted camper which is normally used for
everyday transportation, is mounted on a one ton or less pickup, and is not
more than nine feet in height measured from the surface of the street.
               e.   A person who has been granted a reasonable accommodation.
         (d)   Abandoned, dismantled, wrecked, inoperative vehicles, or parts
thereof, on private property shall be stored in a completely enclosed building
or structure. The exceptions provided by this section shall not be construed to
authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance, as such nuisance may
be defined under any provisions of law commencing with Cal. Vehicle Code §
22650 and may be subject to the abatement procedure contained within Chapter
7.29 of this code.
         (e)   Walkways on private property, driveways and other improved
surfaces shall be maintained in good repair free from unsightly stains and in
safe condition, free from accumulation of pooled oil or grease or other
hazardous material on paved or unpaved surfaces, buildings, walls, or fences.
Parking lot striping and handicapped markings shall be maintained in good
condition, and clearly visible to all motorists.
         (f)   Buildings, structures, sidewalks, and driveways shall be free of
graffiti. The graffiti shall be removed according to the graffiti code in §
6.52.060 of the city code.
         (g)   Property shall be free from infestation of termites, insects,
vermin, or rodents.
         (h)   Improved property shall be properly connected to sewage disposal
system or sanitary sewer and free from sewage seepage.
         (i)   Interiors of all buildings shall be maintained in good repair,
sanitary condition and in compliance with all applicable building codes.
         (j)   Swimming pools, ponds, or other bodies of water shall be
filtered or maintained so as to not result in the water becoming polluted.
Polluted water means water which contains bacterial growth, algae, remains of
insects, remains of deceased animal life, rubbish, dirt, debris, papers,
chemicals or other matter or material which, because of the magnitude, nature,
or location, constitutes an unhealthy or unsafe condition.
   (Q)   To maintain residentially zoned property by storing or permitting the
storage of household items customarily used in the interior of a dwelling,
including appliances, equipment, construction materials or machinery in any
front yard setback or driveway area;
   (R)   To store or place equipment, construction materials or machinery upon
public property or public right-of-way (this prohibition shall not apply to
otherwise permissible parking of vehicles, nor to permitted temporary
placements such as for purposes of loading or unloading a vehicle or for
permitted waste collections, or for authorized public equipment or vehicles
during necessary work or repairs, or similar authorized uses);
   (S)   To maintain, place or otherwise display upon any fence, wall, tree,
bush or any other structure or portion thereof, any linens, rugs, fabrics,
nylon, or any other item of clothing or similar items except upon a recognized
clothesline facility. For the purpose of this section, the placement of
clothesline(s) shall be prohibited within any required front yard setback area
or required street side yard setback area; and
   (T)   The maintenance of properties, so out of harmony or conformity with
the maintenance standards of abutting, or adjacent properties in the
surrounding vicinity, as to cause substantial diminution of the enjoyment, use
or property values of the surrounding properties.
   (U)   All fences and walls shall be maintained in good repair and regularly
maintained to ensure continued structural integrity. Fences may not list or
lean more than 20 degrees from vertical. Fences may not have broken fence
boards or be reinforced from falling by propping up with other materials. Any
dilapidated, dangerous, or unsightly fences or walls shall be repaired or
removed.
      (1)   Permitted materials. A fence may be constructed of permanent
material, such as wood, chain link, stone, rock, concrete block, masonry brick,
brick, decorative wrought iron, or other material approved by the City Manager,
or designee.
      (2)   Prohibited materials. Fencing materials prohibited include, but are
not limited to cast-off, secondhand, or other items not originally intended to
be used for constructing or maintaining a fence. Plywood less than five-eighths
inches thick, plywood not of a grade, particle board, paper, and visqueen
plastic, plastic tarp, metal roofing panels, corrugated or sheet metal and
garage doors or similar material shall be prohibited unless approved by the
City Manager, or designee.
(1995 Code, § 7.28.030) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-20-2022; Ord. 14-02, passed 3-
18-2014; Ord. 02-1909, passed - -2002; Ord. 2024-02, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 7.28.040   Defective plumbing.
   Every privy, cesspool, sink, sewer, gutter or drain emitting any noxious
odor or any gas, or effluvium prejudicial to the public health, or in such
condition by reason of defective construction, or want of repair as to be
liable to emit such odor, gas or effluvium.
(1995 Code, § 7.28.040) (Ord. 02-1909, passed - -2002)
§ 7.28.050   Carcasses—Hogs.
   Every slaughterhouse or hog pen, and every unburied carcass of any dead
animal except such as are killed and kept for food is a type of nuisance.
(1995 Code, § 7.28.050) (Ord. 02-1909, passed - -2002)
§ 7.28.060   Offensive trades or acts.
   Every business, trade, occupation or act, except acts necessarily done in
the abatement of a nuisance, by which any odor, gas or effluvium is created,
annoying or offensive to the public or prejudicial to the public health is a
type of nuisance.
(1995 Code, § 7.28.060) (Ord. 02-1909, passed - -2002)
§ 7.28.070   Vehicles on sidewalks.
   Riding upon any velocipede, bicycle or other vehicle, or running any
handcart, wheelbarrow or any other vehicle, except baby carriages, upon any
sidewalk within the city is a type of nuisance.
(1995 Code, § 7.28.070) (Ord. 02-1909, passed - -2002)
§ 7.28.080   Trains.
   Obstructing the streets of Kern and Tulare at the railroad crossings by any
locomotive or car for more than five minutes at any one time is a type of
nuisance.
(1995 Code, § 7.28.080) (Ord. 02-1909, passed - -2002)
§ 7.28.090   Keeping of articles on sidewalks.
   Placing or keeping or permitting to be placed or kept on the sidewalks or
pavements of the main business streets in the city of any goods, wares or
merchandise, boxes, bootblack stands, vehicles, lumber, bricks, dirt, sand,
firewood, or any other article or thing is a type of nuisance. It is unlawful
for any person to loiter, stand or sit in or upon any public highway, alley,
sidewalk, or crosswalk so as to in any manner hinder or obstruct the free
passage therein or thereon of persons or vehicles passing or attempting to pass
along the same, or so as to in any manner accost or molest persons passing
along the same. When, however, in the construction, alteration, or repair of
any building, it becomes necessary to temporarily obstruct a portion of the
sidewalk or pavement, the same may be done upon permission of the Chief of
Police being first had and obtained. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the
unloading of goods, wares, and merchandise on any such sidewalk where the same
is immediately removed.
(1995 Code, § 7.28.090) (Ord. 02-1909, passed - - 2002; Ord. 2024-02, passed 3-
19-2024)
§ 7.28.100   Openings in sidewalk.
   Leaving any cellar door, trap door or other opening in any sidewalk or
pavement in the city open for more than five minutes at any one time, unless
guarded by the owner or his or her employees, or otherwise made safe from all
danger is a type of nuisance.
(1995 Code, § 7.28.100) (Ord. 02-1909, passed - -2002)
§ 7.28.110   Water running onto thoroughfare.
   All water which shall be caused or suffered to run across or upon any
sidewalk, street or alley in such a manner as to cause inconveniences to any
person traveling the same is a type of nuisance.
(1995 Code, § 7.28.110) (Ord. 02-1909, passed - -2002)
§ 7.28.120   Crowds obstructing thoroughfare.
   Any number of persons gathered together in one place so as to interrupt the
free passage of travel on any of the sidewalks or pavements in the city is a
type of nuisance; and all shall be liable to arrest alike and punished for
committing a nuisance.
(1995 Code, § 7.28.120) (Ord. 02-1909, passed - -2002)
§ 7.28.130   Mistletoe prohibited.
   No person occupying or owning premises within the city shall permit to grow
thereon that certain plant known as mistletoe. Any mistletoe now growing within
the city is hereby declared a nuisance, and shall immediately be abated by
destruction by the owners or lessees of the premises on which the mistletoe is
growing. It is the duty of the Street Superintendent to be vigilant in the
prosecution of all persons violating this section or any of the provisions
thereof.
(1995 Code, § 7.28.130) (Ord. 02-1909, passed - -2002)
Statutory reference:
   Statute authority, see Cal. Gov’t Code § 38771
§ 7.28.140   Exterior lighting.
   Exterior lighting shall be directed away from abutting properties so as to
cause no annoying glare.
(1995 Code, § 7.28.140) (Ord. 02-1909, passed - -2002)
§ 7.28.150   Abatement.
   All or any part of any real property, or vehicles, or buildings or structure
located thereon, found to constitute a public nuisance as provided in this
chapter, shall be abated by rehabilitation, repair, removal or demolition
pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 7.28.150) (Ord. 02-1909, passed - -2002)
§ 7.28.160   Authorization for City Manager.
   The City Manager is authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of
this chapter and may appoint and authorize one or more members of the city
staff to act as his or her designee. In the context of this chapter, the phrase
CITY MANAGER includes each and all persons designated by the City Manager to
assist in the administration and enforcement of this chapter, as limited by the
terms of the delegation.
(1995 Code, § 7.28.160) (Ord. 02-1909, passed - -2002)
§ 7.28.170   Notification of nuisance.
   (A)   (1)   When the City Manager or the authorized representative thereof
determines that any condition on any property within the city constitutes a
nuisance as declared herein above, the person shall give written notice (notice
to abate) to the owner or person in control or in charge of the property
stating:
         (a)   The condition or conditions on the premises creating the
nuisance;
         (b)   A reasonable time limit based on the nature of the nuisance to
abate the nuisance (as identified in §
7.28.190); and
         (c)   The right to appeal. The notice shall direct the abatement of
the nuisance and refer to this chapter for particulars.
      (2)   Notices served by means other than posting as provided herein below
shall contain a description of the property in general terms reasonably
sufficient to identify the location of the nuisance.
   (B)   The notice required by this chapter may be served in any one of the
following manners:
      (1)   By personal service on the owner, occupant or person in charge or
control of the property;
      (2)   By regular mail addressed to the owner or person in charge and
control of the property, at the address shown on the last available assessment
roll, or as otherwise known; or
      (3)   By posting in a conspicuous place on the premises or abutting
public right-of-way, or, in the alternative, insertion of a legal advertisement
at least once a week for a period of two weeks in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city. The newspaper advertisement shall be a general notice
that property in the city has been posted in accordance with this chapter and
contain a general statement of the effect of the postings.
(1995 Code, § 7.28.170) (Ord. 02-1909, passed - -2002)
§ 7.28.180   Appeal.
   Within ten days from receipt of the notice, the violator may file an appeal
of the nuisance finding to the City Manager. The appeal shall be in writing and
shall identify the property subject to the notice to abate and set forth the
reason or reasons as to why the party believes there is no violation. The City
Manager shall then appoint a hearing officer to hear the appeal. The Hearing
Officer must hear the appeal within 20 days from the filing of the notice of
appeal by the violator or at such later date as may be agreed to by the
parties. Notice of the date of hearing shall be given in writing. The date of
the hearing shall be no sooner than five days from the date when notice of the
hearing is given to the appellant and to the Code Enforcement Officer. The
decision of the Hearing Officer shall be final.
(1995 Code, § 7.28.180) (Ord. 02-1909, passed - -2002)
§ 7.28.190   Time limit for compliance.
   The violator must abate the nuisance within the period of time set forth in
the notice to abate, or, in case of an appeal, within ten days from the finding
of a nuisance by the hearing officer or such longer period as may be determined
by the Hearing Officer. Unless an emergency situation exists, the violator
shall be given no less than ten days to abate the nuisance.
(1995 Code, § 7.28.190) (Ord. 02-1909, passed - -2002)
§ 7.28.200   Abatement to city.
   If the nuisance is not completely abated by the owner, as directed, within
the time set forth above, the City Manager shall cause the same to be abated by
city personnel or private contract, and entry upon the premises is expressly
authorized for such purposes. Upon completion of the abatement by direction of
the City Manager, he or she shall cause a statement of the costs thereof to be
prepared for submission to the City Council. The City Manager shall set a time
and place for the City Council to receive and consider the statement of costs,
and shall serve on the owner or owners of the property a copy of the statement
of costs and a notice of the time and place at which the City Council will
receive and consider the statement of costs. The statement of costs and the
notice of hearing shall be served in the same manner as is provided in §
7.28.170 of this chapter and shall be accompanied by a copy of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 7.28.200) (Ord. 02-1909, passed - -2002)
§ 7.28.210   Report—Hearing on assessment.
   At the time and place set for receiving and considering the statement of
costs, the City Council shall hear and pass upon the statement together with
any objections or protests, relating exclusively to the amount of the cost,
raised by any of the persons liable to be assessed for the cost of abating the
nuisance. Thereupon, the City Council may make any such revision, correction or
modification to the statement of costs as it may deem appropriate, after which
the statement as submitted, or as revised, corrected or modified, shall be
confirmed by resolution. The hearing may be continued from time to time. The
decision of the City Council shall be final.
(1995 Code, § 7.28.210) (Ord. 02-1909, passed - -2002)
§ 7.28.220   Inspection fees.
   Code Enforcement Officers of the city shall have the power to make
inspections or re-inspections deemed necessary to ensure compliance for the
abatement of public nuisances. A re-inspection fee, in such amounts as set from
time to time by resolution of the City Council, may be assessed for each
inspection or re-inspection conducted pursuant to Title 1 of this code, when a
nuisance has not been fully abated or corrected within the time and manner
specified in the notice. Any fee imposed shall compensate the city for
administrative costs of inspection or re-inspection and shall be separate and
apart from any fines or penalties imposed.
(1995 Code, § 7.28.220) (Ord. 02-1909, passed - -2002)
§ 7.28.230   Service on owner of statement of costs.
   The City Clerk shall give notice of the City Council’s decision regarding
the statement of costs to the owner, or owners, of the property in the manner
set forth in §
7.28.170 of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 7.28.230) (Ord. 02-1909, passed - -2002)
§ 7.28.240   Assessment of costs of lien against the property.
   The costs of abatement of a nuisance, as confirmed by resolution of the City
Council, shall constitute a special assessment against the property to which it
relates, and after its recording, as thus made and confirmed, the same shall
constitute a lien on the property in the amount of the assessment. After the
confirmation of the statement, a copy thereof shall be recorded in the official
records of Tulare County and shall be transmitted to the Assessor and Tax
Collector of the county by the City Clerk. Whereupon it shall be the duty of
the Assessor and Tax Collector to add the amount of such assessment, or
assessments, to the next regular bill of taxes levied against the respective
lot or parcel of land, and thereafter the amount shall be collected at the same
time and in the same manner as ordinary real property taxes are collected, and
shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure for foreclosure
and sale in the case of delinquency as provided for ordinary real property
taxes.
(1995 Code, § 7.28.240) (Ord. 02-1909, passed - -2002)
§ 7.28.250   Alternatives.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the City Council from
ordering the City Attorney to commence a civil action or other judicial or
administrative proceeding to abate the alleged nuisance or to obtain any other
appropriate remedy in addition to, as an alternative to, or in conjunction with
the procedures authorized by this chapter. Nor shall the implementation of this
chapter be deemed to prevent appropriate authorities from commencing a criminal
action based upon the conditions constituting the alleged nuisance.
(1995 Code, § 7.28.250) (Ord. 02-1909, passed - -2002)
§ 7.28.260   Emergency abatement.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, whenever the City
Manager or his or her designee determines that any real property or any
building, structure or condition thereon is dangerous or constitutes an
immediate threat to public health or safety, the City Manager or his or her
designee shall, without being required to observe the provisions of this
chapter with reference to abatement procedures, immediately and forthwith abate
such public nuisance. Where such condition and the abatement is immediately
required, the City Manager or his or her designee shall prepare a statement of
costs in respect thereto, and the provisions of §§
7.28.210 through
7.28.230 of this chapter shall apply.
(1995 Code, § 7.28.260) (Ord. 02-1909, passed - -2002)
§ 7.28.270   Penalty—Violations.
   (A)   (1)    Every violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed to be a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment not exceeding six months
or by fine not exceeding $1,000, or by both fine and imprisonment.
Notwithstanding the classification of a violation of this chapter as a
misdemeanor, at the time an action is commenced to enforce the provisions of
this chapter, the trial court, upon recommendation of the City Attorney, may
reduce the charged offense from misdemeanor to an infraction. Any person
convicted of an infraction under this chapter shall be punished by:
         (a)   A fine not exceeding $100 for a first violation;
         (b)   A fine not exceeding $200 for the second violation of this
chapter within one year; and
         (c)   A fine not exceeding $500 for each additional violation of this
chapter within one year.
      (2)   Each day that a violation continues shall be regarded as a new and
separate offense.
   (B)   Any person who knowingly or intentionally misrepresents to any officer
or employee of the city any material fact herein required to be provided is in
violation of this chapter. Additionally, any individual who on a sworn
statement states as true a material fact, which he or she knows to be false, is
guilty of perjury.
   (C)   Every person who causes or maintains any public nuisance as defined in
this chapter, or who fails to comply with an order of abatement made pursuant
to this chapter is guilty of a violation of this chapter and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of the chapter.
(1995 Code, § 7.28.270) (Ord. 02-1909, passed - -2002)
CHAPTER 7.29: ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLES ON
PRIVATE PROPERTY
Section
   
7.29.010   Nuisance declared
   
7.29.020   Definitions
   
7.29.030   Exceptions
   
7.29.040   Chapter not exclusive
   
7.29.050   Enforcement
   
7.29.060   Entering property
   
7.29.070   Voluntary compliance
   
7.29.080   Notice of intention to abate
   
7.29.090   Request for hearing
   
7.29.100   Failure to request hearing- removal -costs
   
7.29.110   Public hearing
   
7.29.120   Conduct of hearing
   
7.29.130   Decision by City Manager or designee
   
7.29.140   Appeal
   
7.29.150   Removal of vehicle
   
7.29.160   Reconstruction of vehicle
   
7.29.170   Notice to Department of Motor Vehicles
   
7.29.180   Collection of costs
   
7.29.190   Costs-payment by state
§ 7.29.010 Nuisance declared.
   In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the
authority granted by the State of California, under Cal. Vehicle Code § 22660,
to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts
thereof as public nuisances, the City Council makes the following declarations:
The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative
vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property including highways is
hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private
property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create
fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the
health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and
to be injurious to the health, safety, and general welfare. Therefore, the
presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle or part
thereof, on private or public property including highways, except as expressly
herein permitted, is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance which may
be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 7.29.020 Definitions.
   Except where the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall
govern the construction of this chapter.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. Any vehicle, which has been left on private property or
public property in such inoperable or neglected condition that the owner's
intention to relinquish all further rights or interests in it may be reasonably
concluded; except, if the vehicle is stored as provided in §
7.29.030(B) of the city code. A vehicle shall not be considered abandoned if it
is on property owned or occupied by the owner of the vehicle.
   ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS. The costs to the city, and to the county when acting
on behalf of the city pursuant to an agreement of performing the acts required
under this chapter, except the actual removal of the vehicle. The City Council
may, from time to time, by resolution, determine the administrative costs for
the removal of each vehicle removed by the city if the vehicle is removed
without a hearing pursuant to §
7.29.100 of this chapter. When the acts required by this chapter are performed
by the county acting on behalf of the city, the administrative costs, if the
vehicle is removed without a hearing, shall be that amount to be determined
from time to time by the Board of Supervisors to be the administrative costs of
removal of abandoned vehicles from unincorporated areas of Tulare County rather
than the amount determined by the City Council. ln those cases in which the
City Manager, or designee, conducts a hearing pursuant to §
7.29.110 of this chapter, they shall fix and determine the administrative costs
which shall be the actual cost of performing acts pertaining to the specific
vehicle which is the subject of the hearing.
   COST OF REMOVAL. The actual cost to the city of having the vehicle removed.
The City Council may, from time to time, by resolution, determine the cost of
removal.
   DISMANTLED VEHICLE. Any vehicle that is partially or wholly disassembled.
   H1GHWAY. A way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to
the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. The term HIGHWAY
includes “streets.”
   INOPERATIVE VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle designed to be operated on a public
roadway that cannot be moved under its own power, and which is not currently
registered for operation with the California Department of Motor Vehicles. A
Planned Non-Operation (PNO) will be recognized as current registration.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Includes "highway."
   VEHICLE. A device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved,
or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. The term VEHICLE also includes any
part or portion of a vehicle which is less than a whole vehicle, and all of the
provisions of this chapter apply to a part or portion of a vehicle which is
less than a whole vehicle.
   WRECKED VEHICLE. A vehicle which has been wrecked, or which lacks an engine,
transmission, wheels, tires, doors, windshield, or any other part or equipment
necessary to operate safely on the highways of this state.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 7.29.030 Exceptions.
   This chapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a
building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other
public or private property; or
   (B)   A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner
on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler,
licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is
necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial
enterprise. Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public
or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Cal. Vehicle
Code Chapter 10 (commencing with § 22650) of Division 11.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 7.29.040 Chapter not exclusive.
   This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be
in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore
or hereafter enacted by the city, the state or any other legal entity or agency
having jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 7.29.050 Enforcement.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this chapter shall be
administered and enforced by the City Manager, or designee, and the employees
in the City Manager's Department or other persons authorized by the City
Manager to administer and enforce this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 7.29.060 Entering property.
   (A)   The City Manager, or designee, or the employees in the City Manager's
Department and other persons authorized by the City Manager may enter upon
private or public property to examine a vehicle and to obtain information as to
the ownership and identity of a vehicle when enforcing this chapter only with
the consent of the owner or tenant unless a written order from the court has
been issued.
   (B)   If the city enters into a contract with any person to remove or cause
the removal of vehicles which have been declared to be public nuisances
pursuant to this chapter, the person may enter upon private or public property
to remove the vehicles.
   (C)   Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who in any way denies,
obstructs, or hampers the entrance of the persons mentioned in this section
upon private or public property to carry out the aforementioned duties or who
denies, obstructs, or hampers the performance of the duties by the persons
after they have entered the property.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 7.29.070 Voluntary compliance.
   If it appears to the City Manager, or designee, that an abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled, or inoperative vehicle is located on private or public property,
they may follow such administrative procedures to secure voluntary removal of
the vehicle as appear advisable in each individual case prior to giving a
notice of intention to abate pursuant to §
7.29.070 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 7.29.080 Notice of intention to abate.
   If the City Manager, or designee, cannot secure voluntary removal of the
vehicle, pursuant to §
7.29.070 of this chapter, they shall give written notice of intention to abate
and remove the vehicle. The notice shall contain a statement of the hearing
rights of the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located and the
owner of the vehicle. The statement shall include notice to the property owner
that they may appear in person at a hearing or may present a sworn written
statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land
with the reasons for the denial, in lieu of appearing. The notice of intention
to abate shall be mailed, by certified mail, to the owner of the land as shown
on the last equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and legal
owners of record of the vehicle unless the vehicle is in such condition that
identification numbers are not available to determine ownership.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 7.29.090 Request for hearing.
   The registered or legal owner of the vehicle or the owner of the land on
which the vehicle is located may request a hearing on the question of
abatementand removal of the abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative
vehicle and on the question of assessment of the administrative costs and cost
of removal against the property on which it is located. The request for a
hearing shall be in writing and shall be filed with the City Manager, or
designee, not more than ten days after the date on which the notice of
intention described in §
7.29.080 of this chapter was mailed by the City Manager, or designee. If the
owner of the land on which the vehicle is located files with the City Manager,
or designee, a sworn statement denying responsibility for the presence of the
vehicle on his or her land within the ten-day period, the statement shall be
construed as a request for a hearing which does not require the presence of the
owner submitting the request.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 7.29.100 Failure to request hearing-removal- costs.
   If no hearing is requested within the time limit specified in §
7.29.090 of this chapter, the City Manager, or designee, shall cause the
vehicle to be removed and taken to a junk yard, automobile dismantling yard, or
refuse disposal site. Except as otherwise provided in §
7.29.190 of this chapter, when no hearing has been requested, the owner shall
be required to pay the administrative costs, as determined by the City Council,
and the cost of removal, as determined by the City Council in accordance with §
7.29.020 of this chapter. The City Manager, or designee, shall send a request
for payment of the costs to the owner of the property by regular mail and if he
or she does not pay the costs within 30 days after the date on which the letter
was mailed, the procedure set forth in §
7.29.180(C) of this chapter shall be followed.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 7.29.110 Public hearing.
   lf a public hearing has been requested in accordance with the provisions of
§
7.29.090 of this chapter, a public hearing shall be held on the question of
abatement and removal of a vehicle as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or
inoperative vehicle and the assessment of the administrative costs and cost of
removal against the property on which it is located. The City Manager, or
designee, shall cause notices of the time and place of the hearing to be sent
by regular mail to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized county
assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owners of record of the
vehicle unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are
not available to determine ownership. The notices shall be mailed at least ten
days before the date of the hearing.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 7.29.120 Conduct of hearing.
   The public hearings under this chapter shall be conducted by the City
Manager, or designee. The City Manager, or designee, shall hear all pertinent
evidence offered by all interested persons, including testimony on the
condition of the vehicle and the circumstances concerning its location on
private property or public property. The technical rules of evidence shall not
be applicable to the hearing. The owner of the land on which the vehicle is
located may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written
statement for consideration at the hearing. The owner of the land may deny
responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with their reasons
for the denial.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 7.29.130 Decision by City Manager or designee.
   (A)   At the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Manager, or
designee, may find that a vehicle has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or
is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from
the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided. The
City Manager, or designee, may also determine the amount of the administrative
costs, in accordance with §§
7.29.020 and
7.29.190 of this chapter, and may determine that all or a portion of the
administrative costs and the cost of removal are to be charged against the
owner of the land on which the vehicle is located.
   (B)   If it is determined by the City Manager, or designee, that the vehicle
was placed on the land without the consent of the landowner and that he or she
was not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the City Manager, or designee,
shall not assess administrative costs or the cost of removal of the vehicle
against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to
collect the costs from the landowner.
   (C)   The City Manager, designee, may impose such conditions and take such
other action as he or she deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry
out the purposes of this chapter. The City Manager, or designee, may delay the
time for removal of the vehicle if, in their opinion, the circumstances justify
it.
   (D)   The City Manager, or designee, shall give written notice of their
decision to all of the interested persons to whom the notice of hearing was
mailed.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 7.29.140 Appeal.
   Within ten days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, after
notice of the decision of the City Manager, or designee, has been mailed to the
interested parties, any person affected by the decision may file with the City
Clerk a written notice of appeal from the decision. The City Council shall
thereafter set the matter for hearing. The City Clerk shall give written notice
of the hearing to all of the persons mentioned in §
7.29.110 of this chapter. At the time and place set for the hearing, the City
Council shall hear the matter de novo and all of the provisions of §
7.29.120 of this chapter shall be applicable to the hearing. The decision of
the City Council after the hearing upon the appeal is final and conclusive as
to all things involved in the matter. The City Clerk shall give written notice
of the decision of the City Council to all of the persons to whom notice of the
hearing was mailed.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 7.29.150 Removal of vehicle.
   (A)   At any time after the City Manager, or designee, orders an abandoned,
wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle to be removed pursuant to §
7.29.130 of this chapter, any interested party may cause the vehicle to be
removed. lf the City Manager, or designee, has assessed administrative costs
and the cost of removal against the property on which the vehicle is located,
and the vehicle is voluntarily removed without cost to the city, only the
administrative costs shall thereafter be collected from the owner of the land.
   (B)   If no appeal has been filed and the vehicle has not been removed
within ten days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, after the
notice of the decision of the City Manager, or designee, was mailed to the
interested parties, the City Manager, or designee, shall cause the vehicle to
be removed and taken to a junk yard, automobile dismantling yard, or refuse
disposal site.
   (C)   If an appeal has been filed, and the vehicle had not been removed
within ten days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, after the
notice of the decision of the City Council was mailed to the interested
parties, the City Manager, or designee, shall cause the vehicle to be removed
and taken to a junk yard, automobile dismantling yard, or refuse disposal site.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 7.29.160 Reconstruction of vehicle.
   After a vehicle has been removed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter,
it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 7.29.170 Notice to Department of Motor Vehicles.
   Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, the City Manager, or designee, shall give notice of
the removal to the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State of California
identifying the vehicle removed and transmit to the Department any evidence of
registration available, including, but not limited to, registration
certificates, certificates of title, and license plates.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 7.29.180 Collection of costs.
   (A)   If the City Manager, or designee, has caused the vehicle to be removed
from the property and has assessed administrative costs and the cost of removal
against the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located, they shall
mail a notice to the owner of the property of the total costs to be paid by the
owner of the property.
   (B)   If any interested party has caused the vehicle to be removed from the
property without cost to the city and the City Manager, or designee, has
previously assessed administrative costs and the cost of removal against the
owner of the property on which the vehicle is located, the City Manager, or
designee, shall mail a notice to the owner of the property of the
administrative costs to be paid by the owner of the property.
   (C)   If the costs referred to in divisions (A) and (B) above are not paid
within 30 days after the date on which the notice referred to therein is mailed
to the owner of the property, the City Council may direct the County Auditor to
place the unpaid costs on the city tax roll as a special assessment against the
property pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 38773.5.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 7.29.190 Costs-payment by state.
   (A)   The City Council may, from time to time, enter into agreements with
the State of California, through the California Highway Patrol, or such other
agency of the state as shall be designated by the state, providing that the
state shall pay all, or any portion, of the administrative costs. The City
Council may, from time to time, determine, by resolution, whether the payment
agreed upon is sufficient to pay all, or only a portion, of the costs of
administration.
   (B)   Whenever the city has entered into an agreement with the county for
the performance by the county of such acts as under this chapter may be
delegated to the county, the county may contract with the state for the payment
to the county of such administrative costs for the removal of vehicles removed
within the city. ln such case if the county determines whether payments
received from the state for removal of abandoned vehicles are sufficient to pay
all, or only a portion, of the administrative cost, that determination shall
apply also to payments of administrative costs of removal of vehicles within
the city.
   (C)   Except where administrative costs are determined by the City Manager,
or designee, at a hearing, the amount assessed against an owner of land
pursuant to §§
7.29.130 and
7.29.180 of this chapter shall be limited to the portion of the administrative
cost found to be not covered by such an agreement with the State of California
and the cost of removal. This limitation on the assessment shall apply to all
cases assessed while such a resolution is in effect. However, the limitation
shall not apply to cases in which the written notice of intention to remove was
mailed prior to the effective date of the resolution and the resolution
increases the amount assessable.
   (D)   Any cost of removal incurred shall be paid by the city out of its
general fund.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 3-19-2024)
CHAPTER 7.32: WATER CONSERVATION
Section
   
7.32.010   Purpose.
   
7.32.020   Short title.
   
7.32.030   Authorization.
   
7.32.040   Application.
   7.32.045   Definitions.
   
7.32.050   Prohibition on water waste.
   
7.32.060   Outdoor water use—Water conservation stages.
   
7.32.070   Exemptions.
   
7.32.080   Violations—Penalties.
§ 7.32.010   Purpose.
   It is the purpose and intent of the ordinance codified in this chapter to
eliminate water waste and to minimize outdoor water use and to control
unnecessary consumption of the available potable water supplies in the city.
(1995 Code, § 7.32.010) (Ord. 2020-07, passed 7-21-2020; Ord. 16-01, passed 2-
16-2016; Ord. 15-06, passed 7-21-2015; Ord. 14-03, passed 6-17-2014; Ord.1895,
passed - -2002)
§ 7.32.020   Short title.
   The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “Water
Conservation Ordinance of the City of Tulare”.
(1995 Code, § 7.32.020) (Ord. 2020-07, passed 7-21-2020; Ord. 16-01, passed 2-
16-2016; Ord. 15-06, passed 7-21-2015; Ord. 14-03, passed 6-17-2014; Ord.1895,
passed - -2002)
§ 7.32.030   Authorization.
   The City of Tulare Board of Public Utilities, upon the recommendation of the
City Manager, is hereby authorized and directed to implement the applicable
provisions of this chapter upon the Board’s determination supported by its
findings that the implementation is necessary to protect the public welfare and
safety including without limitation the city’s long or short term water supply
and water quality.
(1995 Code, § 7.32.030) (Ord. 2020-07, passed 7-21-2020; Ord. 16-01, passed 2-
16-2016; Ord. 15-06, passed 7-21-2015; Ord. 14-03, passed 6-17-2014; Ord.1895,
passed - -2002)
§ 7.32.040   Application.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all persons, customers
and property within the limits of the city, and shall be included in any
contract pertaining to the provision of water services outside of the city
limits.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to uses of water for
essential government services such as police, fire, and other similar emergency
services.
(1995 Code, § 7.32.040) (Ord. 2020-07, passed 7-21-2020; Ord. 16-01, passed 2-
16-2016; Ord. 15-06, passed 7-21-2015; Ord. 14, passed 6-17-2014; Ord.1895,
passed - -2002)
§ 7.32.045 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the meanings set
forth in this section:
   COMMERCIAL NURSERY. The use of land, buildings or structures for the growing
and/or storing of flowers, fruit trees, ornamental trees, vegetable plants,
shrubs, trees and similar vegetation for the purpose of transplanting, for use
as stock or grafting, and includes the retail sale or wholesale distribution of
such items directly from the premises/lot.
   DRIP IRRIGATION SYSTEM. A non-spray, low pressure, and low-volume irrigation
system utilizing emission devices with a precipitation or flow rate measured in
gallons per hour (GPH), designed to  slowly apply small volumes of water at or
near the root zone of plants or other landscaping, and in no event, emits more
than four gallons of water per hour.
   IRRIGATION SYSTEM. The components of a system meant to apply water to an
area for the purpose of irrigation, including, but not limited to, piping,
fittings, sprinkler heads or nozzles, drip tubing, valves and control wiring.
   LARGE LANDSCAPE AREA. An area of vegetation at least three acres in size
supporting a business necessity or public benefit use such as parks, golf
courses, schools and cemeteries.
   RAIN EVENT. Any amount of precipitation of more than one-tenth of an inch.
   ORNAMENTAL LANDSCAPE. Plants for the purpose of improving the aesthetic
appearance of property, including but not limited to, tree shrubs, bushes,
flowers, ground cover, turf, lawns, and grass, but does not include crops or
other agricultural products or special landscape areas.
   PERSON. Any natural person or persons, corporation, public or private
entity, governmental agency or institution, or any other user of water within
the limits of the City of Tulare.
   RUNOFF. Water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is
applied and flows from the landscape onto other areas.
   SPORTS FIELD. A public or private facility improved with apparatus and/or
striping supporting a public benefit use or business necessity that provides
turf areas as playing surface for regularly scheduled individual and team
sports, and does not include a facility on a residential property.
   TURF. A ground cover surface of grass that can be mowed.
   WATER FEATURE. A design element where open, artificially supplied water
performs an aesthetic or recreation function, including, but not limited to,
ponds, lakes, waterfalls, fountains and streams.
(Ord. 2020-07, passed 7-21-2020)
§ 7.32.050   Prohibition on water waste.
   The following uses of water are defined as a “waste of water” and are hereby
prohibited, except as otherwise authorized:
   (A)   The use of water which allows excess water runoff to a gutter, ditch
or drain. Excess water runoff is runoff in such quantities that the water
runoff is capable of flowing or moving in more than droplets on the impervious
service. Every water user is deemed to have his or her water distribution lines
and facilities under their control at all times and to know the manner and
extent of their water use and excess runoff;
   (B)   The excessive use, loss or escape of water through breaks, leaks or
malfunctions in the water user’s plumbing or distribution facilities after such
an event should reasonably have been discovered and corrected. It shall be
presumed that a period of 48 hours after discovery is a reasonable time within
which to correct the defect causing the water waste to occur;
   (C)   The washing of vehicles, building exteriors, sidewalks , driveways,
parking areas, tennis courts, patios or other paved areas without the use of a
positive shut-off nozzle on the hose, which results in excessive runoff, except
where necessary in an emergency or to abate a danger to public health and
safety. The watering of lawns, ground cover and shrubbery in violation of the
stage then in effect, as described in §
7.32.060;
   (D)   Irrigation of ornamental landscape or other vegetated areas within 48
hours of a rain event if it is a designated watering day;
   (E)   Any watering or irrigation of ornamental landscape, turf, or other
vegetated area between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day, except
by the use of a handheld bucket or similar container, a handheld hose fitted
with a positive shut-off nozzle or device that causes it to cease dispensing
water immediately when not in use, or for very short periods of time for the
express purpose of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system;
   (F)   Installation of non-recirculating water systems in commercial car wash
and laundry systems;
   (G)   The draining of swimming pools more than once every three years,
except for structural repairs, chemical imbalance, or to comply with public
health standards determined by the County Health Officer or City Code
Enforcement Officer. Any resident whose swimming pool is drained by order of
the city or county for failure to maintain it properly will also be issued a
notice of violation. The draining of pools for reasons of health and safety
hazards as determined by a City Officer or Department of Health is permitted.
Pool drain permit applications due to structural repairs or chemical imbalance
shall include the results of a pool water test conducted by an independent
testing organization which shows a cyanuric acid level above 100 parts per
million, total dissolved solids over 2,500 parts per million, or calcium over
450 parts per million, or a statement of repairs from a licensed pool
contractor stating the nature and duration of repairs to be made and the date
on which the pool will be drained;
   (H)   Operating a water feature that does not use recirculated water;
   (I)   Food preparation establishments, such as restaurants or cafes, using
non-water conserving dish-wash spray valves.
(1995 Code, § 7.32.050) (Ord. 2020-07, passed 7-21-2020; Ord. 16-01, passed 2-
16-2016; Ord. 15-06, passed 7-21-2015; Ord. 14-03, passed 6-17-2014; Ord. 1895,
passed - -2002)
§ 7.32.060   Outdoor water use—Water conservation stages.
   No person subject to this ordinance shall knowingly make, cause, use or
permit the use of water for residential, commercial, industrial, government or
any other purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of this chapter, or in
an amount in excess of that use permitted by the conservation stage described
immediately below then in effect as determined and declared by the Board.
   (A)   Stage 1, Mandatory Compliance, Water Alert Condition. The following
restrictions shall apply to all persons year-round unless removed by the Board
declaring implementation of either Stage 2, Stage 3 or Stage 4. Upon the Board
removing all of Stages 2 through 4, Stage 1 shall be in effect.
      (1)   All outdoor irrigation shall occur only between the hours of 6:00
p.m. and 10:00 a.m. on designated days. Outdoor irrigation is permitted at any
time if:
         (a)   A handheld faucet filled bucket of five gallons or less is used;
or
         (b)   A drip irrigation system is used.
      (2)   Dwellings or establishments with even-numbered street addresses
shall water only on Wednesday, Friday, and Sunday, subject to the time
restrictions set forth above.
      (3)   Dwellings or establishments with odd-numbered street addresses
shall water only on Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday, subject to the time
restrictions set forth above.
      (4)   Monday is a non-watering day unless an exemption is on file with
the Public Works Department.
      (5)   The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes and
other types of mobile equipment is permitted only when using a handheld hose
equipped with a positive shut-off nozzle for quick rinses.
      (6)   The washing of sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, courts, patios,
or other paved areas is prohibited unless an approved or conditionally approved
exemption is on file with the Public Works Department.
      (7)   The operation of any ornamental fountain or other water feature
structure making similar use of water is prohibited unless the fountain uses a
recycling system, such as an electric pump. WATER FEATURES are any structures
other than a swimming pool or spa (as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code §
115921) that use, receive, or discharge water for functions other than
irrigation, or human or animal consumption.
      (8)   All restaurants are requested to serve water to customers only when
specifically requested by customers, and commercial kitchens are required to
use pre-rinse spray valves.
      (9)   Lodging establishments must offer customers the option to not
receive linen service between the days of their stay.
      (10)   The use of water for irrigation of golf greens and tees is
permitted only on designated irrigation days between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and
10:00 a.m.
      (11)   Any person found violating any portion of Stage 1 mandatory
compliance more than once will be subject to penalties. All persons, customers
and property within the limits of the city shall not commit water waste as
identified in §
7.32.050.
      (12)   The foregoing restrictions do not apply to:
         (a)   Landscape irrigation zones that exclusively use drip irrigation
systems;
         (b)   Irrigation of ornamental landscapes with the use of an attended
handheld bucket or similar container, or an attended handheld hose equipped
with a positive self-closing shut-off nozzle or device;
         (c)   Operation for very short periods of time for the express purpose
of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system. A sign must be displayed
notifying the public of the repairs while the area remains wet;
         (d)   Sports fields and public and private golf course greens and tees
may deviate from the mandatory irrigation day and time restrictions in order to
maintain play areas and accommodated event schedules by submitting to the
Public Works Director or designee an alternative watering schedule that reduces
overall water use by 10% based on their respective 2013 consumption levels;
         (e)   Large landscape areas may deviate from the mandatory irrigation
day restrictions by submitting to the Public Works Director or designee an
alternative watering schedule that reduces overall water use by 10% based on
their respective 2013 consumption levels. Applicants must reapply for the
exception annually and provide documentation that the alternative watering
schedule achieved the required water use reduction. Documentation may consist
of water utility bills, pump electric utility bills, or other documentation
that provides the required information.
   (B)   Stage 2, Mandatory Compliance, Water Warning Condition. In addition to
all of the provisions included in Stage 1, the following restrictions shall
apply upon the Board declaring implementation of Stage 2:
      (1)   No outdoor irrigation allowed during the months of: December,
January and February.
      (2)   For the months watering is allowed: All outdoor irrigation shall
occur only three days per week as described in divisions (3) and (4) below,
between 12:00 a.m. and 4:00 a.m., then again between 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m.,
and then again between 10:00 p.m. and 12:00 a.m. on the permitted watering days
specified in divisions (3) and (4) below. All persons, customers and property
within the limits of the city shall not commit water waste as identified in §
7.32.050.
      (3)   Dwellings or establishments with even-numbered street addresses
shall water only on Wednesday, Friday, and Sunday, subject to the permitted
time restrictions set forth above.
      (4)   Dwellings or establishments with odd-numbered street addresses
shall water only on Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday, subject to the permitted
time restrictions set forth above.
      (5)   Monday will be a non-watering day, unless an approved or
conditionally approved exemption is on file with the Public Works Department.
      (6)   Overseeding of lawns is prohibited. Exception is provided for
maintenance of sports fields, and golf course greens and tees.
      (7)   The washing of sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, courts, patios,
or other paved areas is prohibited unless an approved or conditionally approved
exemption is on file with the Public Works Department. In addition, the
following prohibitions will apply:
         (a)   The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes,
and other types of mobile equipment is permitted only when using a hand-held
hose equipped with a positive shut-off nozzle for quick rinses and on one
permitted watering days. No fundraising car washes will be permitted.
         (b)   Use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited to firefighting
and/or testing activities necessary to maintain the health, safety and welfare
of the citizens of Tulare.
         (c)   Commercial nurseries and commercial sod farms, sports fields,
golf courses, cemeteries, city parks and other large lawn areas will reduce
their water consumption by 25% based on their respective 2013 consumption
levels.
      (8)   Any person found violating any portion of Stage 2 mandatory
compliance more than once will be subject to penalties. All persons, customers
and property within the limits of the city shall not commit water waste as
identified in §
7.32.050.
   (C)   Stage 3, Mandatory Compliance, Water Emergency Condition. In addition
to all of the provisions included in Stage 1 and Stage 2, the following
restrictions shall apply upon the Board declaring implementation of Stage 3:
      (1)   No outdoor irrigation allowed during the months of: November,
December, January and February.
      (2)   For the months watering is allowed: All outdoor irrigation shall
occur only two days per week as described in divisions (3) and (4) below,
between 12:00 a.m. and 4:00 a.m., then again between 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m.,
and then again between 10:00 p.m. and 12:00 a.m. on the permitted watering days
specified in divisions (3) and (4) below. All persons, customers and property
within the limits of the city shall not commit water waste as identified in §
7.32.050.
      (3)   Dwellings or establishments with even-numbered street addresses
shall water only on Wednesday and Sunday, subject to the permitted time
restrictions set forth above.
      (4)   Dwellings or establishments with odd-numbered street addresses
shall water only on Tuesday and Saturday, subject to the permitted time
restrictions set forth above.
      (5)   Monday, Thursday and Friday are non-watering days, unless an
approved or conditionally approved exemption is on file with the Public Works
Department.
      (6)   Any person found violating any portion of Stage 3 mandatory
compliance more than once will be subject to penalties. All persons, customers
and property within the limits of the city shall not commit water waste as
identified in §
7.32.050.
   (D)   Stage 4, Mandatory Compliance, Water Emergency Condition, Drought
Emergency. In addition to all of the provisions included in Stages 1 through
Stage 3, the following restrictions shall apply upon the Board declaring
implementation of Stage 4:
      (1)   No outdoor irrigation allowed during the months of: November,
December, January, February and March.
      (2)   For the months watering is allowed: All outdoor irrigation shall
occur only one day per week as described in divisions (D)(3) and (D)(4) below,
between 12:00 a.m. and 4:00 a.m., then again between 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m.,
and then again between 10:00 p.m. and 12:00 a.m. on the permitted watering days
specified in divisions (3) and (4) below. All persons, customers and property
within the limits of the city shall not commit water waste as identified in §
7.32.050.
      (3)   Dwellings or establishments with even-numbered street addresses can
water landscapes on SUNDAY ONLY.
      (4)   Dwellings or establishments with odd-numbered street addresses can
water landscapes on SATURDAY ONLY.
      (5)   Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday are non-watering
days, unless an approved or conditionally approved exemption is on file with
the Public Works Department.
      (6)   The washing down of sidewalks, driveways, parking areas,
courtyards, patios, or any other paved areas is prohibited.
      (7)   Commercial nurseries and commercial sod farms, sports fields, golf
courses, cemeteries, city parks and other large lawn areas will reduce their
water consumption by 50% based on their respective 2013 consumption levels.
      (8)   Any person found violating any portion of Stage 4 mandatory
compliance will be subject to penalties. All persons, customers and property
within the limits of the city shall not commit water waste as identified in §
7.32.050.
   (E)   Stage 5, Mandatory Compliance, Water Extreme Emergency Condition,
Extreme Drought Emergency. In addition to all of the provisions included in
Stages 1 through Stage 4, the following restrictions shall apply upon the Board
declaring implementation of Stage 5:
      (1)   Dwellings or establishments with even-numbered addresses can hand-
water trees and large shrubs on SUNDAY ONLY, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
midnight.
      (2)   Dwellings or establishments with odd-numbered addresses can hand-
water trees and large shrubs on SATURDAY ONLY, between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and midnight.
      (3)   Any person found violating any portion of Stage 5 mandatory
compliance will be subject to penalties. All persons, customers and property
within the limits of the city shall not commit water waste as identified in §
7.32.050.
(1995 Code, § 7.32.060) (Ord. 2020-07, passed 7-21-2020; Ord. 16-01, passed 2-
16-2016; Ord. 15-06, passed 7-21-2015; Ord. 14-03, passed 6-17-2014; Ord.1895,
passed - -2002; Ord. 95-1754, passed - -1995)
§ 7.32.070   Exemptions.
   Exemptions from any provision of this chapter may be requested upon the
filing of an application and the payment of the application processing fee. The
Public Works Director or designee will, within 30 days after submission of the
completed application either reject the request, or approve or conditionally
approve the application upon a finding that such an exemption is within the
intent of this chapter and that unusual circumstances make it otherwise
impossible or commercially infeasible for the applicant to comply. Where no
decision is issued the request will be deemed denied. Appeals of an adverse
decision by the Public Works Director or designee may be taken to the Board for
final decision.
(Ord. 2020-07, passed 7-21-2020; Ord. 16-01, passed 2-16-2016; Ord. 15-06,
passed 7-21-2015; Ord. 14-03, passed 6-17-2014)
§ 7.32.080   Violations—Penalties.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
penalties and fees as determined by the Board by resolution or by the City
Council by ordinance or resolution. All remedies provided for herein shall be
cumulative and not exclusive.
(1995 Code, § 7.32.080) (Ord. 2020-07, passed 7-21-2020; Ord. 16-01, passed 2-
16-2016; Ord. 15-06, passed 7-21-2015; Ord. 14-03, passed 6-17-2014; Ord.1895,
passed - -2002)
CHAPTER 7.36: WASTE TIRE HAULERS
Section
   
7.36.010   Definitions.
   
7.36.020   Waste tire hauler’s business license required.
   
7.36.030   Exceptions to waste tire hauler’s business license requirement.
   
7.36.040   Display of waste tire hauler’s business license.
   
7.36.050   Use of licensed waste tire hauler required.
   
7.36.060   Report of transactions by tire dealers.
   
7.36.070   Penalties.
   
7.36.080   Conflict with other laws and regulations.
§ 7.36.010   Definitions.
   As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings herein ascribed to them.
   ASSOCIATION. Every club, syndicate, joint venture and every other group of
individuals who are united together for some common purpose but are not
organized as a partnership or corporation.
   BUSINESS. The operation or carrying on of any activity, whether for profit
or gratuitously, for which a license is required by this chapter.
   BUSINESS PREMISES. The office, building, location or place in which or from
which a business is conducted or carried on.
   DISPOSITION. The removal of waste tires from the business premises or other
location used by the dealer in its business.
   TAX COLLECTOR. The Tax Collector for the County of Tulare.
   TIRE. A pneumatic tire or solid tire manufactured for use on any type of
motor vehicle.
   TIRE DEALER. Any person who engages in the business of selling, trading or
dealing in tires for profit.
   WASTE TIRE. A tire that has been removed from the wheel of a motor vehicle
and is no longer suitable for its originally intended purpose due to wear,
damage or defect.
   WASTE TIRE HAULER. Any person who engages in the collection and/or
transportation of waste tires for compensation.
   WASTE TIRE HAULER’S BUSINESS LICENSE. A license to engage in the collection
and/or transportation of waste tires for compensation, as required by § 6172 of
the Tulare County Ordinance Code, Article 2.6 of Chapter 2, Part IV of that
code.
(1995 Code, § 7.36.010)
§ 7.36.020   Waste tire hauler’s business license required.
   Any person engaging in, or vehicle used in, the business of a waste tire
hauler within the city shall have a valid license issued by the County of
Tulare to engage in or be used in such business.
(1995 Code, § 7.36.020)
§ 7.36.030   Exceptions to waste tire hauler’s business license requirement.
   The following persons shall be exempt from the requirement to be licensed:
   (A)   Refuse collectors licensed by the County or City of Tulare;
   (B)   The City of Tulare and its employees;
   (C)   Any tire dealer transporting only its own waste tires; and
   (D)   Any common carrier which transports freight of various kinds and for
which the transportation of waste tires is only incidental.
(1995 Code, § 7.36.030)
§ 7.36.040   Display of waste tire hauler’s business license.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the following
requirements concerning business license:
   (A)   Any vehicle used to collect and/or transport waste tires within the
city must bear on both sides the name of the licensee and the words “Waste Tire
Hauler License No.     “ with the applicable license number in contrasting
lettering not less than two inches in height.
   (B)   The waste tire hauler’s business license shall be displayed at all
times in a conspicuous place near the main entrance of the business premises.
   (C)   A waste tire hauler’s business license issued for the use of a vehicle
shall be carried at all times in the vehicle for which the license was issued.
   (D)   If a waste tire hauler’s business license has been issued authorizing
the licensee to conduct a business independent of a fixed location, the
licensee shall carry the license upon his or her person at all times when he or
she is conducting such business.
   (E)   No person shall post, display or carry any revoked, suspended, expired
or otherwise invalid waste tire hauler’s business license.
   (F)   A waste tire hauler’s business license shall be displayed to the Tax
Collector, any investigating officer or any peace officer on demand.
   (G)   Any business license that has been revoked or suspended shall be
surrendered to the Tax Collector, any investigating officer or to any peace
officer immediately after a demand for such surrender has been made.
(1995 Code, § 7.36.040)
§ 7.36.050   Use of licensed waste tire hauler required.
   It shall be unlawful for any tire dealer in the City of Tulare to contract
with, or otherwise permit, any person to collect and/or transport its waste
tires unless that person holds a valid waste tire hauler license or is a person
excepted from the provisions of this chapter by §
7.36.030.
(1995 Code, § 7.36.050)
§ 7.36.060   Report of transactions by tire dealers.
   All licensees shall be required to file a monthly report with the Public
Works Director on a form prescribed by the Director of each and every
transaction in which the licensee was involved in the collection and/or
transportation of waste tires within the city. The form shall contain the
following information as to each such transaction:
   (A)   The date and time of each such transaction;
   (B)   The approximate quantity of waste tires transported;
   (C)   The manner of transportation used in the transaction, including the
name and license number of the waste tire hauler used, if applicable. In all
cases where common carrier was used, copies of documentation verifying such use
shall be attached to the report;
   (D)   The location of the site to which the waste tires were transported;
and
   (E)   The disposition of the waste tires involved in the transaction. For
purposes of this section, DISPOSITION shall mean the removal of waste tires
from the business, premises or other location used by the dealer in its
business.
(1995 Code, § 7.36.060)
§ 7.36.070   Penalties.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter which are
declared to be unlawful, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to a penalty
of imprisonment in the County Jail not exceeding six months, or by a fine not
to exceed $500 for each violation, or both.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the classification of a violation of this chapter as a
misdemeanor, at the time an action is commenced to enforce the provisions of
this chapter, the trial court, upon recommendation of the prosecuting attorney,
may reduce the charged offense from a misdemeanor to an infraction. Any person
convicted of an infraction under this chapter shall be punished by:
      (1)   A fine not exceeding $50 for a first violation;
      (2)   A fine not exceeding $100 for the second violation of this chapter
within one year; and
      (3)   A fine not exceeding $250 for each additional violation of this
chapter within one year.
(1995 Code, § 7.36.070)
§ 7.36.080   Conflict with other laws and regulations.
   No provision of this chapter, nor any of the procedures set forth herein,
shall constitute a waiver of any of the requirements of any statutes or any
provisions of this ordinance code or any other ordinance of the city which is
in effect as of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter or which
may thereafter be enacted.
(1995 Code, § 7.36.080)
CHAPTER 7.40: EMERGENCY AMBULANCE OPERATOR FRANCHISE
Section
   
7.40.010   Purpose and objectives.
   
7.40.020   Exclusive franchise.
   
7.40.030   Emergency modification of franchise.
   
7.40.040   Franchise requirement.
   
7.40.050   Definitions.
   
7.40.060   Application fee.
   
7.40.070   Application procedure.
   
7.40.080   Insurance requirement.
   
7.40.090   Suspension and revocation of franchise.
   
7.40.100   Ambulance dispatch.
   
7.40.110   Ambulance operation.
   
7.40.120   Exceptions.
   
7.40.130   Assignment of franchise.
   
7.40.140   Compliance with Tulare County requirements.
   
7.40.150   Miscellaneous provisions.
   
7.40.160   Written agreement.
   
7.40.170   Citizen’s complaint.
   
7.40.180   Review by City Council.
   
7.40.190   Penalties.
   
7.40.200   Council decision final.
   
7.40.210   Judicial review.
§ 7.40.010   Purpose and objectives.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the regulation of all
emergency medical transportation services and the emergency medical services
connected therewith in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the city and to ensure that competent and adequate care is
provided to the residents in need of the services. Further, it is the purpose
of this chapter to regulate the provision of such services where there is a
sudden need of immediate medical attention requiring basic or advanced life
support services as defined by the California Health and Safety Code.
(1995 Code, § 7.40.010) (Ord. 96-1786, passed - -1996)
§ 7.40.020   Exclusive franchise.
   It is declared that in order to provide adequate pre-hospital medical care
and transportation of the sick and injured, it is in the best interest of the
city and its citizens, to limit the number of ambulance franchises. The number
of franchises issued for the emergency operation of an ambulance service within
the city limits shall be limited to a single provider who shall, except for
extenuating circumstances requiring additional resources, have exclusive rights
for the provision of ambulance services.
(1995 Code, § 7.40.020) (Ord. 96-1786, passed - -1996)
§ 7.40.030   Emergency modification of franchise.
   The Permit Officer or, in his or her absence, the City Manager, may modify
the terms of the exclusive franchise and operating area on a temporary basis at
any time, for any time not to exceed 30 days, upon any of the following
conditions or occurrences:
   (A)   A labor action disrupting or ending the ambulance service;
   (B)   The closing, bankruptcy or dissolution of the ambulance company;
   (C)   Any other circumstance which disrupts or ends ambulance service
without sufficient notice to allow Council action; and
   (D)   Suspension, revocation or termination of the ambulance provider’s
license under this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 7.40.030) (Ord. 98-1821, passed - -1999)
§ 7.40.040   Franchise requirement.
   Except as specified in §
7.40.120 of this chapter, no person shall operate for hire, profit or otherwise
provide emergency transportation services by ambulance on any street, road,
highway, alley or any public place within the Tulare City limits without first
obtaining an ambulance franchise from the City Council, as hereinafter
provided.
(1995 Code, § 7.40.040) (Ord. 96-1786, passed - -1996)
§ 7.40.050   Definitions.
   The following words and terms when used in this chapter have the meanings
herein ascribed to them.
   ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT. Those special services defined by Cal. Health and
Safety Code § 1797.52 and any amendments thereto and referred to in the
Emergency Medical Service (EMS) System and the prehospital Medical Care
Personnel Act, Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 1797 et seq., and any amendments
thereto, or regulation promulgated thereunder.
   AMBULANCE. A vehicle specially constructed, modified or equipped and used
for the purpose of transporting sick, injured, convalescent, infirmed or
otherwise incapacitated persons. AMBULANCE also includes the transportation of
persons confined to wheelchairs.
   (A)   A primary ambulance shall be one used regularly in service by the
grantee.
   (B)   A backup ambulance shall be an ambulance only used occasionally to
fill in while a primary ambulance is temporarily out of service.
   AMBULANCE ATTENDANT. Any person accompanying an ambulance to provide pre-
hospital medical care for a sick, injured or otherwise incapacitated person.
   AMBULANCE DRIVER. A person who is licensed by the California Department of
Motor Vehicles to operate an ambulance.
   AMBULANCE PROVIDER. A firm, partnership, corporation or other organization
which furnishes or offers to furnish an ambulance service within the city
limits of Tulare.
   AMBULANCE SERVICE. The activity, business or service for hire, profit or
otherwise, of transporting one or more persons by ambulance on any of the
streets, roads, highways, alleys or any public way or place within the city
limits of Tulare.
   AMBULANCE STATION. The premises (including living quarters) located within a
zone from which the ambulance provider renders service.
   BASIC LIFE SUPPORT. Those special services defined by Cal. Health and Safety
Code § 1797.60 and any amendments thereto and referred to in the Emergency
Medical Service (EMS) System and the prehospital Medical Care Personnel Act,
Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 1797 et seq., and any amendments thereto, or
regulation promulgated thereunder.
   CALL-UP PROTOCOL. A systematic procedure for providing adequate ambulance
coverage, within the city limits of Tulare, on those occasions when ambulances
of the grantee are unavailable for additional emergency assistance.
   EMERGENCY CALL. A request for the dispatch of an ambulance to transport or
provide other assistance to persons in sudden need of immediate medical
attention, including the transport of all persons identified in the Cal.
Welfare and Institutions Code § 5150.
   EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-I or EMT-I. An individual defined in the Cal.
Health and Safety Code § 1797.80, with a scope of service set forth in the Cal.
Health and Safety Code § 1797.170, trained in basic life support according to
standards set forth in the Cal. Code of Regulations, Title 22, Chapter 2, §§
100005 et seq., and certified as such by the Medical Director.
   EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN- PARAMEDIC, EMT-P or MOBILE INTENSIVE CARE
PARAMEDIC. An individual whose scope of practice is to provide advanced life
support in accordance to standards prescribed by Cal. Health and Safety Code §
1797.84 and who has a valid certificate issued pursuant to the division.
   EMS. Emergency medical services which include all services required to
identify, respond to, stabilize and treat all medical and psychiatric
emergencies.
   EXCLUSIVE OPERATING AREA. The service area within the City of Tulare
designated by the City Council where the provision of emergency ambulance
service is restricted to a single provider.
   GRANTEE. A firm, partnership or corporation granted a franchise to operate
an ambulance service within the city limits of Tulare.
   MEDICAL DIRECTOR. A physician serving as the Medical Director/Health Officer
of the Tulare County Emergency Medical Service Agency.
   PERMIT OFFICER. The Fire Chief of the City of Tulare or his or her designee.
(1995 Code, § 7.40.050) (Ord. 06-2024, passed 6-20-2006; Ord. 96-1786, passed -
-1996)
§ 7.40.060   Application fee.
   Any person desiring to obtain the emergency ambulance franchise required by
§
7.40.040 of this chapter shall pay a fee, established by resolution by the City
Council, of $100 to the Clerk, and shall make application for the franchise to
the Council, which application shall set forth the following:
   (A)   The name and address of the applicant, and if the same be a
corporation, partnership, association or company, the name of its principal
officers, with the address of each, and the names, addresses and percentage of
ownership of all owners of the business;
   (B)   A description of every motor vehicle which the applicant proposes to
operate. The description should include make, year of manufacture (and in case
of type I and type III, the year of manufacture of the patient compartment),
motor and chassis numbers, California state license number for the current
year, and the color scheme, insignia, name, monogram or other distinguishing
characteristics used to identify the vehicle;
   (C)   List the address of each proposed ambulance station;
   (D)   The distinctive color scheme, name, monogram or insignia applied to
each vehicle;
   (E)   The training and experience of the applicant in the transportation and
care of patients; and
   (F)   A statement of financial status and responsibility in a form
acceptable to the Permit Officer.
(1995 Code, § 7.40.060) (Ord. 96-1786, passed - -1996)
Editor’s note:
   For the most recent fee, please see the Rates and Fees Resolution passed by
the city and on file in the city offices.
§ 7.40.070   Application procedure.
   Applications for ambulance franchise shall be processed in the following
manner:
   (A)   The Permit Officer shall develop and make available a document setting
forth the information to be included in the official request for proposal (RFP)
to provide ambulance service to the city.
   (B)   Applications shall be delivered to the Permit Officer by the first
Monday in April of the year the existing franchise expires.
   (C)   The following documents shall accompany the application:
      (1)   Evidence that all vehicles proposed to be used have been properly
licensed and inspected by the State of California; and
      (2)   Evidence that each employee possesses a valid certificate or
license as required by state laws and regulations, this chapter and the Medical
Director.
   (D)   Applications will be reviewed by the Permit Officer, who shall
recommend the award of franchise to the City Council during the first Council
meeting in May. Council shall schedule a public hearing for their second
meeting in May.
   (E)   During the second meeting in May, the Council shall conduct a public
hearing and award the franchise.
   (F)   The term of this exclusive franchise, which shall become effective
July 1, shall be for the period of five years, unless sooner terminated, and
shall be subject to the right of the city to terminate, alter or amend the
franchise at any time, as hereinafter provided.
(1995 Code, § 7.40.070) (Ord. 96-1786, passed - -1996)
§ 7.40.080   Insurance requirement.
   Before the franchise shall be issued by the Clerk, the applicant to whom
this permit shall be awarded by the Council shall deliver to the Clerk a policy
of insurance executed by a company duly authorized under the laws of the state
to do an insurance business. The policy shall include the following
information:
   (A)   Grantee shall assume all responsibility for damages to property or
injuries to persons, including accidental death, which may be caused by the
grantee’s performance of a contract, whether such performance be by himself or
herself, his or her subcontractor, or anyone directly or indirectly employed by
him or her and whether such incurred damage is discovered before or after
termination of contract.
   (B)   The grantee shall take out and maintain during the life of the
contract a comprehensive liability policy, including contractual liability, as
shall protect him or her and the city from claims for such damages. The policy
shall name the City of Tulare, California, its agents, officers and employees
as additional insured under the policy, in the following amounts:
      (1)   Public liability insurance; in an amount not less than $1,000,000
per occurrence for personal injuries, including accidental death to any one
person;
      (2)   Property damage insurance; in an amount not less than $1,000,000;
and
      (3)   Subject to the above limits, as combined single limit of insurance
in an amount not less than $2,000,000.
   (C)   In addition, the policy shall contain a severability of interest
clause and provide that the coverage shall be primary for losses arising out of
the contractor’s performance of the contract. Neither the city nor any of its
insurers shall be required to contribute to any such loss.
   (D)   The grantee shall furnish a certificate of insurance countersigned by
an authorized agent of the insurance carrier on a form of the insurance carrier
setting forth the general provisions of the insurance coverage. This
countersigned certificate shall verify that the City of Tulare, California, its
agents, officers and employees are named as additional insured under the
policy. The certificate of insurance carrier shall contain a statement of
obligation on the part of the carrier to notify the city of any material
change, cancellation or termination of the coverage at least 30 days in advance
of the effective date of any such material change, cancellation or termination.
(1995 Code, § 7.40.080)
§ 7.40.090   Suspension and revocation of franchise.
   The franchise may be suspended or revoked if the provider or any of his or
her employees or agents have:
   (A)   Violated any of the provisions of this chapter;
   (B)   Violated any of the provisions of this ordinance code or the laws of
the city, county, the state or federal government pertaining to the operation
of an ambulance, failed to comply with the county’s EMS Agency Policies and
Procedures Manual, or breached any written agreement with the city;
   (C)   Misrepresented a material statement of fact in the application for
this ambulance franchise;
   (D)   Violated any of the terms or conditions of his or her license;
   (E)   Committed any act or failed to perform any duty which adversely
affects the health, safety and welfare of patients or the public need and
necessity for efficient ambulance services;
   (F)   Deliberately provided false information or data to the Permit Officer;
and
   (G)   If any term or condition of this franchise shall be or become invalid
or unenforceable, the City Council may by ordinance terminate this franchise,
provided the City Council shall find and declare that the invalid or
unenforceable term or condition constituted a consideration material to the
granting of this franchise.
(1995 Code, § 7.40.090)
§ 7.40.100   Ambulance dispatch.
   The grantee shall be responsible for providing adequate notification and
dispatching of appropriate ambulances to emergency calls.
   (A)   In all cases, the grantee shall dispatch the nearest ambulance to the
scene of any emergency reported to ambulance personnel.
   (B)   The grantee shall provide, as determined by the Permit Officer, in
each ambulance and at one or more of the ambulance stations, a radio capable of
communications with the Tulare police dispatcher and Tulare Fire Department.
   (C)   The grantee shall maintain direct telephone and radio communications
with the Tulare Police Department dispatchers, 24 hours/day, seven days/week,
365 days/year.
   (D)   The grantee shall provide radio communications over the fire frequency
to alert fire and police officials of any ambulance en route and arriving on
scene to provide for the safe arrival of all responding units.
(1995 Code, § 7.40.100) (Ord. 06-2024, passed 6-20-2006)
§ 7.40.110   Ambulance operation.
   All vehicles used under this franchise shall be operated and maintained in
accordance with the laws of the State of California and ordinances of the
County of Tulare and the City of Tulare.
   (A)   The city hereby expressly reserves the right to modify, amend, alter,
change or eliminate any of the provisions of this franchise during its life,
for the following purposes, to wit:
      (1)   To eliminate or delete from such conditions as prove obsolete or
impractical;
      (2)   To impose such additional conditions upon the grantee as may be
just and reasonable, for the purpose of insuring adequate service to the
public;
      (3)   To make reasonable orders respecting character, extent, quality and
standard of service; and
      (4)   To make such other rules and regulations as may be reasonably
necessary to facilitate the service to be rendered to the public under this
franchise.
   (B)   The grantee must have a valid permit and the drivers, operators and
attendants of the authorized ambulance shall, at all times, be qualified
pursuant to the requirements of the Vehicle Code of the state and the Medical
Director.
   (C)   The allowable fees for service charged by the ambulance provider shall
be no greater than the rates approved in the grantee’s request for proposal.
Grantee may, however, petition the City Council no more than annually, except
for extraordinary circumstances, for a review and revision of the rates. The
City Council may approve the revisions with or without conducting a public
hearing as it deems appropriate. A schedule of fees for services shall be made
available, by the grantee, upon request to any person.
   (D)   In the interest of public health, safety and welfare, the grantee
shall not operate any ambulance unless and until the following conditions have
been met:
      (1)   All vehicles to be operated as ambulances must meet all state and
federal standards.
      (2)   Each ambulance shall be equipped with all safety equipment and
supplies required by the California Highway Patrol, California Welfare and
Institutions Code, California Health and Safety Code, County EMS Agency and the
Medical Director.
      (3)   Ambulances may be inspected at irregular intervals at the
discretion of the Permit Officer or the Chief of Police.
   (E)   A driver and attendant shall respond to all calls. The drivers and
attendants shall comply with the following:
      (1)   Shall meet all state and federal standards concerning the licensing
and certification of ambulance drivers and attendants and be of good moral
character;
      (2)   Shall wear clean uniforms bearing the county and provider agency
standard insignia indicating the person’s class of service, be neat and clean,
and conduct themselves in a professional manner; and
      (3)   Have a set of fingerprints on file with the Tulare Police
Department.
   (F)   Except as provided by county’s EMS protocol, grantee shall not provide
ambulance service utilizing vehicles or personnel which are based outside the
city limits.
   (G)   Grantee shall maintain a distinctive color scheme with the company
name and identification number on each side and rear of each ambulance,
lettering to be not less than four inches high.
   (H)   Prior to January 1, 2007, a minimum of two ambulances shall be fully
staffed, 24 hours/day, seven days/week by: one EMT-I and one EMT-II. Beginning
January 1, 2007, all ambulances must be staffed to the Advanced Life Support
(ALS) level, which requires at least one EMT-1 and one EMT-P Paramedic in each
ambulance. BLS ambulances may be utilized for the purpose of BLS interfacility
transfers. However, at no time on or after January 1, 2007, will it be
acceptable to respond a BLS staffed ambulance to a prehospital request for
ambulance service unless no ALS is available and the BLS ambulance is the
closest available ambulance to the call. All BLS ambulances must be staffed
with a minimum of two Emergency Medical Technician I personnel and be equipped
with an automated external defibrillator (AED).
   (I)   One or more separate ambulance stations, as determined by the City
Council, shall be maintained and occupied by the ambulance service provider.
All such locations shall be approved by the City Council and are intended to
meet minimum response times, considering traffic, street patterns and other
ambulance station locations. Each ambulance station shall be equipped with all
communication equipment required by the Permit Officer.
   (J)   The delivery of pre-hospital emergency medical care provided by the
grantee shall be reviewed and approved by the Permit Officer in consultation
with the Medical Director.
   (K)   All ambulance personnel, employed by the grantee, shall meet or exceed
the training standards required by the Medical Director.
   (L)   The grantee shall maintain each ambulance in good serviceable
condition, meeting all state and federal laws applicable to the performance of
such vehicles and in no case shall the motor or chassis be older than ten
years.
   (M)   The grantee shall provide, and abide by the direction established in
accordance with policies established by the Tulare County Emergency Medical
Services Committee, a “call-up” protocol of additional ambulance(s) as may be
required during mass casualties or other unusual circumstances.
(1995 Code, § 7.40.110) (Ord. 06-2024, passed 6-20-2006)
§ 7.40.120   Exceptions.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
   (A)   Any person operating an ambulance in the line of duty as a salaried,
regular, full-time police officer, Deputy Sheriff or member of the Fire
Department;
   (B)   Any ambulance and personnel operating such ambulance rendering
assistance to patients during any declared “state of war emergency”, “state of
emergency” or “local emergency”, as defined in the California Government Code,
or as otherwise requested by the Medical Director or public safety agency for
mutual aid response;
   (C)   Any ambulance company located outside of the city when one of the
following applies:
      (1)   A patient is being transported to a residence or facility within
the city from a residence or facility outside the city;
      (2)   A patient is being transported through the city from a point of
origin outside the city to a destination outside the city; and
      (3)   A patient whose condition requires transportation to another
facility utilizing specialized equipment or personnel not available from the
local provider.
(1995 Code, § 7.40.120)
§ 7.40.130   Assignment of franchise.
   Neither this franchise, nor any interest therein shall be sold, assigned or
disposed of, either by merger or consolidation, or otherwise without the
consent of the city expressed by ordinance.
(1995 Code, § 7.40.130)
§ 7.40.140   Compliance with Tulare County requirements.
   The grantee shall comply with the provisions of the “Tulare County Ambulance
Ordinance”, the Tulare County “Emergency Medical Services Policies and
Procedures” and the Tulare County “limited and advanced life support”
agreements.
(1995 Code, § 7.40.140)
§ 7.40.150   Miscellaneous provisions.
   (A)   All ambulance calls initiated by the Police or Fire Department of the
city shall be directed to the grantee in all cases except when such agencies
are advised by the grantee that the grantee is unable to provide service at
that time because of prior commitments for service.
   (B)   The grantee shall be responsible for replacing all chargeable
supplies, identified in the agreement between the city and ambulance franchise
operator, used by Tulare Fire Department personnel for victims/patients
transported by ambulance.
(1995 Code, § 7.40.150) (Ord. 06-2024, passed 6-20-2006)
§ 7.40.160   Written agreement.
   The granting of the franchise is conditional upon the grantee filing with
the City Clerk, at least ten days before the effective date of the issuance of
the franchise, a written acceptance thereof and agreement to comply with the
terms and conditions set forth in this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 7.40.160)
§ 7.40.170   Citizen’s complaint.
   Any person who has received services from a person licensed or certified
under the provisions of this chapter and who has any complaint regarding the
quality or adequacy of the service, or compliance with this chapter, may file a
written complaint with the Permit Officer setting forth in detail the reasons
for the complaint. The Permit Officer shall investigate all written complaints
and take appropriate actions as provided within this chapter.
   (A)   The Permit Officer shall conduct an investigation of the allegations
contained in the complaint.
   (B)   If there is substantial evidence to verify the allegation, the Permit
Officer shall notify the provider of his or her findings and the measures to be
taken pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Measures regarding suspension or revocation of the franchise shall be
reported to the City Council for consideration and final determination of
appropriate action.
(1995 Code, § 7.40.170)
§ 7.40.180   Review by City Council.
   Upon receipt of the Permit Officer’s notice of serious violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter, the City Council shall set a date and time for
a hearing before the Council to receive evidence offered by all interested
parties. The provider may be represented by counsel and all persons shall be
sworn before testifying. The provider may employ a shorthand reporter to record
the hearing. If, at the conclusion of the hearing, the Council finds that the
ambulance service provider violated any of the provisions of this chapter, the
Council may suspend, modify or revoke the ambulance franchise or take any other
action which it deems necessary for the best interests of the residents of the
city.
(1995 Code, § 7.40.180)
§ 7.40.190   Penalties.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of the chapter which are declared
to be unlawful shall be guilty of a misdemeanor which is punishable as provided
in this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 7.40.190)
§ 7.40.200   Council decision final.
   The determination of the City Council, after the conclusion of any hearing,
pursuant to this chapter shall be final. An applicant or ambulance service
provider may not submit a new application for a franchise to serve the city for
a period of one year after the determination has been made by the Council,
unless the Council finds that the public interest requires a reconsideration of
the matter with a shorter period of time.
(1995 Code, § 7.40.200)
§ 7.40.210   Judicial review.
   A judicial review of a decision of the Council made after a hearing pursuant
to this chapter, if the decision suspends or revokes an ambulance service
franchise, shall be made pursuant to Cal. Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.6. The
method of judicial review, the time limits for judicial review, and all of §
1094.6 shall govern the judicial review. When giving written notice to the
ambulance service provider that the franchise has been suspended or revoked,
the Council shall notify the provider that the time within which judicial
review must be sought is governed by § 1094.6.
(1995 Code, § 7.40.210)
CHAPTER 7.44: REGULATION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Section
   
7.44.010   Purposes.
   
7.44.020   Definitions.
   
7.44.030   Display of tobacco products.
§ 7.44.010   Purposes.
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the welfare officers by
discouraging the commercial exploitation of potential tobacco users and by
discouraging actions that promote the unlawful sale of tobacco products to
minors as well as the unlawful purchase or possession of tobacco products by
minors. There is an existing problem within the City of Tulare regarding
underage use of tobacco products. It is a public purpose and goal to reduce the
amount of the underage use of tobacco products. The regulation of the manner in
which tobacco products are displayed for public sale will reduce the
opportunities for, and the likelihood of, minors being tempted to purchase,
attempting to purchase and purchasing tobacco products for their own use and
consumption.
(1995 Code, § 7.44.010) (Ord 99-1838, passed - -1999)
§ 7.44.020   Definitions.
   The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meaning indicated, unless the context or usage clearly requires a different
meaning.
   SELF SERVICE DISPLAY. An open display of tobacco products and point of sale
tobacco promotional products that the public has access to without the
assistance of an employee of the selling business establishment.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any tobacco, cigarette, cigar, pipe tobacco, smokeless
tobacco, snuff or any other form of tobacco which may be utilized for smoking,
chewing, inhalation or other manner of ingestion.
   VENDER ASSISTED. Only a store employee has access to the tobacco product and
assists customer by supplying the product. The customer does not take
possession of the product until it is purchased.
(1995 Code, § 7.44.020) (Ord 99-1838, passed - -1999)
§ 7.44.030   Display of tobacco products.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, business or tobacco retailer within the
city to sell, permit to be sold, offer for sale, or display for purposes of
sale, by means of self-service displays or by any means other than vendor
assisted sales, any tobacco projects. All tobacco products shall be stored,
stocked and/or displayed in a place that is secured and unavailable to the
public and which is accessible only to the employees of the store.
(1995 Code, § 7.44.030) (Ord 99-1838, passed - -1999)
CHAPTER 7.48: PUBLIC USE/CONSUMPTION OF MEDICAL/RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA
Section
   
7.48.010   Purpose and intent.
   
7.48.020   Definitions.
   
7.48.030   Regulations applicable to public use/consumption of medical/
recreational marijuana.
   
7.48.040   Ban on commercial cultivation and regulations applicable to
individual/personal use.
   
7.48.050   Penalties.
§ 7.48.010   Purpose and intent.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the health, safety, morals,
general welfare and enjoyment of private property of and by the residents
within the City of Tulare. To this end, this chapter restricts the public use
and consumption of marijuana, whether for medical or recreational purposes, and
regulates cultivation of the same.
(1995 Code, § 7.48.010) (Ord. 17-12, passed 12-19-2017; Ord. 15-13, passed 1-
19-2016; Ord. 05-1999, passed - -2005)
§ 7.48.020   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, these words and phrases shall be defined
as follows, whether used in the singular or plural, the masculine or feminine.
   CANNABIS or MARIJUANA. The meaning set forth in Cal. Business and
Professions Code § 19300.5(f), as may be amended.
   CITY. The City of Tulare.
   COLLECTIVE OR COOPERATIVE CULTIVATION. An association within California, of
qualified patients, persons with valid medical marijuana identification cards,
and/or qualified and  designated primary care givers of the same, for the
purpose of cultivating medicinal marijuana, pursuant to the Compassionate Use
Act, the Medical Marijuana Program Act, or the 2015 California Medical
Marijuana Regulation and Safety Act (hereinafter "MMRSA").
   COMMERCIAL MARIJUANA OPERATION. Any commercial cannabis/marijuana activity,
as set forth and defined by Cal. Business and Professions Code § 19300.5(k),
MMRSA and its implementing regulations.
   DELIVERY. The commercial transfer of medical marijuana/cannabis and/or
marijuana products by a marijuana dispensary to qualified patients or their
caregivers, as well as any technology/electronic platform that facilitates the
same, or as otherwise defined and described in the MMRSA, codified at Cal.
Business and Professions Code § 19300.5(m) and as may be amended from time to
time.
   MARIJUANA DISPENSARY or DISPENSARY. Any facility or location, whether fixed
or mobile, and any building or structure, where cannabis/marijuana is made
available, sold, offered for sale, given, distributed, traded, or otherwise
provided to one or more persons.
   MARIJUANA PRODUCT(S). Cannabis in the form of plant material or in any form
that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed
into a concentrate and/or added to another substance or material, including,
but not limited to concentrated cannabis, cannabis oil, cannabis wax, any
edible, topical, or other product for ingestion or introduction into the body
through any means that contains cannabis, cannabinoids, and/or concentrated
cannabis in any amount.
   MEDICAL MARIJUANA PURPOSE or MEDICAL MARIJUANA USE. The use of cannabis for
the purposes set forth in the Compassionate Use Act and the Medical Marijuana
Program Act, Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 11362.5 and 11362.7 et seq.
   RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA PURPOSE or RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA USE. All uses of
cannabis not included within the definition of “medical marijuana use.”
(1995 Code, § 7.48.020) (Ord. 17-12, passed 12-19-2017; Ord. 15-13, passed 1-
19-2016; Ord. 05-1999, passed - -2005)
§ 7.48.030   Regulations applicable to public use/consumption of medical/
recreational marijuana.
   No person shall smoke, ingest, or otherwise consume marijuana or marijuana
products, whether for recreational marijuana purpose(s) or medical marijuana
purpose(s), within the geographic and/or political boundaries of the city,
unless said smoking, ingestion, or consumption occurs solely and entirely
within a private residence. WITHIN A PRIVATE RESIDENCE shall mean inside of
enclosed and habitable areas of a residential building and shall not include
garages, whether attached or detached, or other accessory buildings like
carports, sheds, barns, etc., unless those buildings are at all times fully
enclosed during the consumption.
   All consumption shall be in a manner so as not to cause a nuisance to nearby
residents through exposure to noxious odors or any other means that may
adversely impact health, safety, or the right to quiet enjoyment of private
property by city residents.
(1995 Code, § 7.48.030) (Ord. 17-12, passed 12-19-2017; Ord. 15-13, passed 1-
19-2016; Ord. 05-1999, passed - -2005)
§ 7.48.040   Ban on commercial cultivation and regulations applicable to
individual/personal use.
   To the extent that the city is required by California law to permit the
cultivation of medical or recreational marijuana the rules set forth herein
shall apply to any and all such cultivation. Nothing in this section shall be
interpreted to permit the establishment or operation of any marijuana
activities or dispensaries that are otherwise prohibited by this chapter.
   (A)   Personal use cultivation. The cultivation of marijuana shall be
subject to the limits set forth in any applicable state law. An individual that
has a right to cultivate marijuana for personal use shall be allowed to
cultivate marijuana within his or her private residence, in an attached garage,
or in an enclosed accessory building if the property in which the cultivation
will occur is zoned and/or utilized as a detached single-family residence.
Outdoor cultivation is prohibited. Cultivation in or on property zoned for
multi-family use is prohibited. Marijuana cultivation for personal use shall be
subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   Area. The marijuana cultivation area shall not exceed 32 square
feet, measured at the canopy, or ten feet in height, per residence. This limit
applies regardless of the number of individuals residing in the residence. The
cultivation area shall be limited to a single designated area per residence.
      (2)   Lighting. Marijuana cultivation lighting shall not exceed a total
of 1,200 watts, per residence.
      (3)   Building Code requirements. Any alterations or additions to a
residence, including garages and accessory buildings, for the purpose of
cultivating marijuana, shall be subject to applicable building and fire codes,
including plumbing and electrical, and all applicable zoning codes, including
lot coverage, setback, height requirements, and parking requirements.
      (4)   Gas products. The use of gas products (CO2, butane, etc.) for
marijuana cultivation or processing is prohibited.
      (5)   Evidence of cultivation. From a public right-of-way, there shall be
no exterior evidence of marijuana cultivation occurring on the site. Any and
all cultivation that results in evidence of the cultivation being visible from
a public right-of-way is prohibited.
      (6)   Residence. An individual may cultivate marijuana only at his or her
own residence.
      (7)   Cultivation elsewhere in city. An individual shall not participate
in marijuana cultivation in any location within the city other than the
individual's residence.
      (8)   Incidental use. Any residence in which cultivation occurs shall
maintain kitchen, bathrooms, and primary bedrooms for their intended use and
shall not be used primarily for marijuana cultivation.
      (9)   Ventilation. The marijuana cultivation area shall include a
ventilation and filtration system designed to ensure that odors from the
cultivation are not detectable beyond the residence or property line of the
detached single-family residence, and designed to prevent mold or moisture as
well as otherwise protect the health and safety of persons residing in the
residence. This shall include, at a minimum, a system meeting the requirements
of the California Building Code Section 1203.4, Natural Ventilation, or Section
402.3, Mechanical Ventilation, as may be amended from time to time.
      (10)   Storage of chemicals. Any chemicals used for marijuana cultivation
shall be stored outside of the habitable areas of the residence and outside of
public view from neighboring properties and public rights-of-way.
      (11)   Nuisance. The marijuana cultivation area shall not:
         (a)   Adversely affect the health, safety, or comfort of nearby
residents by creating dust, glare, heat, noise, noxious gasses, odor, smoke,
traffic, vibration, or other impacts; or
         (b)   Be hazardous due to the use or storage of materials, processes,
products, waste, or from other activities related to cultivation.
      (12)   Property owner authorization. For rental property, the lessee/
tenant shall obtain written notarized authorization from the property owner
prior to cultivating marijuana and shall maintain a copy of said authorization
at the location of the cultivation at all times.
      (13)   Notification. The owner and any lessee of the residence upon which
cultivation will occur shall inform the Tulare Police Department of the intent
to cultivate marijuana and pick up a handout setting forth the owner and lessee
responsibilities under this section. This notification shall be provided prior
to the commencement of the cultivation, except that for cultivation existing at
the time this chapter is adopted, the information shall be provided within ten
calendar days of the effective date of this chapter. The Tulare Police
Department may direct the owner and/or renter/lessee to the City of Tulare
Building/Planning Department for more information about Building Code and
permit requirements that may be applicable ifalterations or additions to the
residence are contemplated. The Tulare Police Department and City of Tulare
Building/Planning Department shall keep patient information confidential to the
extent required by law.
      (14)   Additional requirements for garages and accessory buildings. The
following additional requirements shall apply for personal use cultivation that
occurs in a garage or accessory building: the garage or accessory building
shall be secure, locked, and fully enclosed, with a ceiling, roof or top, and
entirely opaque. The garage or building, including all walls, doors, and the
roof, shall be constructed with a firewall assembly of green board, meeting the
minimum Building Code requirements for residential structures, and include
material strong enough to prevent entry except through an open door.
      (15)   Inspections. The cultivation operation shall be open for
inspection by any law enforcement officer or City of Tulare Code Enforcement
Officer between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. seven days a week, or at
any time upon responding to a call for service related to the property where
the cultivation is occurring.
      (16)   Posting of physician recommendation or identification card and
owner permission. A copy of a qualified patient's physician recommendation or
identification card shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the cultivation
area for each patient residing in the residence that is cultivating medical
marijuana.
         (a)   For rental properties, a copy of the property owner's written
and notarized authorization to cultivate marijuana, with the property owners
name and contact information clearly identified thereon, shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in the cultivation area.
      (17)   Collective or cooperative cultivation. The collective or
cooperative cultivation of medical or recreational marijuana shall be
prohibited in the City of Tulare.
(1995 Code, § 7.48.040) (Ord. 17-12, passed 12-19-2017; Ord. 15-13, passed 1-
19-2016; Ord. 05-1999, passed - -2005)
§ 7.48.050   Penalties.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter which are
declared to be unlawful shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to a penalty
of imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six months, or by
a fine not to exceed $1,000 or both, for each violation. Notwithstanding the
classification of a violation of this chapter as a misdemeanor, at the time an
action is commenced to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the trial court,
upon recommendation of the prosecuting attorney, may reduce the charged offense
from a misdemeanor to an infraction.
   (B)   Any person convicted of an infraction under this chapter shall be
punished by:
      (1)   A fine not exceeding $250 for a first violation;
      (2)   A fine not exceeding $500 for the second violation of this chapter
within one year; and
      (3)   A fine not exceeding $1,000 for each additional violation of this
chapter within one year.
(1995 Code, § 7.48.050) (Ord. 17-12, passed 12-19-2017; Ord. 15-13, passed 1-
19-2016; Ord. 05-1999, passed - -2005)
CHAPTER 7.49: REGULATION OF PSYCHOACTIVE BATH SALTS, PSYCHOACTIVE HERBAL
INCENSE, AND OTHER SYNTHETIC DRUGS
Section
   
7.49.010    Purpose and intent.
   
7.49.020    Definitions.
   
7.49.030    Provision, display for sale, sale or distribution of synthetic
drugs prohibited.
   
7.49.040    Provision, display for sale, sale or distribution of substances
claimed or represented to be synthetic drugs prohibited.
   
7.49.050    Possession of synthetic drugs prohibited.
   
7.49.060    Public nuisance.
   
7.49.070    Emergency abatement.
   
7.49.080    Revocation of business license.
   
7.49.090    Penalties.
   
7.49.100    Seizure of evidence.
   
7.49.110    Exclusions.
§ 7.49.010 Purpose and intent.
   Recreational use of psychoactive bath salts, psychoactive herbal incense and
similar products commonly known as “synthetic drugs” has been documented to
cause hallucinations, agitation, psychosis, aggression, suicidal and homicidal
ideations, cannibalism and death. While state and federal laws and regulations
prohibit some synthetic drugs, the makers of these drugs continually alter the
composition of the compounds in their products so as to escape the purview of
these laws and regulations. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to
provide the city with reasonable measure to address the dangers to the
community posed by synthetic drugs that are not regulated by state or federal
law.
(Ord. 14-06, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 7.49.020 Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   BUSINESS. Any commercial enterprise subject to obtainment of a business
license in Tulare.
   CONSUME, CONSUMING or CONSUMPTION. To ingest, inhale, inject, smoke or snort
(insufflate).
   DISTRIBUTE , DISTRIBUTING or DISTRIBUTION. To furnish, give away, exchange,
transfer, deliver or supply, whether for monetary gain or not.
   PERSON. Includes any natural person, business, firm, company, corporation,
public corporation, club, trust, partnership, association or similar
organization.
   POSSESS , POSSESSING or POSSESSION. To have for consumption, distribution or
sale in one’s actual or constructive custody or control, or under one’s
authority or power, whether such custody, control, authority or power be
exercised solely or jointly with others.
   PROVIDE , PROVIDING or PROVISION. Offering to distribute or sell a product
or substance to any person.
   PSYCHOACTIVE BATH SALTS. Any crystalline or powder product that contains a
synthetic chemical compound that, when consumed, elicits psychoactive or
psychotropic stimulant effects. The term PSYCHOACTIVE BATH SALTS includes
without limitation:
      (1)   Products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant effects
and contain any of the following intoxicating chemical compounds:
         (a)   Cathinone (2-amino-1-phenyl- 1-propanone), 4-methylmethcathinone
(2-methylamino-1-(4-methylphenyl)propan-1 -one), 4-methoxymethcathinone (1-(4-
methoxyphyenyl)-2-(methylamino)propan-1-one), MDPV
(methylenedioxypyrovalerone), MDMA (3, 4-methylenedioxy-N-methylamphetamine),
methylene (3,4-methylenedioxy-N-methylcathinone), methcathinone (2-
(methylarnino)-1-phenyl-propan-1-one), flephedrone (4-fluoromethcathinone), 3-
FMC (3-fluoromethcathinone), ethcathinone (2-ethylamino-1-phenyl-propan-1-one),
butylone (13-keto-N-methylbenzodioxolylbutanamine), a-PPP (a-
pyrrolidinopropiophenon), MPPP (4'-methyl-a-pyrrolidinopropiophenone), MDPPP
(3',4'--methylenedioxy-a-pyrrolidinoprio-piophenone),a-PVP (1-phenyl-2-(1-
pyrrolidinyl)-1-pentanone) or naphyrone (1-naphthalen-2-yl-2-pyrrolidin-1-
ylpentan-1-one);
         (b)   Any derivative of the above listed intoxicating chemical
compounds;
         (c)   Any synthetic substance and its isomers with a chemical
structure similar to the above listed compounds;
         (d)   Any chemical alteration of the above listed intoxicating
chemical compounds; or
         (e)   Any other substantially similar chemical structure or compound;
and
      (2)   Products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant effects
and are marketed under any of the following trade names: Bliss, Blizzard, Blue
Silk, Bonzai Grow, Charge Plus, Charlie, Cloud Nine, Euphoria, Hurricane, Ivory
Snow, Ivory Wave, Lunar Wave, Ocean, Ocean Burst, Pixie Dust, Posh, Pure Ivory,
Purple Wave, Red Dove, Scarface, Snow Leopard, Stardust, Vanilla Sky, White
Dove, White Night and White Lightning.
      (3)   The term PSYCHOACTIVE BATH SALTS shall not include any product,
substance, material, compound, mixture or preparation that is specifically
excepted by the California Uniform Controlled Substances Act (“UCSA”) (Cal.
Health and Safety Code §§ 11000 et seq.), listed in one of the UCSA’s schedules
of controlled substances (Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 11053 through11058),
regulated by one of the UCSA’s Synthetic Drug Laws (Cal. Health and Safety Code
§§ 11357.5, 11375.5 and 11401), regulated by the Federal Controlled Substances
Act (the “CSA”) (21 U.S.C. §§ 81 et seq.) or approved by the Food and Drug
Administration (“FDA”).
   PSYCHOACTIVE HERBAL INCENSE. Any organic product consisting of plant
material that contains a synthetic stimulant compound that, when consumed,
elicits psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric effects. The term PSYCHOACTIVE
HERBAL INCENSE includes without limitation:
      (1)   Products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric effects
and contain any of the following chemical compounds:
         (a)   Cannabicyclohexanol (2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-
methylnonan-2-yl)phenol), JWH-018 (naphthalene-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3-
yl)methanone), JWH-073 (napththalen-1-yl-(1-butylindol-3-yl)methanone), JWH-200
((1-(2-morpholin-4-ylethyl)indol-2-yl)-naphthalen-1-ylmethanone), HU-210 (
(6aR,1OaR)-9-(Hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a,7,10,1Oa-
tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-1-ol), CP 47, 497 (2-[(1R,3S)-3- hydroxycyclohexyl]-
5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol) CP 47,497 (2-[1R,3S)-3- hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-
methyloctan-2-yl)phenol) or AM-2201 (1-[(5-fluoropentyl)-1H-indol-3-yl]-(nap-
thalen-1-yl)methanone);
         (b)   Any derivative of the above listed intoxicating chemical
compounds;
         (c)   Any synthetic substance and its isomers with a chemical
structure similar to the above listed intoxicating chemical compounds;
         (d)   Any chemical alteration of the above listed intoxicating
chemical compounds; or
         (e)   Any other substantially similar chemical structure or compound;
and
      (2)   Products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric effects
and are marketed under any of the following names: K2, K3, Spice, Genie, Smoke,
Potpourri, Buzz, Spice 99, Voodoo, Pulse, Hush, Mystery, Earthquake, Black
Mamba, Stinger, Ocean Blue, Stinger, Serenity, Fake Weed and Black Mamba.
      (3)   The term PSYCHOACTIVE HERBAL INCENSE shall not include any product,
substance, material, compound, mixture, or preparation that is Psychoactive
Herbal Incense, and Other Synthetic Drugs specifically excepted by the UCSA
(Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 11000 et seq.), listed in one of the UCSA’s
schedules of controlled substances (Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 11053
through 11058) regulated by one of the USCA’s Synthetic Drug Laws (Cal. Health
and Safety Code §§ 11357.5, 11375.5 and 11401), regulated by the CSA (21 U.S.C.
§§ 81 et seq.) or approved by the FDA.
   PSYCHOACTIVE OR PSYCHOTROPIC EUPHORIC EFFECTS. Affecting the central nervous
system or brain function to change perception, mood, consciousness, cognition
or behavior in ways that are similar to the effects of cannabis.
   PSYCHOACTIVE OR PSYCHOTROPIC STIMULANT EFFECTS. Affecting the central
nervous system or brain function to change perception, mood, consciousness,
cognition or behavior in ways that are similar to the effects of cocaine,
methylphenidate or amphetamines.
   SELL , SELLING or SALE. To furnish, exchange, transfer, deliver or supply
for monetary gain.
   SYNTHETIC DRUG. Includes psychoactive bath salts and psychoactive herbal
incense, as those terms are defined hereinabove.
(Ord. 14-06, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 7.49.030 Provision, display for sale, sale or distribution of synthetic drugs
prohibited.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to provide, display for sale, distribute
or sell any synthetic drug within the City of Tulare.
   (B)   Merely disclaiming a synthetic drug as “not safe for human
consumption” will not avoid the application of this section.
(Ord. 14-06, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 7.49.040 Provision, display for sale, sale or distribution of substances
claimed or represented to be synthetic drugs prohibited.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to claim or represent that a product
that person is providing, displaying for sale, distributing or selling is a
synthetic drug within the City of Tulare.
   (B)   To determine if a person is claiming or representing that a product is
a synthetic drug, the enforcing officer may consider any of the following
evidentiary factors:
      (1)   The product is not suitable for its marketed use (such as a
crystalline or powder product being marketed as “glass cleaner”);
      (2)   The business providing, displaying for sale, distributing or
selling the product does not typically provide, distribute or sell products
that are used for that product’s marketed use (such as a liquor store selling
“plant food”);
      (3)   The product contains a warning label that is not typically present
on products that are used for that product’s marketed use (such as “not for
human consumption,” “not for purchase by minors,” or “does not contain
chemicals banned by section 11357.5");
      (4)   The product is significantly more expensive than products that are
used for that product's marketed use (such as half of a gram of a substance
marketed as “glass cleaner” costing $50);
      (5)   The product resembles an illicit street drug (such as cocaine,
methamphetamine or marijuana); or
      (6)   The product’s name or packaging uses images or slang referencing an
illicit street drug (such as “Eight Ballz” or “Green Buddha”).
   (C)   Merely disclaiming a substance claimed or represented to be a
synthetic drug as “not safe for human consumption” will not avoid the
application of this section.
(Ord. 14-06, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 7.49.050 Possession of synthetic drugs prohibited.
   It is unlawful for any person to possess any synthetic drug within the City
of Tulare.
(Ord. 14-06, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 7.49.060 Public nuisance.
   (A)   It is a public nuisance for any person to provide, display for sale,
distribute or sell any synthetic drug within the City of Tulare.
   (B)   It is a public nuisance for any person to allow the provision, display
for sale, distribution or sale of any synthetic drug on property owned,
controlled or managed by such person within the City of Tulare.
   (C)   It is a public nuisance for any person to provide, display for sale,
distribute or sell any substance claimed or represented to be a synthetic drug
within the City of Tulare.
   (D)   It is a public nuisance for any person to allow the provision, display
for sale, distribution or sale of any substance claimed or represented to be a
synthetic drug on property owned, controlled or managed by such person within
the City of Tulare.
   (E)   To determine if a person is claiming or representing that a substance
or product is a synthetic drug, the enforcing officer may consider any of the
evidentiary factors set forth in §
7.49.040 .
(Ord. 14-06, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 7.49.070 Emergency abatement.
   Because the use of synthetic drugs has been documented to cause
hallucinations, agitation, psychosis, aggression, suicidal and homicidal
ideations, cannibalism and death, any violation of this chapter presents a
grave and imminent danger not only to the person consuming the synthetic drug,
but also to the public at large. If the code compliance officer, based on the
facts then known, determines that a violation of this chapter presents an
imminent danger or hazard or is imminently injurious to the public health or
safety, then that violation is punishable by the emergency abatement procedures
set forth in §
7.28.260 of this code.
(Ord. 14-06, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 7.49.080 Revocation of business license.
   No person holding a city business license and owning or operating a business
in the city may use that business to provide, distribute or sell any synthetic
drug or any substance claimed or represented to be a synthetic drug. Along with
other applicable penalties, a violation of this section by the holder of a city
business license, or their employees or agents, shall constitute grounds for
modification, suspension, revocation, or any combination thereof, of said
license.
(Ord. 14-06, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 7.49.090 Penalties.
   Established by resolution of the City of Tulare City Council.
   (A)   Misdemeanor violation. Failure to comply with any of the requirements
of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the city or
county jail for a period not exceeding six months or by fine not exceeding
$1,000, or by both, provided that where the City Attorney determines that such
action would be in the interest of justice, he or she may specify in the
accusatory pleading that the offense shall be an infraction.
   (B)   Infraction violation. Where the City Attorney determines that, in the
interest of justice, a violation of this chapter is an infraction, such
infraction is punishable by a fine not exceeding $100 for a first violation, a
fine not exceeding $200 for a second violation of the same provision within one
year, and a fine not exceeding $500 for each additional infraction violation of
the same provision within one year. An infraction is not punishable by
imprisonment. A person charged with an infraction shall not be entitled to a
trial by jury and shall not be entitled to have the public defender or other
counsel appointed at public expense to represent him or her, unless he or she
is arrested and not released on his or her written promise to appear, his or
her own recognizance or a deposit of bail. However, any person who has
previously been convicted two or more times during any 12-month period for any
violation of this chapter for a crime made punishable as an infraction shall be
charged with a misdemeanor upon the third violation.
   (C)   The fine amounts set forth above may be modified, from time to time,
by City Council resolution. In no event shall such fine amounts exceed the
amounts authorized by state law.
(Ord. 14-06, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 7.49.100 Seizure of evidence.
   Any product(s) or substance(s) possessed, provided, distributed or sold in
violation of any provision of this chapter shall be seized by the enforcing
officers and removed, stored and disposed of in accordance with law.
(Ord. 14-06, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 7.49.110 Exclusions.
   (A)   This chapter shall not apply to drugs or substances lawfully
prescribed or to intoxicating chemical compounds that have been approved by the
federal Food and Drug Administration or which are specifically permitted by
California law, including without limitation, intoxicating chemical compounds
that are specifically excepted by the California Uniform Controlled Substances
Act (Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 11000 et seq.).
   (B)   This chapter shall not apply to drugs or substances that are
prohibited by state or federal law, including without limitation, Cal. Health
and Safety Code §§ 11357.5, 11375.5, 11401 and the Federal Controlled
Substances Act.
   (C)   This chapter shall not be deemed to prescribe any act that is
positively permitted, prohibited or preempted by any state or federal law or
regulation.
(Ord. 14-06, passed 10-21-2014)
CHAPTER 7.52: REGULATION OF SQUATTER CAMPS
Section
   
7.52.010   Purpose.
   
7.52.020   Definitions.
   
7.52.030   Unlawful occupancy.
   
7.52.040   Enforcement.
   
7.52.050   Nuisance.
   
7.52.060   Procedure for abatement of nuisance.
   
7.52.070   Penalty.
   
7.52.080   Severability.
§ 7.52.010   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to assist code/law enforcement in minimizing
the impact that squatter camps have on the city’s quality of life. Squatter
camps are unsightly, accumulate over time on public and private property
causing blight and similar conditions resulting in reduction of property values
and deterioration of the city’s neighborhoods, are detrimental to the public
health, safety and welfare, and constitute a public nuisance.
(1995 Code, § 7.52.010) (Ord. 06-2012, passed - -2006)
§ 7.52.020   Definitions.
   Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this chapter, the
following terms shall be defined as follows.
   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager of the city and his or her duly authorized
representatives and deputies.
   SQUATTER. One who settles or locates on land enclosed or unenclosed with no
bona fide claim or color of title or without the express consent of the owner
or person legally in charge of the land.
   SQUATTER CAMP. An area or parcel of land upon which any person has settled
or located, or which he or she occupies, without having a bona fide claim or
color of title thereto, or without the express consent of the owner or person
legally in charge thereof or the agent of the same, and which is occupied or
inhabited in violation of § 103 of the California Building Code or Chapter 10
of the Uniform Housing Code as adopted by the City of Tulare. It includes any
tent camp space, house court and every other kind of camp, tent, shelter,
structure or collection of tents, shelters or structures of any kind
established, constructed, maintained or operated thereon.
(1995 Code, § 7.52.020) (Ord. 2023-04, passed 4-4-2023; Ord. 06-2012, passed -
-2006)
§ 7.52.030   Unlawful occupancy.
   No person shall settle or locate on or occupy any land without a bona fide
claim or color of title thereto, or without the express consent of the owner or
person legally in charge of the land, or erect or construct any tent, shelter
or structure of any kind thereon.
(1995 Code, § 7.52.030) (Ord. 06-2012, passed - -2006)
§ 7.52.040   Enforcement.
   It shall be the duty of the City Manager to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
(1995 Code, § 7.52.040) (Ord. 2023-04, passed 4-4-2023; Ord. 06-2012, passed -
-2006)
§ 7.52.050   Nuisance.
   Every squatter camp, as defined in §
7.52.020, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Such nuisances may be
abated in the manner provided by §
7.52.060 of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 7.52.050) (Ord. 06-2012, passed - -2006)
§ 7.52.060   Procedure for abatement of nuisance.
   The City Manager is hereby authorized to abate such a nuisance under the
following alternative and supplemental procedure:
   (A)   The City Manager may serve notice upon the owner or person in charge
of the property upon which the squatter camp is located. The notice shall be in
writing and must be signed by the City Manager, must be served upon the owner
or the person in charge of the property upon which the squatter camp is located
according to the provisions of Cal. Code of Civil Procedure § 1162. The notice
shall require that the squatter camp be completely abandoned, abated, closed
and vacated and demolished within three days from the date of service of notice
upon the owner or operator or person in charge thereof. Failure or refusal on
the part of any such owner or person in charge of the squatter camp to abate,
vacate and close it in compliance with the written notice shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
   (B)   Upon the failure or refusal on the part of the owner or person in
charge of the land upon which the squatter camp is located to act within 14
days, the City Manager may post notices notifying all persons that the squatter
camp is condemned as a public nuisance and that all persons shall immediately
vacate the premises upon which the squatter camp space is located. Any person
who shall thereafter enter in or upon or make any use of the squatter camp
shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
   (C)   In case the City Manager is unable to ascertain or find the owner of
the land upon which any squatter camp is located, or where no person is in
charge of the same, or where the owner of the land refuses to act, as an
alternative procedure, the City Manager may notify all squatters within the
squatter camp that the same has been condemned and to remove therefrom
immediately. In addition to the oral notification, the City Manager shall post
a written notice in a conspicuous place, within the squatter camp, notifying
all squatters to forthwith and immediately remove there from and vacate the
squatter camp. Failure or refusal of any person to comply with the notice shall
be a violation of this chapter.
   (D)   Notwithstanding the notice provisions herein, and in addition to any
other remedy available, in order to prevent loss of life or serious injury in
the case of a person or persons squatting within the right of way of any
existing railroad track, violators of this section shall be immediately removed
and relocated from the right of way. The City Manager is authorized to develop
any regulations to address the storage and/or disposal of property remaining in
the railroad right of way, whether abandoned or not.
(1995 Code, § 7.52.060) (Ord. 2023-04, passed 4-4-2023; Ord. 06-2012, passed -
-2006)
§ 7.52.070   Penalty.
   Every squatter camp, as defined by this chapter, is hereby declared a public
nuisance, and as such may be abated in the manner provided for in §
7.28.200 of this code. Furthermore, all violations of this chapter shall be
considered misdemeanors, punishable according to Cal. Penal Code § 19. Upon the
recommendation of the prosecuting attorney, the court may reduce the charged
offense from a misdemeanor to an infraction, punishable under §
1.12.010 of this code.
(1995 Code, § 7.52.070) (Ord. 06-2012, passed - -2006)
§ 7.52.080   Severability.
   If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the
invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of the
provisions of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid
provisions or application and, to this end, the provisions of this chapter are
declared to be severable.
(1995 Code, § 7.52.080) (Ord. 06-2012, passed - -2006)
CHAPTER 7.56: REGULATION OF ROADSIDE AND MEDIAN SOLICITATION
Section
   
7.56.010   Purpose.
   
7.56.020   Definitions.
   
7.56.030   Acts prohibited.
   
7.56.040   Exceptions.
   
7.56.050   Severability.
   
7.56.060   Penalty.
§ 7.56.010   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to address safety concerns caused by persons
standing, sitting and soliciting on medians and near intersections and
commercial driveways in close proximity to moving vehicles. It is the desire of
this Council to protect the exercise of First Amendment rights of those persons
engaged in soliciting while also minimizing the safety hazards of such
solicitation when it is conducted in close proximity to moving vehicles. This
chapter aims to focus its regulatory power on the place and manner of the
solicitation. Its aim is to regulate the locations where such solicitation is
particularly unsafe in order to address the city's interest in preserving
pedestrian and motorist safety, preventing traffic congestion and controlling
vehicular traffic.
(1995 Code, § 7.56.010) (Ord. 2023-03, passed 1-17-2023; Ord. 06-2013, passed -
-2006)
§ 7.56.020   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL DRIVEWAY. The driveway to a shopping center, business, or
commercial parking lot.
   DRIVEWAY. The paved portion of a public street providing unobstructed
passage from the roadway to an off-street area used for driving, servicing,
parking, or otherwise accommodating motor vehicles.
   LOITER. To stand, delay, or linger on a median without a permit or
exception, other than to safely and lawfully cross the street.
   MEDIAN. A paved or planted areas separating a street, or highway into two or
more lanes or directions of travel.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any propelled vehicle or vehicle drawn by a power other than
muscular power, other than a motorized wheelchair.
   SIDEWALK. A paved or planted path for pedestrians at the side of a road.
   SOLICITING. Asking for money, contributions, business, or political support;
or distributing written materials. Soliciting shall include using the spoken,
written, or printed word, bodily gestures, signs, or other means with the
purpose of obtaining that which is requested.
(1995 Code, § 7.56.020) (Ord. 2023-03, passed 1-17-2023; Ord. 06-2013, passed -
-2006)
§ 7.56.030   Acts prohibited.
   (A)   No person shall solicit an operator or other occupant of a motor
vehicle while such motor vehicle is 1) being driven; or 2) idling on any lane
of traffic, or on any street or highway on-ramp or off-ramp. Provided, however,
that this subsection shall not apply to services rendered in connection with
emergency repairs requested by the operator or passenger of such vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall solicit while standing or sitting on a median, or on a
street or sidewalk within one hundred feet from a stop sign or traffic signal;
or within 100 of a commercial driveway.
   (C)   No person shall remain on a median strip for longer than one traffic
cycle, except that the median may be used as a place for pedestrian crossing in
adherence to all applicable traffic laws.
(1995 Code, § 7.56.030) (Ord. 2023-03, passed 1-17-2023; Ord. 06-2013, passed -
-2006)
§ 7.56.040   Exceptions.
   (A)   This chapter shall not supersede the permit procedure for charitable
solicitations by public safety personnel as set forth in Cal. Business and
Professions Code § 17510.25.
      (1)   All permitted solicitors shall wear safety clothing. Such clothing
shall include, but is not limited to, orange or yellow reflective vests and/or
shirts.
      (2)   All permitted solicitors shall be no younger than 18 years of age.
   (B)   This chapter shall not supersede the permit procedure for charitable
solicitations by charitable organizations, as defined in Cal. Gov’t Code §§
12580 through 12583, as set forth in Cal. Business and Professions Code §
17510.25.
      (1)   All permitted solicitors shall wear safety clothing. Such clothing
shall include, but is not limited to, orange or yellow reflective vests and/or
shirts.
      (2)   All permitted solicitors shall be no younger than 18 years of age.
The city shall require proof of age by the permit applicant providing a valid
birth certificate, valid California driver's license or other California or
military issued identification card containing the permit applicant's birth
date.
      (3)   For organizational permits, all persons to be covered under the
permit shall be listed in the application, with proof of age provided by the
organization for each person.
         (a)   All persons covered under a charitable organization permit shall
be required to carry and display the permit or a copy thereof. Any such person
must show the permit or copy thereof to any city employee upon request.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 1-17-2023)
§ 7.56.050   Severability.
   If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the
invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of the
provisions of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid
provisions or application and, to this end, the provisions of this chapter are
declared to be severable.
(1995 Code, § 7.56.050) (Ord. 2023-03, passed 1-17-2023; Ord. 06-2013, passed -
-2006)
§ 7.56.060   Penalty.
   Before any law enforcement officer may cite or arrest a person under this
chapter, the officer must warn the person that his or her conduct is in
violation of this chapter and must give the person an opportunity to comply
with the provisions of this chapter. Any willful violation of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor or an
infraction. The complaint charging such violation shall specify whether the
violation is a misdemeanor or infraction. If charged as an infraction, upon
conviction, the violator shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $50. If
charged as a misdemeanor, upon conviction, the violator shall be punished by a
fine of not less than fifty dollars or more than $100. Any person guilty of
violating this chapter three or more times in a 12-month period shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $300 or more than $500, or
imprisoned in the county jail for a period no longer than three months.
(1995 Code, § 7.56.060) (Ord. 2023-03, passed 1-17-2023; Ord. 06-2013, passed -
-2006)
CHAPTER 7.60: REGULATION OF SHOPPING CARTS
Section
   
7.60.010   Purpose.
   
7.60.020   Definitions.
   
7.60.030   Enforcement authority.
   
7.60.040   Prohibition against removing, possessing and altering carts.
   
7.60.050   Prohibition against abandoning carts.
   
7.60.060   Penalty.
   
7.60.070   Cart identification required.
   
7.60.080   Removal prevention and retrieval.
   
7.60.090   Administrative hearing.
   
7.60.100   Impoundment of abandoned carts.
   
7.60.110   Retrieval services.
   
7.60.120   Prosecution for theft not precluded.
   
7.60.130   Severability.
§ 7.60.010   Purpose.
   (A)   Abandoned shopping carts are unsightly, interfere with pedestrian and
vehicular traffic, accumulate over time on public and private property causing
blight and similar conditions resulting in reduction of property values and
deterioration of the city’s neighborhoods, are detrimental to the public
health, safety and welfare, and constitute a public nuisance.
   (B)   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety
and welfare by establishing that it is a violation of this code to improperly
remove any shopping cart from the premises of the owner of the cart. In
addition, this chapter provides requirements for storeowners to take action to
reduce the removal of shopping carts from the owner’s premises and to
facilitate the retrieval of shopping carts removed from the owner’s premises.
(1995 Code, § 7.60.010) (Ord. 06-2011, passed - -2006)
§ 7.60.020   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED SHOPPING CART. Any cart that has been removed from the premises of
the owner and is no longer in the possession or under the physical control of
the person who removed the cart. A cart abandoned by a person, other than the
owner, shall not constitute a relinquishment of ownership of the cart by the
owner.
   CART. A basket or platform which is mounted on wheels or a similar device
generally used in a business establishment by a customer for the purpose of
transporting goods of any kind. This includes, but is not limited to, laundry,
grocery or shopping carts.
   DIRECTOR. The City Manager or his or her designee.
   HEARING OFFICER. The individual appointed by the City Manager of the City of
Tulare to hear the appeal on a finding that a nuisance exists.
   IN THE BUSINESS OF SHOPPING CART OR LAUNDRY CART RETRIEVAL. To search for,
gather and restore possession to the owner, or an agent thereof, for
compensation or in expectation of compensation, of shopping carts or laundry
carts located outside the premises or parking area of a retail establishment.
   LAUNDRY CART. A basket, which is mounted on wheels and used in a coin-
operated laundry or dry-cleaning retail establishment by a customer or an
attendant for the purpose of transporting fabrics and the supplies necessary to
process them.
   OWNER. Any person, business establishment or entity that owns, possesses or
has the power to make a shopping cart available to customers. For the purpose
of this chapter, OWNER includes, but is not  limited to, the store owner,
manager, on-site manager, on-duty manager or other designated agent of a
business establishment providing shopping carts for customer use.
   PARKING AREA. A parking lot or other property provided by a business
establishment for use by a customer for parking an automobile or other vehicle.
   PERSON. Any person, corporation, partnership, association, joint-stock
company, limited-liability company, limited liability partnership and other
entity capable of being sued.
   PREMISES. The entire area owned, rented, leased or utilized by a business
establishment that provides shopping carts for customer use, including parking
areas.
   STREET. Any street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard,
concourse, driveway, culvert, crosswalk, sidewalk, park, parking lot, parking
area and place used by the general public.
(1995 Code, § 7.60.020) (Ord. 06-2011, passed - -2006)
§ 7.60.030   Enforcement authority.
   (A)   This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Director with
the assistance of the Police Chief, Fire Chief and their designated agents and
Code Enforcement Officers. The Director is hereby authorized and directed to
promulgate and implement rules, regulations and procedures necessary or
appropriate for the enforcement of this chapter. The Director, Police Chief,
Fire Chief and their designated agents and code enforcement officers are
authorized as follows:
      (1)   To enter upon and inspect any public and private property or
premises to ascertain whether the provisions of this chapter or applicable
state laws are being obeyed. As used herein, PUBLIC PROPERTY includes the
outdoor common area of any building, business premises, apartment building or
complex or other premises or portion thereof which is adjacent to public
property, open to the public and which contains a shopping cart or shopping
carts visible at street or ground level from the adjacent public property. All
inspections, entries and examinations shall be done in a reasonable manner. If
an owner, tenant, occupant or agent or other responsible party refuses to grant
the city permission to enter or inspect, the city may seek an inspection
warrant pursuant to the procedures provided for in the California Code of Civil
Procedure. Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed a limitation upon
the Director to enter private property pursuant to permission from the owner or
occupant thereof or pursuant to a duly issued inspection warrant or other court
order;
      (2)   To examine a shopping cart or parts thereof, or to obtain
information as to the identity of the owner of any shopping cart, or to
retrieve shopping carts in accordance with the provisions of this chapter;
      (3)   To determine whether a violation of this chapter exists and to take
appropriate action to gain compliance with the provisions of this chapter and
applicable state laws; and
      (4)   To issue administrative citations and to impose civil penalties for
any violation of this chapter.
   (B)   The Police Chief, city police officers and designated city employees,
who shall be designated by a separate resolution pursuant to the provisions of
Cal. Penal Code § 836.5, shall have the authority to issue criminal citations
for violations of this chapter. The City Attorney and the District Attorney
shall have the authority to file criminal complaints to enforce this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 7.60.030) (Ord. 06-2011, passed - -2006)
§ 7.60.040   Prohibition against removing, possessing and altering carts.
   It is unlawful for any person except the owner of a cart or the owner’s
agent to do any of the following acts:
   (A)   To remove a cart from the premises or parking area of a business
establishment without the express, written consent of the owner;
   (B)   To be in possession of any cart while that cart is not located on the
premises or parking lot of the owner of the cart without the express written
consent of the owner. Written permission to remove a shopping cart shall be
valid for a period not to exceed 72 consecutive hours;
   (C)   To be in possession of any shopping cart with serial numbers removed,
obliterated or altered; or
   (D)   To alter, convert or tamper with a cart, or to remove any part or
portion thereof or to remove, obliterate or alter serial numbers on a cart.
(1995 Code, § 7.60.040) (Ord. 06-2011, passed - -2006)
§ 7.60.050   Prohibition against abandoning carts.
   It is unlawful for any person to leave, abandon or store any cart upon any
sidewalk, street or other public place, or upon private property exposed to
public view, at a location other than the premises of the owner.
(1995 Code, § 7.60.050) (Ord. 06-2011, passed - -2006)
§ 7.60.060   Penalty.
   Any person who violates §§
7.60.040 or
7.60.050 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to punishment in
accordance to Cal. Penal Code § 19. Upon recommendation of the prosecuting
attorney, the court may reduce the charged offense from a misdemeanor to an
infraction, punishable under §
1.12.010 of this code. An administrative fine may also be imposed as set forth
in
Chapter 1.61 of the Tulare City Municipal Code. Nothing in this chapter shall
prevent the city from pursuing criminal, civil, administrative or any other
legal remedy to address violations of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 7.60.060) (Ord. 06-2011, passed - -2006)
§ 7.60.070   Cart identification required.
   (A)   Every owner who, in connection with the conduct of a business,
including, but not limited to a food dispensing business, retail business or
laundry business, owns or makes any cart available to the public, shall
permanently affix a durable metal or plastic sign to the cart containing the
following information:
      (1)   The name of the owner of the cart or the name of the retailer that
provides the cart, or both;
      (2)   A valid, current telephone number or address for returning the cart
if removed from the premises or parking area to the owner or retailer;
      (3)   The procedure to be used for authorized removal of a shopping cart
from the owner’s premises if allowed; and
      (4)   Notice that the unauthorized removal of a shopping cart from the
premises or parking area of the retail establishment or the unauthorized
possession of a shopping cart is a violation of state law.
   (B)   A cart without a sign attached, pursuant to division (A) of this
section, shall bear some form of identification to establish ownership. Every
business that utilizes shopping carts during normal operations within the City
of Tulare shall provide the director with a valid, current telephone number of
the owner or provider of the cart.
   (C)   Carts provided by individual stores or retailers that are owned by or
affiliated with the same company and share the same name (chain stores) shall
bear some form of identification which identifies the specific store that the
cart is assigned to.
   (D)   A cart that does not have a sign attached as required by division (A)
above or fails to provide information to the director as required in division
(B) of this section is presumed to be abandoned if it has been left standing
unattended on any public or private property other than the owner’s or the
owner’s agent. The city may impound, sell or otherwise dispose of such a cart
immediately upon discovery of the cart.
(1995 Code, § 7.60.070) (Ord. 06-2011, passed - -2006)
§ 7.60.080   Removal prevention and retrieval.
   Every owner who provides or intends to provide carts to be used by customers
shall do the following:
   (A)   Post prominently and conspicuously at all public entrances and exits
where there is frequent cart activity, a notice no smaller than 12 inches by 18
inches, or approved by the Director, in the following form: “REMOVAL OF
SHOPPING CARTS (OR LAUNDRY CARTS, IF APPLICABLE,) FROM THESE PREMISES IS
PROHIBITED BY LAW (TMC §
7.60.040) AND WILL SUBJECT THE VIOLATOR TO A FINE OF UP TO $1000.00 OR SIX
MONTHS IN JAIL OR BOTH THE FINE AND THE JAIL TERM.”
   (B)   Provide the Director with reliable contact information for cart
retrieval.
(1995 Code, § 7.60.080) (Ord. 06-2011, passed - -2006)
§ 7.60.090   Administrative hearing.
   Administrative hearings are outlined in detail in
Chapter 1.61, Administrative Citations, of the Tulare City Municipal Code.
(1995 Code, § 7.60.090) (Ord. 06-2011, passed - -2006)
§ 7.60.100   Impoundment of abandoned carts.
   (A)   The City of Tulare hereby adopts Cal. Business and Professions Code §
22435 in reference to the impoundment of abandoned carts. Pursuant to the
provisions of the Business and Professions Code, a cart that has a sign affixed
to it in accordance with Cal. Business and Professions Code § 22435.1 may be
impounded by the city provided both of the following conditions have been
satisfied.
      (1)   The shopping cart is located outside the premises or parking area
of a retail establishment. The parking area of a retail establishment located
in a multi-store complex or shopping center shall include the entire parking
area used by the complex or center.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (G) above, the shopping cart is not
retrieved within three business days from the date the owner of the shopping
cart, or his or her agent, receives actual notice from the city of the shopping
cart’s discovery and location.
   (B)   In instances where the location of a shopping cart will impede
emergency services the city is authorized to immediately retrieve the shopping
cart from public or private property.
   (C)   When the city impounds a shopping cart under the authority provided in
divisions (A) and (B) above, the city is authorized to recover its actual costs
for providing this service.
   (D)   Any shopping cart that is impounded by the city pursuant to divisions
(A) and (B) above shall be held at a location that is both:
      (1)   Reasonably convenient to the owner of the shopping cart; and
      (2)   Open for business at least six hours of each business day.
   (E)   The city shall fine the owner of a shopping cart in an amount as set
by the Tulare City Council for each occurrence in excess of three during a
specified six-month period for failure to retrieve shopping carts in accordance
with this section. An occurrence includes all shopping carts impounded in
accordance with this section in a one-day period.
   (F)   The city may sell or otherwise dispose of any shopping cart not
reclaimed from the city within 30 days of receipt of a notice of violation by
the owner of the shopping cart.
   (G)   Notwithstanding division (A)(2) of this section, the city may impound
a shopping cart that otherwise meets the criteria set forth in division (A)(1)
without complying with the three-day advance notice requirement provided that:
      (1)   The owner of the shopping cart, or his or her agent, is provided
actual notice within 24 hours following the impound and that notice informs the
owner, or his or her agent, as to the location where the shopping cart may be
claimed.
      (2)   Any shopping cart so impounded shall be held at a location in
compliance with division (D) of this section.
      (3)   Any shopping cart reclaimed by the owner or his or her agent,
within three business days following the date of actual notice as provided
pursuant to division (G)(1) of this section, shall be released and surrendered
to the owner or agent at no charge whatsoever, including the waiver of any
impound and storage fees or fines that would otherwise be applicable pursuant
to divisions (C) or (E) of this section. Any cart reclaimed within the three
business day period shall not be deemed an occurrence for purposes of division
(E) of this section.
      (4)   Any shopping cart not reclaimed by the owner or his or her agent,
within three business days following the date of actual notice as provided
pursuant to division (G)(1) of this section, shall be subject to any applicable
fee or fine imposed pursuant to divisions (C) or (E) of this section commencing
on the fourth business day following the date of the notice.
      (5)   Any shopping cart not reclaimed by the owner or his or her agent,
within 30 days of receipt following the date of actual notice as provided
pursuant to division (G)(1) of this section, may be sold or disposed of in
accordance with division (F) of this section.
(1995 Code, § 7.60.100) (Ord. 06-2011, passed - -2006)
§ 7.60.110   Retrieval services.
   (A)   Any person who engages in the business of shopping cart or laundry
cart retrieval, as defined in this chapter, in the city shall have a city
business license and shall retain records showing written authorization from
the cart owner, or an agent thereof, to retrieve the cart or carts and to be in
possession of the cart or carts retrieved.
   (B)   A copy of the record showing written authorization shall be maintained
in each vehicle used for shopping cart or laundry cart retrieval.
   (C)   Each vehicle employed for the retrieval of shopping carts or laundry
carts shall display a sign that clearly identifies the retrieval service.
   (D)   Any person who violates the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and subject to punishment in accordance with §
1.12.010 of this code.
(1995 Code, § 7.60.110) (Ord. 06-2011, passed - -2006)
§ 7.60.120   Prosecution for theft not precluded.
   The provisions of this chapter are not intended to preclude the application
of any other laws relating to prosecution for theft.
(1995 Code, § 7.60.120) (Ord. 06-2011, passed - -2006)
§ 7.60.130   Severability.
   If any provision, clause, sentence or division of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the
invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of the
provisions of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid
provisions or application and, to this end, the provisions of this chapter are
declared to be severable.
(1995 Code, § 7.60.130) (Ord. 06-2011, passed - -2006)
CHAPTER 7.64: SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT
Section
Article I. Title, Purpose and Definitions
   
7.64.010   Short title.
   
7.64.020   Purpose and intent.
   
7.64.030   Definitions.
   
7.64.040   Responsibility for administration.
   
7.64.050   Construction and application.
   
7.64.060   Severability and application.
   
7.64.070   Taking.
   
7.64.080   Effective date.
Article II. Discharge Regulations  and Requirements
   
7.64.090   General discharge prohibition—Illegal discharges.
   
7.64.100   Discharges exempt from the general prohibition.
   
7.64.110   Discharge in violation of permit.
   
7.64.120   Requirement to eliminate illegal discharges.
   
7.64.130   Illicit connections.
   
7.64.140   Requirement to eliminate or secure approval for illicit connections.
   
7.64.150   Reduction of pollutants in surface water.
   
7.64.160   Spill prevention plan.
   
7.64.170   Notification of spills.
Article III. Inspection and Enforcement
   
7.64.180   Authority to inspect.
   
7.64.190   Violations constituting misdemeanors.
   
7.64.200   Penalty for violation.
   
7.64.210   Continuing violation.
   
7.64.220   Concealment.
   
7.64.230   Acts potentially resulting in violation of federal Clean Water Act
and/or Porter-Cologne Act.
   
7.64.240   Violations deemed a public nuisance.
   
7.64.250   Civil actions.
   
7.64.260   Administrative enforcement powers.
   
7.64.270   Authority to arrest or issue citations.
   
7.64.280   Appeal.
   
7.64.290   Judicial review.
   
7.64.300   Remedies not exclusive.
   
7.64.310   Disclaimer of liability.
Article IV. Coordination with Other Programs
   
7.64.320   Coordination with hazardous materials inventory and response
program.
   
7.64.330   Confidential information.
   
7.64.340   Special agreements.
Article V. Surface Water Sewer Service Charges
   
7.64.350   Surface water sewer service charges purpose and basis.
ARTICLE I. TITLE, PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
§ 7.64.010 Short title.
   This chapter shall be known as the "City of Tulare Surface Water Management
Ordinance" and may be so cited.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 7.64.020 Purpose and intent.
   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to ensure the health, safety and
general welfare of citizens, and protect the water quality of watercourses and
water bodies in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Federal Clean
Water Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq. and any successor legislation) by
reducing pollutants in urban surface water discharges to the maximum extent
practicable and by effectively prohibiting non-surface discharges to the
surface water sewer drain system.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 7.64.030 Definitions.
   When used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section.
   ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, including the 1972 amendments,
referred to as the Clean Water Act or CWA (33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq. and
any successor legislation).
   APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The State of California Central Valley Regional Water
Quality Control Board.
   AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The Public Works Director and those
individuals designated by the Public Works Director to enforce the provisions
of this chapter.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. An authorized
representative of an industrial user including, but not limited to the
following persons:
      (1)   A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-
president, if the industrial user is a corporation;
      (2)   A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a
partnership or proprietorship, respectively; or
      (3)   A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above
if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facility
from which the discharge originates.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP). Any program, schedule of activity,
technology, process, siting criteria, operating method, measure, device,
prohibition, practice (including, but not limited to, general housekeeping
practices and pollution prevention practices), procedure or other management
policy which controls, prevents, removes or reduces the discharge of
pollutants, directly or indirectly to the municipal storm drain system and
waters of the United States.
   CALIFORNIA GENERAL CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES STORMWATER PERMIT. The general
permit as adopted by the California State Water Resources Control Board for the
permitting of surface water discharges associated with construction activities.
   CALIFORNIA GENERAL INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITIES STORMWATER PERMIT. The general
permit as adopted by the California State Resources Control Board for the
permitting of surface water discharges associated with given industrial
activities.
   CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. Section
1251 et seq.) and any successor legislation.
   CFR. The Code of Federal Regulations.
   CITY. The City of Tulare.
   CITY SURFACE WATER SEWER DRAINAGE SYSTEM or SURFACE WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM.
Includes, but is not limited to, those facilities owned and operated by the
city through which surface water may be collected and/or conveyed to the waters
of the United States, including flood control channels, any roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, ponding basins or surface water drains which are not part of a
publicly-owned  treatment works (POTW) as defined at 40 Code of Federal
Regulations Section 403.3 and all conduits, pumping plants, collection
facilities and other appurtenances owned and operated by the City of Tulare for
carrying, collecting, pumping and/or disposing of stormwater, surface water,
groundwater, roof runoff or other unpolluted water.
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Activities subject to a California general
construction activities permit.
   FACILITY. Any nonresidential premises.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material, including any substance, waste or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration or physical,
chemical or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property
or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or
otherwise managed.
   ILLICIT OR ILLEGAL DISCHARGE. Any direct or indirect non-surface water
discharge to the surface water drain system, except as exempted in § 7.64.100
of this chapter.
   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS. Either of the following:
      (1)   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
which allows an illegal discharge to enter the surface water drain system
including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-surface water
discharge including sewage, process wastewater and wash water to enter the
surface water drain system and any connections to the surface water drain
system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or
connection had been previously allowed, permitted or approved by a government
agency; or
      (2)   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the surface water drain system which has not been documented in
plans, maps or equivalent records and approved by the city.
   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Any activity that involves manufacturing, processing,
use of raw materials storage areas or any other activities covered in 40 Code
of Federal Regulations Section 122.26 (b).
   INSPECTOR. An authorized enforcement officer as defined in this section.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT. A permit
issued by the approval authority pursuant to the Clean Water Act, which
authorizes a discharge of surface water to the waters of the state.
   NON-SURFACE WATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is
not entirely composed of surface water.
   NOTICE OF INTENT (NOI). The formal notification to the State Water Resources
Control Board by the applicant that either a construction or industrial
activity will occur in compliance with the conditions of the general permit and
thereby commits the applicant to prepare and implement a stormwater pollution
prevention plan.
   OUTFALL. The point at which the city's surface water drainage system
discharges to the waters of the state.
   PERSON. Any natural person, corporation, partnership, business trust,
company, government agency, association or other entity.
   POLLUTANT. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution including, but
not limited to, the following: dredged soil, incinerator residue, sewage,
sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive
materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and
industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharge into water. POLLUTANTS
may also include: paints, varnishes and solvents; oil and other automotive
fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish,
garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles and
accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables;
pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; animal
wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or
structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
   POLLUTION. Human-caused or human-induced alteration of the quality of waters
by waste to a degree that unreasonably affects, or has the potential to
unreasonably affect, either the waters for beneficial uses or the facilities
that serve these beneficial uses.
   PORTER-COLOGNE ACT. The Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act (California
Water Code Section 13000 et seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto and
regulations adopted thereby.
   PREMISES. Any building, lot parcel, real estate or land or portion of land,
whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips
or other surface area which is capable of contributing runoff to the city's
surface water drain system.
   PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR. The director of the City of Tulare Public Works
Department.
   STATE. The State of California.
   SURFACE WATER. Surface water runoff, snowmelt runoff, surface runoff and
drainage that has been contaminated as defined in the Porter-Cologne Act.
   SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM (SWMP). A comprehensive planning process to
reduce discharge of pollutants to the maximum extent practicable using best
management practices.
   SURFACE WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP). The report required to be
prepared by industrial or construction site storm-water dischargers, which sets
forth the site map, identifies the activities that have the potential to
pollute surface water and describes the proposed BMPs to be implemented by the
discharger.
   USER. Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of
surface water to the city's surface water drainage system as a consequence of
improving property by adding impervious surfaces such as paving, sidewalks and
roofs.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water to which no pollutant has been intentionally or
accidentally introduced so as to render such water unacceptable to the city for
disposal to storm or natural drainages or directly to surface waters.
   WATERS OF THE STATE. Surface watercourses, and water bodies as defined at 40
CFR Section 122.2 and any subsequent amendment.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 7.64.040 Responsibility for administration.
   This chapter shall be administered by the Public Works Director for the City
of Tulare.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 7.64.050 Construction and application.
   The rules and regulations set forth in this chapter shall be construed in a
manner consistent with and shall in no way be construed in such a manner so as
to diminish the authority of the requirements of the federal Water Pollution
Control Act and the 1972 amendments thereto, referred to as the Clean Water
Act, and any amendments or supplements thereto and its applicable implementing
regulations; the City of Tulare NPDES permit and any amendment, revision or
reissuance thereof; and all other provisions contained in the Tulare City Code.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 7.64.060 Severability and application.
   If any portion of this chapter is declared invalid, the remaining portions
of this chapter are to be considered severable and valid.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 7.64.070 Taking.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not operate to deprive any landowner of
substantially all of the market value of his or her property or otherwise
constitute an unconstitutional taking without compensation. If application of
this chapter to a specific project would create a taking then pursuant to the
chapter the City Council may allow additional land uses, but only to the extent
necessary to avoid a taking. Such uses shall be consistent with and carry out
the purposes of this chapter as stated in §
7.64.020.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 7.64.080 Effective date.
   The ordinance codified in this chapter will take effect 30 days from the
date of passage, and shall be published following passage as required by the
Cal. Government Code.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-3-2009)
ARTICLE II. DISCHARGE REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS
§ 7.64.090 General discharge prohibition—Illegal discharges.
   Non-surface water discharges to the city surface water drain system are
prohibited. No person shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly, to the city's surface water drainage system any pollutant,
wastewater or any substance or material which will interfere with the operation
or performance of the surface water drainage system, violate the city's NPDES
permit or violate other applicable law or regulations.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 7.64.100 Discharges exempt from the general prohibition.
   (A)   The general discharge prohibition shall not apply to any discharge
regulated under a NPDES permit, waiver or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered by the State of California under the authority of
the United States Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger
is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver or order and
other applicable laws or regulations.
   (B)   Discharges from the following activities shall not be considered a
source of pollutants to waters of the United States when properly managed to
ensure that no potential pollutants are present, and therefore they shall not
be considered illegal
discharges unless determined to cause a violation of the provisions of the
Porter-Cologne Act, Clean Water Act, or this chapter:
      (1)   Potable water line flushing and other discharges from potable water
sources;
      (2)   Landscape irrigation and lawn watering;
      (3)   Irrigation water, diverted stream flows or rising groundwaters;
      (4)   Groundwater infiltration to surface water drain system;
      (5)   Uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
      (6)   Uncontaminated water from foundation and footing drains, and from
crawl space pumps;
      (7)   Air conditioning condensation;
      (8)   Uncontaminated nonindustrial roof drains;
      (9)   Spring water or flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
      (10)   Individual residential and occasional non-commercial car washing;
      (11)   Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges;
      (12)   Street wash waters; and
      (13)   Flows from firefighting.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 7.64.110 Discharge in violation of permit.
   Any discharge not managed in accordance with the city's surface water
management program as referenced in the city's NPDES permit or any amendment,
revision or reissuance thereof, either separately considered or when combined
with other discharges, is prohibited. Liability for any such discharge shall be
the responsibility of the person(s) causing or responsible for the discharge,
and such person(s) shall defend, indemnify, hold harmless the city against any
litigation, administrative proceeding, claim, expense, liability, fine, penalty
or payment for injury or damage to any person or property resulting from such
discharges.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 7.64.120 Requirement to eliminate illegal discharges.
   The authorized enforcement officer may require by written notice that a
person responsible for an illegal discharge immediately, or by a specified
date, discontinue the discharge and, if necessary, take measures to eliminate
the source of the discharge to prevent the occurrence of future illegal
discharges.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 7.64.130 Illicit connections.
   It is unlawful for any person to establish, use, maintain or continue
illicit discharges or illicit drainage connections to the city surface water
drainage system. This prohibition shall apply to connections in existence at
the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter,
irrespective of whether such connection was made under a permit or other
authorization or whether permissible under the law or practices applicable or
prevailing at the time the connection was made.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 7.64.140 Requirement to eliminate or secure approval for illicit connections.
   The authorized enforcement officer may require by written notice that a
person responsible for an illicit connection to the surface water drain system
comply with the requirements of this article to eliminate or secure approval
for the connection by a specified date, regardless of whether or not the
connection or discharges to it had been established or approved prior to the
effective date of this article. If, subsequent to eliminating a connection
found to be in violation of this article, the responsible person can
demonstrate that an illegal discharge will no longer occur; such person may
request city approval to reconnect. The reconnection or reinstallation of the
connection shall be at the responsible person's expense.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 7.64.150 Reduction of pollutants in surface water.
   (A)   Any person engaged in activities, which will, or may result in
pollutants entering the city surface water drainage system shall undertake all
practicable measures to reduce the introduction of such pollutants. Where best
management practices requirements are promulgated by the city or any federal,
state or regional agency for any activity, operation or facility which would
otherwise cause the discharge of pollutants to the surface water drain system
or waters of the United States, every person undertaking such activity or
operation, or owning or operating such facility shall comply with such
requirements.
   (B)   The city's surface water management program shall establish minimum
requirements that apply to pollutant generating activities within the city.
With regard to such activities, the following minimum requirements shall apply.
      (1)   Littering. No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep or
permit to be thrown, deposited, placed or left, any refuse, rubbish, garbage or
other discarded or abandoned objects, articles and accumulations, in or upon
any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin, conduit or any
other drainage structures, business place or upon any public or private plot of
land in the city, so that the same might be or become a pollutant. No person
shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, irrigation
canal or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere in the city. This
section shall not apply to the storing of such potential pollutants in
containers or in lawfully established waste disposal facilities.
      (2)   Owners of abutting property. The occupants, tenants, owners,
lessees and/or proprietors of any real property in the City of Tulare in front
of which there is a paved sidewalk shall be responsible for maintaining such
sidewalk and keeping the same free of dirt and litter to the maximum extent
practicable. Sweepings from such sidewalk shall not be swept or otherwise made
or allowed to go into the gutter or roadway, but shall be disposed of in
receptacles maintained on such real property as required for the disposal of
garbage.
      (3)   Owners and operators of parking lots and similar structures.
Persons owning or operating a paved parking lot, gas station pavement, paved
private street or road, or similar structure, shall clean those structures in a
manner that does not result in discharge of pollutants to the city surface
water drain system.
      (4)   Best management practices for construction sites. All construction
shall comply with city Standards to Control Excavations, Cuts, Fills, Clearing,
Grading, Erosion and Sediments (or any resolution that revises, supplements, or
replaces said standards). Any construction contractor performing work in the
city shall keep debris and dirt out of the city's surface water drain system.
The authorized enforcement officer may require any construction contractor
performing work in the city to submit a surface water pollution prevention plan
prior to final map approval by the city or prior to issuance of a building
permit by the city, whichever first occurs.
      (5)   Best management practices for new development and redevelopment.
The authorized enforcement officer may adopt regulations establishing controls
on the volume and rate of surface water runoff for new development and
redevelopment within the city as may be appropriate to minimize the discharge
and transport of pollutants.
      (6)   Notification of intent and compliance with general permits. Each
industrial discharger, discharger associated with construction activity, or
other discharger, described in any general stormwater permit addressing such
discharges, as may be adopted by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency, the State Water Resources Control Board, or the California Regional
Water Quality Control Board, Central Valley Region, shall provide notice of
intent, comply with, and undertake all other activities required by any general
stormwater permit applicable to such discharges. Furthermore, each discharger
identified in an individual NPDES permit relating to surface water discharges
shall comply with and undertake all activities required by such permit.
      (7)   Compliance with best management practices. Where best management
practices guidelines or requirements have been defined in the city's surface
water management program or adopted by any federal, state, regional, county
and/or city agency, for any activity, operation or facility which may cause or
contribute to surface water pollution or contamination, and/or discharges of
non-surface water to the surface water system or waters of the United States,
every person undertaking such activity or operation, or owning or operating
such facility, shall comply with such guidelines or requirements. Any person
engaged in activities or operations, or owning facilities or property which
will or may result in pollutants entering surface water, the surface water
drain system or waters of the U.S. shall implement best management practices to
the extent they are technologically achievable to prevent and reduce such
pollutants. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment
shall provide reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited
materials or other wastes into the municipal surface water drain system or
watercourses. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited
materials or other wastes shall be provided and maintained at the owner or
operator's expense.
      (8)   Watercourse protection. Every person owning property through which
a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that
part of the watercourse within the property reasonably free of trash, debris,
excessive vegetation and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate or
significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition,
the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within
or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard
to the use, function or physical integrity of the watercourse. The owner or
lessee shall not remove healthy bank vegetation beyond that actually necessary
for maintenance, nor remove such vegetation in such a manner as to increase the
vulnerability of the watercourse to erosion. The property owner shall be
responsible for maintaining and stabilizing that portion of the watercourse
that is within their property lines in order to protect against erosion and
degradation of the watercourse originating or contributed from their property.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 7.64.160 Spill prevention plan.
   (A)   Each facility shall provide protection from spills of hazardous or
prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this chapter. The
methods, procedures, mechanisms and facilities established and utilized for the
purpose of preventing accidental discharges or spills of materials with
pollution potential shall be provided to the city, and maintained at the
owner's own cost and expense.
   (B)   Facilities required to file a NOI for coverage under the California
general industrial activities stormwater permit shall submit to the city a copy
of the surface water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) prepared for the general
permit. The SWPPP shall outline the user's spill prevention and response
procedure, describe the nature and location of any chemicals stored on the
user's premises and shall contain procedures for immediately notifying the city
and preventing adverse impacts of any discharge of such chemicals, substances
or materials.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 7.64.170 Notification of spills.
   (A)   All persons in charge of a facility or responsible for emergency
response for a facility have a personal responsibility to train facility
personnel and maintain notification procedures to assure immediate notification
is provided to the city of any suspected, confirmed or unconfirmed release of
material, pollutants or waste creating a risk of discharge into the city
surface water drain system.
   (B)   As soon as any person in charge of a facility or responsible for
emergency response for a facility has knowledge of any suspected, confirmed or
unconfirmed release of materials, pollutants or waste which may result in
pollutants or non-surface water discharge entering the city surface water drain
system, such person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
containment and clean up of such release and notify the city of the occurrence
within two hours of becoming aware of the occurrence.
   (C)   In the event of a release of hazardous materials, such person shall
telephone 911 to report the release immediately. In the event of a release of
nonhazardous materials, see definition of HAZARDOUS MATERIALS in §
7.64.030, such person shall notify the City of Tulare, Public Works Department
in person or by phone or facsimile immediately. Notifications in person and by
phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed, within three
business days, to Public Works Director, City of Tulare, 411 E. Kern, Tulare,
CA 93274, Attention: Spill Notification.
   (D)   Notification shall identify the location of the discharge, the type,
concentration and volume of waste, and corrective actions taken. Such
notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other
liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the city, fish kills,
or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve
the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liabilities which may be
imposed by this chapter or other applicable law.
   (E)   A notice advising employees whom to call in the event of an accidental
discharge or spill shall be posted on the user's bulletin board or other
prominent place. Employers shall provide spill prevention and response training
for all employees who may cause an accidental discharge or spill to occur.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-3-2009)
ARTICLE III. INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 7.64.180 Authority to inspect.
   (A)   Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the
provisions of this chapter, or whenever an authorized enforcement officer has
reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any
premises any condition which constitutes a violation of the provisions of this
chapter, the officer may enter such building or premises at all reasonable
times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon the officer by this
chapter, provided that:
      (1)   If such building or premises be occupied, he or she shall first
present proper credentials and request entry; and
      (2)   If such building or premises be unoccupied, he or she shall first
make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or
control of the building or premises and request entry.
   (B)   Any such request for entry shall state that the property owner or
occupant has the right to refuse entry and that in the event such entry is
refused, inspection may be made only upon issuance of a search warrant by a
duly authorized court.
   (C)   Routine or area inspections shall be based upon such reasonable
selection processes as may be deemed necessary to carry out the objectives of
this chapter, including but not limited to random sampling and/or sampling in
areas with evidence of surface water contamination, illicit discharges,
discharge of non-surface water to the surface water system, or similar factors.
      (1)   Authority to sample and establish sampling devices. With the
consent of the owner or occupant or pursuant to a search warrant, any
authorized enforcement officer may establish on any property such devices as
are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. During all
inspections as provided herein, the officer may take any samples deemed
necessary to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or in the recordation of the
activities on-site.
      (2)   Requirement to test or monitor. Any authorized enforcement officer
may require that any person engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating
any facility which may cause or contribute to surface water pollution or
contamination, illicit discharges and/or discharges of non-surface water to the
surface water system, undertake such monitoring activities and/or analyses and
furnish such reports as the officer may specify. The burden, including costs,
of these activities, analyses and reports shall bear a reasonable relationship
to the need for the monitoring, analyses and reports and the benefits to be
obtained. The recipient of such requests shall, at their own costs, undertake
and provide the monitoring, analyses and reports required.
   (D)   In the event the owner or operator of a facility subject to a
monitoring and/or analyses order fails to conduct required monitoring and/or
analyses and furnish the required reports in the form required, the authorized
enforcement officer may in addition to the other penalties noted in this
chapter, cause such monitoring and/or analyses and the cost therefor, including
the reasonable additional administrative costs incurred by the city to be borne
by the owner of the property and the cost thereof shall be invoiced to the
owner of the property.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 7.64.190 Violations constituting misdemeanors.
   Unless otherwise specified by ordinance, the violation of any provision of
this chapter, or failure to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of
this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor; except that notwithstanding any
other provisions of this chapter, any such violation constituting a misdemeanor
under this chapter may, at the discretion of the authorized enforcement
officer, with the consent of the City Attorney, be charged and prosecuted as an
infraction.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 7.64.200 Penalty for violation.
   (A)   Upon conviction of a misdemeanor, a person shall be subjected to the
payment of a fine, or imprisonment, or both, not to exceed the limits set forth
in Cal. Government Code § 36901.
   (B)   Upon conviction of an infraction, a person shall be subject to payment
of a fine; not to exceed the limits set forth in Cal. Government Code § 36900.
After a third conviction for a violation of the same provision subsequent
violations within a 12- month period may be charged as a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 7.64.210 Continuing violation.
   Unless otherwise provided, a person, firm, corporation or organization shall
be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any
portion of which a violation of this chapter is committed, continued or
permitted by the person, firm, corporation or organization and shall be
punishable accordingly as herein provided.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 7.64.220 Concealment.
   Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting or concealing a violation of any
provision of this chapter shall constitute a violation of such provision.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 7.64.230 Acts potentially resulting in violation of federal Clean Water Act
and/or Porter-Cologne Act.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, any provision of any
permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or who discharges waste or wastewater
which causes pollution, or who violates any cease and desist order,
prohibition, or effluent limitation, may also be in violation of the federal
Clean Water Act and/or Porter-Cologne Act and may be subject to the sanctions
of those acts including civil and criminal penalty. Any enforcement action
authorized under this article should also include notice to the violator of
such potential liability.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 7.64.240 Violations deemed a public nuisance.
   (A)   In addition to the penalties hereinbefore provided, any condition
caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter is deemed a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, and is
declared and deemed to be a public nuisance, and may be summarily abated and/or
restored by the authorized enforcement officer, and/or
civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel the cessation of such
nuisance may be taken by the City Attorney.
   (B)   The cost of such abatement and restoration shall be borne by the owner
of the property and the cost thereof shall be invoiced to the owner of the
property.
   (C)   If any violation of this chapter constitutes a seasonal and recurrent
nuisance, the Public Works Director shall so declare. Thereafter such seasonal
and recurrent nuisance shall be abated every year without the necessity of
further notification. If the city prevails in any administrative or civil
proceedings initiated under this chapter, the city shall be entitled to seek
reimbursement for all costs incurred in connection with such proceeding. Such
reimbursable costs may include, but are not limited to, the costs of
investigation, administrative overhead, out-of-pocket expenses, costs of
administrative hearings, costs of suit, and reasonable attorney fees.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 7.64.250 Civil actions.
   In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, any violation of
this chapter may be enforced by civil action brought by the city. In any such
action, the city may seek, and the court may grant, as appropriate, any or all
of the following remedies:
   (A)   A temporary and/or permanent injunction;
   (B)   Assessment against the violator for the costs of any investigation,
inspection, or monitoring survey, which led to the discovery of the violation,
and for the reasonable costs incurred in preparing and prosecuting legal action
as a result of violations of this chapter, including attorney fees;
   (C)   Costs incurred in removing, correcting, or terminating the adverse
effects resulting from the violation;
   (D)   Compensatory damages for loss or destruction to water quality,
wildlife, fish and aquatic life;
   (E)   Such other relief as the court may authorize. Assessments under this
section shall be paid to the city to be used exclusively for costs associated
with monitoring and establishing surface water discharge pollution control
systems and/or implementing or enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 7.64.260 Administrative enforcement powers.
   In addition to the other enforcement powers and remedies established by this
chapter, the authorized enforcement officer has the authority to utilize the
following administrative remedies.
   (A)   Cease and desist orders. When the authorized enforcement officer finds
that a discharge has taken place or is likely to take place in violation of
this chapter, the officer may issue an order to cease and desist such
discharge, or practice, or operation likely to cause such discharge and direct
that those persons not complying shall:
      (1)   Comply with the requirement;
      (2)   Comply with a time schedule for compliance; and/or
      (3)   Take appropriate remedial or preventive action to prevent the
violation from recurring.
   (B)   Notice to clean. Whenever the authorized enforcement officer finds any
oil, earth, dirt, grass, weeds, dead trees, tin cans, rubbish, refuse, waste or
any other material of any kind, in or upon the sidewalk abutting or adjoining
any parcel of land, or upon any parcel of land or grounds, which may result in
an increase in pollutants entering the city surface water drain system or a
non-surface water discharge to the city surface water drain system, he or she
may give notice to remove such oil, earth, dirt, grass, weeds, dead trees, tin
cans, rubbish, refuse, waste or other material in any manner that he or she may
reasonably provide. The authorized enforcement officer shall specify in the
notice the time allotted for compliance and the recipient of such notice shall
undertake the activities necessary to abate such condition within the period of
time specified. In the event the owner or operator of a facility fails to
conduct the required activities as described in the notice, the authorized
enforcement officer may cause such activities required as described in the
notice and the cost thereof shall be invoiced to the owner of the property.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 7.64.270 Authority to arrest or issue citations.
   (A)   Duly authorized peace officers for the city shall have and are vested
with the authority to arrest or cite and release any person who violates the
provisions of this chapter, in the manner provided by Cal. Penal Code § 849.
   (B)   It is the intent of the City Council that the immunities prescribed in
Cal. Penal Code § 836.5 which apply to public officers or employees in the
discharge of their duties within the course and scope of their employment shall
apply to all actions taken by such peace officers or other city employees in
discharging their duties in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 7.64.280 Appeal.
   Any person, firm, corporation or organization required to perform
monitoring, analyses, reporting, and/or corrective activities by the authorized
enforcement officer who is aggrieved by the decision of the authorized
enforcement officer may appeal such decision to the City Manager within 15 days
following the effective date of the decision by furnishing written request for
an appeal to the Public Works Director. Upon receipt of such request, the
Public Works Director shall request a report and recommendation from the
authorized enforcement officer and shall set the matter for hearing at the
earliest practical date. At such hearing, the City Manager may hear additional
evidence, and may reject, affirm or modify the authorized enforcement officer's
decision. Such decision shall be final.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 7.64.290 Judicial review.
   The provisions of Cal. Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.6 are applicable to
judicial review of city decisions pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 7.64.300 Remedies not exclusive.
   (A)   Remedies under this chapter are in addition to and do not supersede or
limit any and all other remedies, civil or criminal. The remedies provided for
herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive.
   (B)   In addition to any other authorized means of collection, any costs and
charges imposed upon a person pursuant to this chapter may be placed upon the
tax rolls and/or may constitute a lien against said person and the subject real
property.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 7.64.310 Disclaimer of liability.
   The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable
for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific, engineering and other
relevant technical considerations. The standards set forth herein are minimum
standards and this division does not imply that compliance will ensure that
there will be no unauthorized discharge of pollutants into the waters of the
United States. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city
or any officer or employee thereof for any damages that result from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-3-2009)
ARTICLE IV. COORDINATION WITH OTHER PROGRAMS
§ 7.64.320 Coordination with hazardous materials inventory and response
program.
   The first revision of the business plan for any facility subject to the
city's hazardous materials inventory and response program shall include a
program for compliance with this chapter, including the prohibitions on non-
surface water discharges and illicit discharges, and the requirement to reduce
surface water pollutants to the maximum extent practicable.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 7.64.330 Confidential information.
   (A)   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit applications, permits and monitoring programs, and from inspections
shall be made available to the EPA, state agencies and other local governmental
agencies without restrictions. Such information and data shall also be made
available to the public or other nongovernmental agencies without restriction
unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge
information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade
secrets of the user. However, in no event shall surface water constituents and
characteristics be recognized as confidential information.
   (B)   Information accepted by the city as confidential shall not be
transmitted to any nongovernmental agency or to the general public by the city
until or unless the request is received in writing and until ten days after
notification of the request has been given to the user by the city.
Furthermore, when requested by the person furnishing a report for uses related
to this chapter, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permit, state general industrial stormwater permit and/or state general
construction activity water permit, the portions of a report which might
disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available when
requested by the public or nongovernmental agencies. However, such portions of
such reports shall be made available, without reservation, to the EPA, State
agencies or local governmental agencies upon the written request of such
agency.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 7.64.340 Special agreements.
   Special agreements and arrangements between the city and any persons or
agencies may be established with the approval of the Council when, in the
opinion of the city, unusual or extraordinary circumstances compel special
terms and conditions. However, in no event shall any such agreement be
interpreted so as to authorize the violation or waiver of applicable standards
or requirements as delineated in the city's NPDES permit.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-3-2009)
ARTICLE V. SURFACE WATER SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
§ 7.64.350 Surface water sewer service charges purpose and basis.
   Surface water sewer service charges as set forth in this chapter are
established to assure that each recipient of surface water sewer services
within the city surface water sewer service area shall pay its proportionate
share of the costs of all surface water sewer service provided by the city. The
funds collected shall be placed into a separate accounting fund to assure that
they are used for the purpose for which they were collected. The system of
charges to be established must provide for the following items:
   (A)   Sufficient financing for an adequate operation and maintenance
program, including competent operating personnel;
   (B)   Funds to be reserved for necessary future replacements, improvements,
and expansions of the facilities;
   (C)   Adequate funding to implement the NPDES Storm Water Permit BMP's;
   (D)   Adequate funding for projects that benefit the entire service area
equally, including but not limited to upstream flood control projects, waterway
protection and restoration, and correction of existing deficiencies in the
collection system, recharge, wastewater treatment plant treatment and capacity
reduction;
   (E)   Such other costs as are deemed necessary and allowed by law.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 09-15, passed 11-3-2009)
CHAPTER 7.68: ADMINISTRATIVE FINES
Section
   
7.68.010   Administrative Fine Schedule.
§ 7.68.010 Administrative Fine Schedule.
   The City Council of the City of Tulare in an effort to more efficiently
administer all fines, as referenced within each chapter of the Tulare Municipal
Code and associated with its administrative citation process hereby sets forth
an Administrative Fine Schedule to be established and adopted by resolution.
(Ord. 10-15, passed 4-20-2010)
TITLE 8: PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter
   
8.04.   OFFICIAL PLAN LINES—ELEVATIONS
   
8.08.   STREET OBSTRUCTIONS
   
8.12.   STREET WORK
   
8.16.   SIDEWALKS
   
8.20.   [REPEALED BY ORD. 2022-17]
   
8.24.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
   
8.26.   PARKLAND DEDICATION OR QUIMBY FEE REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL
DEVELOPMENT REQUIRING A TENTATIVE MAP OR PARCEL MAP
   
8.28.   [REPEALED BY ORD. 15-12]
   
8.32.   STREET TREES
   
8.36.   CITY PARK AND TRAIL ORDINANCE
   
8.37.   CITY PROPERTY EXCLUSION
   
8.38.   ENCAMPMENTS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
   
8.40.   MEFFORD FIELD REGULATIONS
   
8.44.   FEES
   
8.48.   PARKING AND BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT AREA
   
8.52.   PRESERVATION OF HERITAGE TREES
   
8.56.   DEVELOPMENT IMPACT MITIGATION FEES
   
8.60.   BENEFIT DISTRICTS
   
8.64.   OVERSIZED CONSTRUCTION REIMBURSEMENT
   
8.68.   CABLE TELEVISION
   
8.70.   PARADES AND EVENTS
   
8.74.   ADMINISTRATIVE FINES
CHAPTER 8.04: OFFICIAL PLAN LINES—ELEVATIONS
Section
   
8.04.010   Purpose.
   
8.04.020   Official plan lines.
   
8.04.030   Index map—Record of Official Plan Line Maps.
   
8.04.040   Adoption of Official Plan Line Maps.
   
8.04.050   No new structures to be in future streets.
   
8.04.060   Appeal procedure.
   
8.04.070   Enforcement and penalties.
   
8.04.080   City base.
   
8.04.090   Bench mark—Location.
   
8.04.100   Elevation of bench mark.
   
8.04.110   Description of elevations.
   
8.04.120   Conformance required.
§ 8.04.010   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the Master Street and Highway Plan
adopted by the city. The Street and Highway Plan was adopted. as prescribed by
law. in order to:
   (A)   Serve as a general guide for the development of streets and highways;
   (B)   Promote the public welfare, safety and convenience;
   (C)   Provide a comprehensive guide for capital outlay on streets and
highway improvements in the city;
   (D)   Provide an authentic source of information for residents and investors
in the city; and
   (E)   To obviate the menace to the public safety and the damage to property
values resulting from inadequate provision of traffic thoroughfares.
(1995 Code, § 8.04.010)
§ 8.04.020   Official plan lines.
   Official plan lines (future width lines) shall be designated on maps drawn
up by the Engineer at the request of the Council, or at the request of the
Planning Commission acting through the Council. The Official Plan Line Maps
shall show all property divisions and buildings adjacent to the project at a
scale of one inch equals 50 feet, and they shall show the existing and proposed
right-of-way widths as well as a cross section of the proposed street. The maps
shall be titled “Official Plan Lines of (name of street or highway)”. There
shall be statements of adoption or affirmation by the Planning Commission and
the Council on each map.
(1995 Code, § 8.04.020)
§ 8.04.030   Index map—Record of Official Plan Line Maps.
   The Engineer is hereby instructed to make and keep up to date an index map
which shall show the streets or portions of streets upon which official plan
lines have been established. The Clerk is hereby directed to record all duly
attested Official Plan Line Maps adopted under the provisions of this chapter
in the office of the County Recorder. The Engineer is hereby directed to post
permanent notices at intervals of not more than 1,000 feet on streets for which
precise plan lines have been adopted. The notices shall contain the following
words:
   “The width of this street, (or other appropriate designation) is established
as feet, according to the Master Street and Highway Plan of the City. All
buildings or other structures hereafter erected must be outside the lines of
the established width as shown on the Official Plan Line Map No.    , recorded
in the Office of the County Recorder, Visalia, California, a copy of which is
on file in the office of the Clerk.”
(1995 Code, § 8.04.030)
§ 8.04.040   Adoption of Official Plan Line Maps.
   (A)   Action by Planning Commission. In order to adopt an Official Plan Line
Map, the Planning Commission shall be in receipt of the map from the Engineer
and shall hold at least one public hearing thereon. Notice of this hearing
shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least ten
days in advance of the hearing. The Planning Commission shall submit its
findings in writing to the Council.
   (B)   Action by Council. Upon receipt of the report from the Planning
Commission, the Council shall set a date for at least one public hearing and
give public notice of the hearing as prescribed by law. At such time as the
hearing is concluded by the Council, they may adopt the Official Plan Line Map
as an amendment to division (C) of this section, or resubmit the map to the
Planning Commission for further study.
   (C)   Official Plan Line Maps part of chapter. Official Plan Line Maps and
all the notations thereon are hereby made a part of this chapter at the time of
their adoption by the Council, and the Maps constitute the divisions under this
section.
      (1)   Plan Line Map of West Inyo Street from Howard Street to West
Street;
      (2)   Plan line map of Prosperity Avenue from M Street on the west to
Blackstone Street on the east and approved by the Planning Commission of the
City of Tulare on March 1, 1971;
      (3)   Plan line map of Cross Avenue from Manor Street on the west to
Cherry Street on the east and approved by the Planning Commission of the City
of Tulare on June 7, 1971.
(1995 Code, § 8.04.040)
§ 8.04.050   No new structures to be in future streets.
   No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or placed within the
official plan lines of streets or highways established by §
8.04.040 of this chapter, except as provided for under the following section.
(1995 Code, § 8.04.050)
§ 8.04.060   Appeal procedure.
   (A)   General. The Council, upon receipt of a recommendation from the
Planning Commission, shall hear and decide appeals for variances in the strict
application of §
8.04.050 of this chapter.
   (B)   Action by appellant.
      (1)   The owner of any property affected by established official plan
lines may appeal the strict interpretation of §
8.04.050 herein.
      (2)   The appeal should be made in writing to the Planning Commission.
   (C)   Action by Planning Commission. Upon receipt of an appeal, the Planning
Commission shall set a date for at least one public hearing and publish notice
thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least ten days in
advance of the public hearing. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the
Planning Commission shall make its recommendations by resolution in writing to
the Council. In order to make a recommendation contrary to the provisions
stated in §
8.04.050 herein, the Planning Commission must find:
      (1)   That the property of which the official plan line is a part is of
such nature that the owner of the land will be substantially damaged by the
refusal to grant the variance;
      (2)   That the property will not earn a fair return on the owner’s
investment unless the construction involved is authorized; and/or
      (3)   That the granting of the application is necessary for the
preservation of substantial property rights of the individual.
   (D)   Action by the Council. Upon receipt of the report from the Planning
Commission, or upon expiration of 60 days from the time the applicant filed his
or her appeal with the Planning Commission, the Council shall set a date for a
public hearing thereon, with notices as required by law. At the conclusion of
the public hearing, the Council may grant the applicant a variance from the
provisions in §
8.04.050 of this chapter. In order to grant a variance contrary to the section,
the Council must find:
      (1)   That the property of which the official plan line is a part is of
such nature that the owner of the land will be substantially damaged by the
refusal to grant the variance;
      (2)   That the property will not earn a fair return on the owner’s
investment unless the construction is authorized; and
      (3)   That the granting of the application is necessary for the
preservation of substantial property rights of the individual.
(1995 Code, § 8.04.060)
§ 8.04.070   Enforcement and penalties.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the official vested with the authority of
issuing building permits to enforce this chapter. The official shall not issue
any such permit in conflict with the terms of this chapter; and any such permit
or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter shall be null
and void.
   (B)   Any building or structure erected or moved contrary to the provisions
of this chapter shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful, and a
public nuisance; and the attorney shall, upon order of the Council, immediately
commence action or proceedings for the abatement and removal and enjoinment
thereof in the manner provided by law, and shall take such other steps, and
shall apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant the relief, as
will abate and remove the building or structure.
(1995 Code, § 8.04.070)
Statutory reference:
   Statute authority, see Cal. Gov’t Code § 65466
§ 8.04.080   City base.
   The official city base or plane of reference for elevations in the city
shall be the datum used by the United States Geological Survey or mean sea
level.
(1995 Code, § 8.04.080)
§ 8.04.090   Bench mark—Location.
   The official bench mark for the city shall be the United States Geological
Survey benchmark, located in the northeast corner of the enclosure surrounding
what is known as Library Hall.
(1995 Code, § 8.04.090)
§ 8.04.100   Elevation of bench mark.
   The elevation of the bench mark is 285 feet above mean sea level.
(1995 Code, § 8.04.100)
§ 8.04.110   Description of elevations.
   All official elevations hereafter established in the city shall be described
with reference to their elevation as compared with the official base in feet
and decimal parts of a foot.
(1995 Code, § 8.04.110)
§ 8.04.120   Conformance required.
   No grade or official elevation shall be described or established other than
by ordinance and in the manner described in this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 8.04.120)
CHAPTER 8.08: STREET OBSTRUCTIONS
Section
   
8.08.010   Ditches—Fences in public places.
   
8.08.020   Removal of obstruction.
   
8.08.025   Railroad crossings—Safety and maintenance
   
8.08.030   Drainpipes.
   
8.08.040   Depth of new pipes.
   
8.08.050   Playing in streets prohibited.
§ 8.08.010   Ditches—Fences in public places.
   No person shall erect, construct or maintain, or cause to be constructed,
erected or maintained any ditch, canal, fence, barricade or other obstruction
in or upon any street, alley, square or other public place in the city in such
manner as to obstruct the free use, by the public of the street, alley, square
or other public place or any part thereof.
(1995 Code, § 8.08.010) (Ord. 09-17, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 8.08.020   Removal of obstruction.
   It shall be the duty of the Street Superintendent to remove any such
obstruction that he or she may find to exist in the city after ten-days’
notice, in writing, to the person constructing, erecting or maintaining the
obstruction as aforesaid.
(1995 Code, § 8.08.020) (Ord. 09-17, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 8.08.025 Railroad crossings—Safety and maintenance.
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided by contract made between the railroad and
the city, it shall be the duty of all railroad companies or entities owning or
operating and maintaining a railroad passing through the city to place, keep or
maintain crossings, and all places within their right-of-way where the public
streets or alleys of the city intersect and cross any of the railroad tracks,
in a suitable and safe condition for public travel over and across the same.
   (B)   If the railroad facilities are at any time abandoned and removed, it
shall be the duty of the railroad company or entity owning or operating and
maintaining the crossing to remove the rails through the crossing at the same
time as the remainder of the rails are removed and to reconstruct the crossing
in the same manner as the remaining portions of the city street or alley are
paved or in such other manner and with such other materials as shall be
required by the city and in a suitable and safe condition for public travel.
The term CROSSING, as used in this chapter, shall include viaducts and roadways
under or over the tracks of any railroad.
   (C)   If any railroad crossing shall be at any time in bad condition or
unsafe or inconvenient for public travel, the City Council, upon recommendation
of the City Manager or his designee, may, by ordinance, resolution or motion
call upon the proper railroad company to repair or replace the crossing and
render the same safe and convenient for public travel. Unless otherwise ordered
by the City Council, all railroad crossing replacements shall be made with
steel rails or steel plates. A copy of every such ordinance, resolution or
motion shall be served upon the local agent of the railroad company whose duty
it is to maintain such crossing; and for a failure or refusal to comply with
such ordinance, resolution or motion within 30 days after the service thereof,
as aforesaid, such railroad company shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (D)   Whenever any highway or alley upon, along or through which any
railroad track is laid, shall be ordered paved by the City Council, it shall be
the duty of the railroad entity owning or operating such railroad track to pave
all that portion of the street or alley, including in the space between the
rails of its track or tracks, and for one foot on the outer edge of the rails,
in the same manner as the remaining portions thereof are paved or in such other
manner and with such other materials as shall be required by the city's
regulations and requirements. In the case of any default on the part of such
company to comply with this requirement, the City Council may cause such
railroad track or tracks to be taken up, and pavement to be laid pursuant to
the city's regulations and requirements, and every such railroad company shall
be liable to the city for the cost and expense of paving such portion of the
street or alley, together with lawful interest thereon from the completion of
work.
(Ord. 09-16, passed 11-17-2009)
§ 8.08.030   Drainpipes.
   All drainpipes which empty into any street or alley from buildings within
the fire limits, not so constructed as to lead entirely to the ground, are
hereby declared to be public nuisances. Any person failing to abate the
nuisance declared by the section within 30 days shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(1995 Code, § 8.08.040) (Ord. 09-17, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 8.08.040   Depth of new pipes.
   All water and gas pipes laid in any street or alley in the city shall be
placed not less than 18 inches below the surface of the street or alley.
(1995 Code, § 8.08.050) (Ord. 09-17, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 8.08.050   Playing in streets prohibited.
   No person shall, upon any public highway, engage in playing ball or other
boisterous game, use any sling or other missile weapon or throw stones or other
missiles.
(1995 Code, § 8.08.060) (Ord. 09-17, passed 12-15-2009)
Statutory reference:
   Statute authority, see Cal. Gov’t Code § 38775
CHAPTER 8.12: STREET WORK
Section
   
8.12.010   Street excavating.
   
8.12.020   Warning lights.
   
8.12.030   Width of excavation.
   
8.12.040   Guards—Notices.
   
8.12.050   Construction permit, data required.
   
8.12.060   Decorative curbs and sidewalks.
   
8.12.070   Decorative curbs and sidewalks—Streets designated.
   
8.12.080   Limitations upon curb opening—Frontage.
   
8.12.090   Maximum driveway width.
   
8.12.100   Distance between driveways.
   
8.12.110   Distance of curb opening from corner.
   
8.12.120   Distance from utility structures.
   
8.12.130   Application for construction permit.
   
8.12.140   Modifications by Street Superintendent.
   
8.12.150   Conformance with specifications—Inspection.
   
8.12.160   Replacement—Abutting landowner’s duty.
   
8.12.170   Liability for injuries to public
   
8.12.180   Useless driveways.
   
8.12.190   Request to make replacement.
   
8.12.200   Replacement by city—Cost.
   
8.12.210   Variance procedure.
§ 8.12.010   Street excavating.
   Digging, excavating, disturbing or in any manner undermining or causing the
same to be done in any street or alley in the city, except the duly authorized
agents of corporations, duly organized for the purpose of supplying the city
with water or gas, when they shall find it necessary to dig up, break, disturb,
dig under or undermine a public street or alley for the purpose of gaining
access to their pipes or mains or for laying the same, without permission from
the Street Superintendent first had and obtained, whose duty it shall be to see
that when any street or alley is so disturbed in any manner by any person the
same shall be replaced and the streets or alleys left in as good condition as
before; and if the ground in which any excavation has been made in any street
or alley shall, after the refilling thereof, become in bad condition by reason
of the excavation or refilling, it shall be the duty of the Street
Superintendent to require the person making the same to immediately restore the
ground to the condition the same was in before the excavation and a failure to
comply with the request of the Street Superintendent within 24 hours will
subject the person or corporation to prosecution for maintaining a nuisance.
(1995 Code, § 8.12.010)
§ 8.12.020   Warning lights.
   When any street, alley or public highway within the city is excavated for
any purpose and is not refilled before night of the same day, a lantern shall
be placed and kept lighted at either end of the excavation, and if the same
shall be greater in length than 75 yards, a lantern shall be placed at a
distance of not more than 50 yards apart, between the ends and along the
excavation.
(1995 Code, § 8.12.020)
§ 8.12.030   Width of excavation.
   No excavation shall be made to extend more than one-half of the distance
across a street or alley at any one time, when the same is traveled.
(1995 Code, § 8.12.030)
§ 8.12.040   Guards—Notices.
   At all times, due and proper care shall be taken both day and night by
necessary guards or notices to prevent accidents.
(1995 Code, § 8.12.040)
§ 8.12.050   Construction permit, data required.
   No person shall lay, construct, reconstruct or repair, in any street, alley
or other public place in the city, or in, over or through any property or
right-of-way owned by the city, any curb, sidewalk, gutter or driveway, without
first obtaining a permit in writing, so to do, from the Street Superintendent
and without first obtaining the lines and grades therefor from the Engineer.
(1995 Code, § 8.12.050)
§ 8.12.060   Decorative curbs and sidewalks.
   All curbs, gutters and sidewalks over and along the streets set forth in §
8.12.070 shall be decorative curbs and sidewalks and shall be designed and
constructed according to the standards and specifications as and for the
existing Downtown Plaza design, on file in the Public Works Department of the
City of Tulare, or shall be equal to the design in width, height and amount of
landscaping and shall have color or other form of decorative surface. Any
deviation from the Downtown Plaza design must be approved by the Planning
Commission of the City of Tulare.
(1995 Code, § 8.12.060)
§ 8.12.070   Decorative curbs and sidewalks— Streets designated.
   The streets in the City of Tulare along which decorative curbs and sidewalks
must be installed as referred to in §
8.12.060 are as follows: both sides of J Street between San Joaquin Avenue and
Inyo Avenue; both sides of K Street between San Joaquin Avenue and Owens
Avenue; both sides of L Street between King Avenue and Inyo Avenue; both sides
of King Avenue between J Street and M Street; both sides of Tulare Avenue
between J Street and M Street; both sides of Kern Avenue between J Street and M
Street; both sides of Inyo Avenue between J Street and M Street; the south side
of San Joaquin Avenue between J Street and K Street; the west side of M Street
between King Avenue and Inyo Avenue.
(1995 Code, § 8.12.070)
§ 8.12.080   Limitations upon curb opening— Frontage.
   No person shall in any event break away, tear away, construct or reconstruct
any street curb, nor construct or reconstruct any sidewalk, gutter or driveway
over any street curb where the opening would exceed 50% of the lot frontage
facing the curb; and any permit granted hereunder shall specify the frontage of
the opening and the location thereof upon the real property adjacent thereto.
(1995 Code, § 8.12.080)
§ 8.12.090   Maximum driveway width.
   Any driveways or roadways shall not be more than 36 feet in overall width.
(1995 Code, § 8.12.090)
§ 8.12.100   Distance between driveways.
   The minimum width between any two driveways upon or to any one lot in the
city shall be 22 feet.
(1995 Code, § 8.12.100)
§ 8.12.110   Distance of curb opening from corner.
   No driveway or curb opening shall be constructed in the city nearer to the
intersection of the property lines of two intersecting streets than the point
of curve of the curb return at such intersection, where such exists, and in any
event not nearer than four feet to the property line intersection.
(1995 Code, § 8.12.110)
§ 8.12.120   Distance from utility structures.
   No driveway or curb opening shall be constructed nearer than five feet to
any fire hydrant, ornamental light standard, telephone or electric power pole,
meter box or underground vault or manhole.
(1995 Code, § 8.12.120)
§ 8.12.130   Application for construction permit.
   Any person desiring a permit to perform any work mentioned in the preceding
sections of this chapter shall file a written application therefor with the
Street Superintendent, on forms furnished by the Street Superintendent, which
application shall state the location, nature and extent of the work to be
performed, the material to be used, the length of time which will be required
to complete the work, and such other information as the Street Superintendent
may require.
(1995 Code, § 8.12.130)
§ 8.12.140   Modifications by Street Superintendent.
   The Street Superintendent may modify the time specified for the completion
of the work and may make such changes as to the location and extent of the work
as are, in his or her judgment, necessary to prevent undue interference with
traffic or danger to the safety of persons using the same.
(1995 Code, § 8.12.140)
§ 8.12.150   Conformance with specifications— Inspection.
   All work mentioned in the preceding sections of this chapter for which a
permit shall have been issued as provided herein shall be in accordance with
the specifications and/or standard plans adopted by the city for the class of
work, or the special plans and specifications prepared therefor and approved by
the Engineer, and referred to in the permit, and shall be performed to the
satisfaction of the Street Superintendent and under the supervision of an
inspector appointed by the Engineer for the work; costs of inspection to be
borne by the applicant at rates specified by the Engineer; provided, however,
that inspection during actual construction of any and all patchwork, as defined
by the Engineer as such, may by his or her action be waived.
(1995 Code, § 8.12.150)
§ 8.12.160   Replacement—Abutting landowner’s duty.
   (A)   Anything in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, the
maintenance and repair of sidewalk areas and the making, confirming and
collecting of assessments for the cost and expenses of the maintenance and
repair, may be done and the proceedings therefor may be had and taken in
accordance with this section and the procedure therefor provided in Cal.
Streets and Highways Code Chapter 22 of Division 7, Part 3. In the event of any
conflict between the provisions of Cal. Streets and Highways Code Chapter 22 of
Division 7, Part 3, and this §
8.12.160, the provisions of this section shall control.
   (B)   The owners of lots or portions of lots adjacent to or fronting on any
portion of a sidewalk area or driveway approach between the opaquing strips,
sidewalks, curbs and gutters, and persons in possession of the lots by virtue
of any permit or right shall repair and maintain the sidewalk areas and pay the
costs and expenses therefor, including a charge for the City of Tulare’s costs
of inspection and administration whenever the city awards a contract for the
maintenance and repair and including the costs of collection of assessments for
the costs of maintenance and repair under this section or handling of any lien
placed on the property due to failure of the property owner to promptly pay the
assessments.
   (C)   For the purposes of this part, maintenance and repair of sidewalk area
or driveway approach shall include, but not be limited to maintenance and
repair of surfaces including grinding, removal and replacement of sidewalks,
repair and maintenance of curb and gutters, removal and filling or replacement
of parking strips, removal of weeds and/or debris, tree root pruning and
installing root barriers, trimming of shrubs and/or ground cover and trimming
shrubs within the area between the property line of the adjacent property and
the street pavement line, including parking strips and curbs, so that the
sidewalk area will remain in a condition that is not dangerous to property or
to persons using the sidewalk in a reasonable manner and will be in a condition
which will not interfere with the public convenience in the use of the sidewalk
area.
   (D)   Notwithstanding the provisions of Cal. Streets and Highways § 5614,
the Director of Public Works may in his or her discretion, and for sufficient
causes, extend the period within which required maintenance and repair of
sidewalk areas must commence by a period of not to exceed 74 days from the time
the notice referred to in § 5614 is given.
(1995 Code, § 8.12.160) (Ord. 03-1924, passed - -2003)
§ 8.12.170   Liability for injuries to public.
   The property owner required by §
8.12.160 to maintain and repair the sidewalk area shall owe a duty to members
of the public to keep and maintain the sidewalk area in a safe and non-
dangerous condition. If, as a result of the failure of any property owner to
maintain the sidewalk area in a non-dangerous condition as required by §
8.12.160, any person suffers injury or damage to person or property, the
property owner shall be liable to the person for the resulting damages or
injury and shall be required to indemnify and hold harmless the City of Tulare,
its officers, agents and employees.
(1995 Code, § 8.12.165) (Ord. 03-1924, passed - -2003)
§ 8.12.180   Useless driveways.
   Driveways which have been abandoned to general use, or at locations where,
in the opinion of the Street Superintendent, the driveways do not contribute to
the welfare and convenience of the general public, shall be so replaced.
(1995 Code, § 8.12.170)
§ 8.12.190   Request to make replacement.
   Request of the owner of abutting property for the replacement of curbs,
gutters and sidewalks shall be made by the Street Superintendent in writing to
the owner of real property fronting the right-of-way and shall include the
replacement of abandoned driveways.
(1995 Code, § 8.12.180)
§ 8.12.200   Replacement by city—Cost.
   If, after 30 days subsequent to the written notification, the owner so
notified has not proceeded to make replacements as requested, the Street
Superintendent may authorize the work, and the cost thereof, if unpaid by the
property owner 60 days after payment is requested, will become a lien against
the property.
(1995 Code, § 8.12.190)
§ 8.12.210   Variance procedure.
   (A)   Variance conditions. The Public Works Director may authorize, upon
request, the variances from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary
to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, the literal
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary
hardship; provided that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed and
substantial justice done. Before any variance may be authorized, however, it
shall be shown that:
      (1)   Adherence to the strict letter of this chapter will cause
difficulties and hardships upon the petitioner, the imposition of which is
unnecessary in order to carry out the general purpose of this chapter;
      (2)   Special circumstances attach to the property covered by the
application which do not generally apply to other properties in the same
neighborhood;
      (3)   Because of special circumstances, property covered by this
application is deprived of privileges possessed by other properties in the same
neighborhood; and
      (4)   The granting of the variance is essential to the enjoyment of a
substantial use of the property consistent with similar uses of property in the
same neighborhood.
   (B)   Application information. Applications for variance shall be filed with
the Public Works Director. The application shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   A description of the requested variance together with a designation
of the chapter provision from which relief is being requested;
      (2)   An accurate plot plan, if appropriate, indicating the manner in
which the variance will be applied and its effect upon adjacent properties;
      (3)   A detailed explanation of the circumstances and reasons justifying
the variance; and
      (4)   The application shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of
the Council sufficient to cover the cost of handling the application as
prescribed in this chapter.
   (C)   Appeal to Council.
      (1)   Within ten days following the date of a decision of the Public
Works Director on a variance application, the decision may be appealed to the
Council by the applicant or any other interested party. An appeal shall be made
on a form prescribed by the Public Works Department and shall be filed with the
Clerk. The appeal shall state specifically wherein it is claimed there was an
error or a breach of discretion by the Public Works Director or wherein the
decision is not supported by the evidence in the record.
      (2)   Within five days of filing of an appeal, the Public Works Director
shall transmit to the Clerk the variance application, and other data filed
therewith, and any reports, findings or other information which the Public
Works Director has used in making a decision on the application.
      (3)   The Clerk shall give notice to the applicant and to the appellant
(if the applicant is not the appellant) and may give notice to any other
interested party of the time when the appeal will be considered by the Council.
   (D)   Action of the Council.
      (1)   The Council may affirm, reverse or modify a decision of the Public
Works Director on a variance application; provided, that if a decision denying
a variance is reversed or a decision granting a variance is modified, the
Council shall, on the basis of the record transmitted by the Public Works
Director and such additional evidence as may be submitted, make the findings
prerequisite to the granting of a variance as prescribed in §
8.12.210(A) of this chapter.
      (2)   A variance which has been the subject of an appeal to the Council
shall become effective three days following the date on which the variance is
granted by the Council.
   (E)   Lapse of variance. A variance shall lapse and shall become void one
year following the date on which the variance became effective unless prior to
the expiration of one year, a building permit is issued by the Building
Inspector and construction is commenced and diligently pursued toward
completion on the site which was the subject of the variance application or a
certificate of occupancy is issued by the Planning Officer for the site or
structure which was the subject of the variance application. A variance may be
renewed for an additional period of one year; provided, that prior to the
expiration of one year from the date which the variance originally became
effective, an application for renewal of the variance is made to the Public
Works Director. The Public Works Director may grant or deny an application for
renewal of a variance.
   (F)   Revocation. A variance granted subject to a condition shall be revoked
by the Public Works Director if the condition is not complied with.
   (G)   New application. Following the denial of a variance application or the
revocation of a variance, no application for the same, or substantially the
same, variance on the same or substantially the same site shall be filed within
one year of the date of denial of the variance application or revocation of the
variance.
(1995 Code, § 8.12.200)
CHAPTER 8.16: SIDEWALKS
Section
   
8.16.010   Low tree limbs.
   
8.16.020   Duty to trim low limbs.
   
8.16.030   Vegetation upon sidewalks.
   
8.16.040   Duty to keep sidewalk clear.
   
8.16.050   Display of goods on sidewalk.
   
8.16.060   Gasoline pumps.
   
8.16.070   Use of bicycles, skateboards, coasters and roller skates.
§ 8.16.010   Low tree limbs.
   All overhanging limbs of trees along, bordering on, or upon the streets or
other public thoroughfares of the city at a height of less than ten feet above
the level of the sidewalk are hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(1995 Code, § 8.16.010)
§ 8.16.020   Duty to trim low limbs.
   It shall be the duty of all property owners or their agents or other persons
in charge to trim or cause to be trimmed all overhanging limbs of trees along
the streets or other public thoroughfares of the city, to a height of not less
than ten feet above the level of the sidewalk.
(1995 Code, § 8.16.020)
§ 8.16.030   Vegetation upon sidewalks.
   All weeds, underbrush, shrubs and refuse matter in or upon any sidewalk is
hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(1995 Code, § 8.16.030)
§ 8.16.040   Duty to keep sidewalk clear.
   It shall be the duty of all property owners or their agents or other persons
in charge to keep the sidewalk along their premises free from all woods,
underbrush, shrubs and refuse matter and to allow no obstruction to be or
remain on the walks.
(1995 Code, § 8.16.040)
§ 8.16.050   Display of goods on sidewalk.
   No person shall use or occupy any public sidewalk in the city for the
display of goods, wares, signs, advertising matter or merchandise or leave any
goods, wares, merchandise, boxes, barrels, trucks or other articles upon any
street or a portion of the street in the city.
(1995 Code, § 8.16.050)
§ 8.16.060   Gasoline pumps.
   No person shall install, maintain or operate any oil or gasoline pump or
other mechanical device used for the purpose of pumping oil or gasoline in,
over or upon any street, alley or public place. Nothing contained in this
section shall be deemed to prohibit the use, maintenance or operation of any
oil or gasoline pump, or other mechanical device installed or in use prior to
the adoption of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 8.16.060)
§ 8.16.070   Use of bicycles, skateboards, coasters and roller skates.
   No person shall ride a bicycle, skateboard, roller skates, coaster, toy
vehicle or similar device upon any sidewalk within the Downtown Improvement
District of the City of Tulare as described on the map attached to the City of
Tulare Res. 1642 on file with the City Clerk.
(1995 Code, § 8.16.070)
CHAPTER 8.20: [REPEALED BY ORD. 2022-17]
CHAPTER 8.24: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
Applicability and Administration
   
8.24.010   Purpose.
   
8.24.020   Title of provisions.
   
8.24.030   Conformance to provisions required.
   
8.24.040   Applicability.
   
8.24.050   Advisory agency and appeal board.
   
8.24.060   Standard conditions for approval.
   
8.24.070   Public notice.
   
8.24.080   Appeals process.
   
8.24.090   Prohibitions and penalty for violation.
   
8.24.100   Certificate of compliance.
   
8.24.110   Remainder lots.
Definitions
   
8.24.120   Adopted.
   
8.24.130   Definitions.
Tentative Maps
   
8.24.140   Purpose and function of tentative maps.
   
8.24.150   When required.
   
8.24.160   Basic requirements.
   
8.24.170   Review authority.
   
8.24.180   Application submittal.
   
8.24.190   Application review.
   
8.24.200   Environmental review.
   
8.24.210   Public notice and hearing.
   
8.24.220   Findings.
   
8.24.230   Conditions of approval.
   
8.24.240   Notice to applicant.
   
8.24.250   Expiration of maps.
   
8.24.260   Extensions.
   
8.24.270   Amendments.
   
8.24.280   Appeals.
   
8.24.290   Vesting tentative map.
Final Subdivision Maps and Parcel Maps
   
8.24.300   Purpose of final subdivision maps and parcel maps.
   
8.24.310   Basic requirements.
   
8.24.320   Form and contents of final subdivision map and parcel map.
   
8.24.330   Procedures for approval.
   
8.24.340   Phasing of final maps.
   
8.24.350   Survey and monuments.
   
8.24.360   Corrections and amendments.
Other Subdivision Procedures
   
8.24.370   Purpose.
   
8.24.380   Lot line adjustments.
   
8.24.390   Voluntary lot mergers.
   
8.24.400   Mandatory lot mergers.
   
8.24.410   Reversion to acreage.
Design Standards
   
8.24.420   General design standards.
   
8.24.430   Block design.
   
8.24.440   Lot design.
   
8.24.450   Street design and improvements.
   
8.24.460   Trees and landscaping.
   
8.24.470   Energy conservation.
Improvements
   
8.24.480   Purpose.
   
8.24.490   Applicability.
   
8.24.500   Improvement requirements.
   
8.24.510   Improvement agreements.
   
8.24.520   Improvement security.
   
8.24.530   Installation of improvements.
APPLICABILITY AND ADMINISTRATION
§ 8.24.010 Purpose.
   (A)   General. The Subdivision Ordinance is adopted to implement the
California Subdivision Map Act ("Map Act") and to protect the health, safety,
and general welfare of the residents of the City of Tulare.
   (B)   Specific. The Subdivision Ordinance is intended to give effect to the
Map Act, Cal. Gov't Code §§ 66410 et seq.
      (1)   Plan implementation. To give effect to the General Plan and
specific plans of the City of Tulare relative to the subdivision of land and
development of subdivisions.
      (2)   Local ordinance. To regulate, by local ordinance, those matters of
land division, merger, reversion, and lot line adjustment not governed by the
Map Act.
      (3)   Orderly development. To facilitate and ensure orderly development
of lands in the City of Tulare.
      (4)   Consistency. To implement the objectives established for the
development of the City of Tulare in conformance with its General Plan and
specific plans, and to ensure that a proposed subdivision or land division
shall be considered in relation to those plans.
      (5)   Improvements. To provide standards governing the surveys, designs,
and improvements of subdivisions, and the submission of maps, plans, and
specifications for the construction of improvements.
      (6)   Utilities. To provide for standards for streets, roads, highways,
public utilities, and other improvements within subdivisions.
      (7)   Building sites. To provide for the creation of reasonable building
sites by establishing appropriate standards for streets and lots, and to ensure
that each property has a means of ingress and egress.
      (8)   Flooding. To control the division of land that is subject to
inundation by flooding from natural streams or artificial ponding, and other
detrimental influences which may cause land to be unsuitable for satisfactory
development.
      (9)   Soil conditions. To control the division of land which may be
subject to dangerous or unsuitable soil conditions of any type, or subject to
any other impediments affecting the use of the land for human habitation.
      (10)   Rules and regulations. To provide rules and regulations governing
the contents of tentative subdivision maps, tentative parcel maps, vesting
tentative subdivision maps and final maps, to establish methods for the
processing and filing of the maps, and to regulate other related matters.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.020 Title of provisions.
   This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the "Subdivision
Ordinance of the City of Tulare."
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.030 Conformance to provisions required.
   (A)   Prior to the subdivision of any land in the City of Tulare, the
subdivider shall conform to and comply with the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   No land shall be subdivided or developed for any purpose that is not
in conformity with the General Plan, any applicable specific plan, or the City
of Tulare Public Ways and Property Ordinance, Title 8 of the Tulare Municipal
Code.
   (C)   The type and intensity of land use as shown in the General Plan or
specific plan shall determine the type of streets, roads, highways, utilities,
and public services to be provided by the subdivider.
   (D)   No subdivision shall be approved, and no certificate of compliance
shall be issued, if a lot would be created that is inconsistent with the
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.040 Applicability.
   (A)   General. All subdivisions of real property for sale, lease, or
financing in the City of Tulare shall comply with this chapter and the Map Act.
   (B)   Approval. All subdivisions of real property for sale, lease, or
financing in the City of Tulare shall be permitted through the approval of a
map in compliance with this chapter and the Map Act.
   (C)   Conflicts. The Map Act shall govern in the event of any conflict
between the Map Act and this chapter.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.050 Advisory agency and appeal board.
   (A)   Advisory agency.
      (1)   Designation. The designated advisory agencies as defined in Cal.
Gov't Code § 66415 of the Map Act are identified as "review authority" in
Table 8.24-1.
      (2)   Role. The advisory agency, as review authority, is authorized to
make decisions on a given action, as identified in
Table 8.24-1.
   (B)   Responsibilities.
      (1)   Community Development Director. The Community Development Director
is responsible for the following:
         (a)   Processing applications for subdivision maps and approvals as
required by this chapter.
         (b)   Reviewing subdivision applications for compliance with the
General Plan, the Zoning Ordinance, and this chapter.
         (c)   Forwarding subdivision application materials to the City
Engineer and other city departments for review and comment.
         (d)   Conducting environmental analyses related to proposed
applications in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act
(CEQA).
         (e)   Scheduling meetings and hearings for items reviewed by the
Parcel Map Committee, the Planning Commission, and City Council.
         (f)   Providing notice of public hearing as required by this chapter.
         (g)   Membership on in the Parcel Map Committee and participation in
all duties and responsibilities of the Committee.
         (h)   Preparing written reports for items acted upon by the Parcel Map
Committee, the Planning Commission, and the City Council.
         (i)   Certifying, as Secretary of the Planning Commission, decisions
and actions of the Planning Commission.
         (j)   Providing applicants with notice of City decisions on proposed
tentative subdivision maps, vesting tentative subdivision maps, and tentative
parcel maps.
         (k)   Making decisions and providing recommendations on decisions as
shown in
Table 8.24-1.
         (l)   Making decisions on requests to waive the requirement for a
tentative parcel map as allowed by Cal. Gov't Code § 66428.
         (m)   Certifying approval of minor amendments to tentative subdivision
maps, vesting tentative subdivision maps, and tentative parcel maps.
         (n)   Reviewing and approving provisions prepared by a subdivider for
the maintenance and ownership of private streets.
         (o)   When necessary to carry out these responsibilities, the
Community Development Director may designate and authorize a representative to
act on the Community Development Director's behalf.
      (2)   City Engineer. The City Engineer is responsible for the following:
         (a)   Reviewing and commenting on applications for tentative
subdivision maps, tentative parcel maps, lot line adjustments, voluntary lot
mergers, and reversions to acreage.
         (b)   Preparing a written report to the Planning Commission on whether
a tentative subdivision map application complies with this chapter and the Map
Act.
         (c)   Reviewing and commenting on requested certificates of
compliance.
         (d)   Membership on the Parcel Map Committee and participation in all
duties and responsibilities of the Committee.
         (e)   Reviewing and commenting on requested tentative parcel map
waivers.
         (f)   Certification of approved amendments to a tentative subdivision
map or tentative parcel map.
         (g)   Waiving of final subdivision map and parcel map requirements
that are not applicable to a proposed subdivision.
         (h)   Issuing of certificates for final subdivision maps and parcel
maps.
         (i)   Accepting and reviewing final subdivision map and parcel map
submittals.
         (j)   Approving parcel maps that do not require dedications subject to
City Council approval.
         (k)   Transmitting certified final subdivision maps and parcel maps to
the County Recorder.
         (l)   Approving amendments or certificate(s) of correction to final
subdivision maps and parcel maps allowed with City Engineer approval and
recommendation to the City Council on amendments to final subdivision maps and
parcel maps requiring City Council approval.
         (m)   Maintaining the latest edition of the city's Standard Drawings
and Specifications in the Office of the City Engineer.
         (n)   Reviewing and approving subdivision improvement plans in
compliance with official city standards.
         (o)   Approving deviations from the city's standard plans and
specifications for subdivision improvements.
         (p)   Determining required payment for maintenance of trees and
landscaping within a subdivision after completion.
         (q)   Reviewing master water, sewer, and storm drain plans for a
subdivision subject to multiple incremental final subdivision maps.
         (r)   Approving deferred improvement agreements.
         (s)   Approving improvement securities.
         (t)   Approving extensions to the required completion date of
subdivision improvements.
         (u)   Recommending to the City Council acceptance of all public
subdivision improvements.
         (v)   When necessary to carry out these responsibilities, the City
Engineer may designate and authorize a representative to act on the City
Engineer's behalf.
      (3)   Parcel Map Committee. The Parcel Map Committee is responsible for
approving, conditionally approving, or denying all applications for:
         (a)   Tentative parcel maps.
         (b)   Amendments to tentative parcel maps.
         (c)   Discretionary extensions to tentative parcel maps.
         (d)   Lot line adjustments not requiring a variance.
         (e)   Reversions to acreage.
         (f)   Lot mergers.
      (4)   Planning Commission. The Planning Commission is responsible for
approving, conditionally approving, or denying all applications for:
         (a)   Tentative subdivision maps and vesting tentative subdivision
maps.
         (b)   Amendments to vesting tentative subdivision map or a tentative
subdivision map.
         (c)   Amendments to a parcel or final subdivision map to reflect
changed circumstances.
         (d)   Discretionary extensions to a vesting tentative subdivision map
or a tentative subdivision map.
         (e)   Hearing appeals of decisions of the Community Development
Director, City Engineer, and Parcel Map Committee.
      (5)   City Council. The City Council is responsible for:
         (a)   Approving, conditionally approving, or denying all applications
for final subdivision maps.
         (b)   Accepting all dedications of land, rights-of-way, and easements.
         (c)   Hearing appeals of decisions of the Community Development
Director, City Engineer, Parcel Map Committee, and Planning Commission.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.060 Standard conditions of approval.
   Pursuant to its police power, the city may impose conditions on the approval
of any map. The City Council may adopt, by resolution, a listing of standard
conditions of approval, which may be imposed on the approval of any map by
reference. Any, all, or none of the standard conditions of approval may be
imposed by the city by such reference. Imposition of standard conditions of
approval does not in any way abrogate the power of the city to impose other
conditions.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.070 Public notice.
   When a map is filed for the division of land, all public notice requirements
listed in Cal. Gov't Code § 66451 et seq. and the Tulare Municipal Code shall
be followed.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.080 Appeals process.
   When this chapter allows for an appeal of an action, the appeals process
shall be in accordance with Cal. Gov't Code § 66452.5 and as follows:
   (A)   Appeal Community Development Director, City Engineer, and Parcel Map
Committee actions. Community Development Director, City Engineer, and Parcel
Map Committee actions may be appealed to the Planning Commission as follows:
      (1)   Within ten days after the action of the Community Development
Director, City Engineer, or Parcel Map Committee from which the appeal is
taken, the action may be appealed to the Planning Commission by filing a notice
of appeal with the Community Development Director. The notice of appeal shall
be accompanied by payment of a fee as required by resolution of the City
Council. If no appeal is filed, the action shall be final.
      (2)   Within 30 days after the date of filing an appeal, the Planning
Commission shall hold a hearing to consider the matter. At the hearing of the
appeal, the Planning Commission shall consider the report of the Community
Development Director, City Engineer, or Parcel Map Committee, as applicable, in
addition to testimony presented at the hearing.
      (3)   The Planning Commission may sustain, modify, reject, or overrule
any action of the Community Development Director, City Engineer, or Parcel Map
Committee, and make findings that are consistent with city ordinances or the
Map Act. Within ten days following the hearing, the Planning Commission shall
render its decision on the appeal.
   (B)   Appeal of Planning Commission action. Planning Commission actions may
be appealed to the City Council as follows:
      (1)   Within ten days after the action by the Planning Commission from
which the appeal is taken, the action may be appealed to the City Council by
filing a notice of appeal with the Clerk of the City Council and the Community
Development Director. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by payment of a
fee as required by resolution of the City Council. If no appeal is filed, the
action shall be final.
      (2)   Within 30 days of the filing of an appeal, the City Council shall
hold a hearing to consider the matter. At the hearing of the appeal, the City
Council shall consider all of the following, as applicable, in addition to
testimony presented at the hearing:
         (a)   The report of the Community Development Director.
         (b)   The minutes of the Planning Commission.
         (c)   The staff report.
      (3)   The City Council may sustain, modify, reject, or overrule any
action of the Planning Commission and make findings that are consistent with
city ordinances or the Map Act. Within ten days following the hearing, the City
Council shall render its decision on the appeal, which shall be final.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
Table 8.24-1 Review Authority
Key
R Recommended
D Decision    Role of Review Authority
A Appeal
- Not
Applicable
              Community                 Parcel Map Planning
              Development City Engineer Committee  Commission [1] City Council
              Director
Table 8.24-1 Review Authority
Key
R Recommended
D Decision     Role of Review Authority
A Appeal
- Not
Applicable
               Community                 Parcel Map Planning
               Development City Engineer Committee  Commission [1] City Council
               Director
Map Approvals                                                   
Final
Subdivision    R           R             -          -              D
Map
Parcel Map     R           D [2 ]        -          A              A
Tentative      R           R             D          A              A
Parcel Map
Tentative
Subdivision    R           R             -          D              A
Map
Vesting
Tentative      R           R             -          D              A
Subdivision
Map
Tentative
Parcel Map     D           R             -          A              A
Waivers
Map Amendments
Amendment to a
Parcel Map or
Final Map to   -           D             -          A              A
Correct Errors
and Omissions
Amendment to a
Parcel Map or
Final Map to   -           R             -          D              A
Reflect
Changed
Circumstances
Amendment to a
Tentative      R           R             D          A              A
Parcel Map
Amendment to a
Tentative
Subdivision
Map or a       R           R             -          D              A
Vesting
Tentative
Subdivision
Map
Map Extensions
Automatic
Extension to a
Tentative
Subdivision    D           -             -          A              A
Map or a
Tentative
Parcel Map
Discretionary
Extension to a
Tentative
Subdivision
Map or a       R           R             -          D              A
Vesting
Subdivision
Tentative
Subdivision
Map
Discretionary
Extension to a R           R             D          A              A
Tentative
Parcel Map
Other
Decisions
Accepting
Dedication of
Land, Rights-  R           R             -          R              D
of-Way and
Easement
Lot Line       R           R             D[ 2]      A              A
Adjustment
Certificate of R           R             D          A              A
Compliance
Deferred
Improvement    -           D             -          A              A
Agreement
Reversion to   R           R             -          D              A
Acreage
Voluntary Lot  R           R             D          A              A
Merger
Notes:
[1]   The Planning Commission is the review authority for lot line adjustments
requiring a variance.
[2]   Any dedications must be approved by the City Council.
 
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.090 Prohibitions and penalty for violation.
   (A)   Prohibitions.
      (1)   Noncompliance. No person shall offer to sell or lease, to contract
to sell or lease, or to finance any lot of real property or to commence
construction of any building for sale, lease or financing, except for model
homes, or to allow occupancy, for which a parcel map or final parcel map is
required by this chapter, until a parcel map or final subdivision map in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter has been filed for record by the
County Recorder.
      (2)   Conveyance of property. Conveyances of any part of a division of
real property for which a final subdivision map or parcel map is required by
this chapter shall not be made by parcel or block number, initial or other
designation, until the map has been filed for record by the County Recorder.
      (3)   Development contrary to public health or safety. The city shall not
issue any permit or grant any approval necessary to develop any real property
which has been divided, or which has resulted in a division, in violation of
the provisions of this chapter, if it finds that development of the property is
contrary to public health or public safety. If the city issues a permit or
grants approval for the development of the property, it may impose additional
conditions as would have been applicable to the division of the property at the
time the current owner of record acquired the property.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.100 Certificate of compliance.
   (A)   Purpose. A certificate of compliance is an official determination of
the City of Tulare that a property complies with the requirements of this
chapter and the Map Act.
   (B)   Application. Any person owning real property may submit to the
Community Development Director an application for a certificate of compliance.
The application shall be subject to the fees as set forth in the City of
Tulare's Planning Fee Schedule.
   (C)   Review. The Community Development Director, in consultation with the
City Engineer, shall review the application to determine whether the property
complies with the requirements of this chapter and the Map Act.
   (D)   Issuance and recordation. If the Community Development Director is
able to determine from this review that the parcel complies with this chapter
and the Map Act, a certificate of compliance shall be issued by the Parcel Map
Committee and delivered to the County Recorder for recordation. The certificate
of compliance shall identify the property and state that the property complies
with this chapter and the Map Act.
   (E)   Non-compliance. If the Community Development Director cannot determine
that the property complies with this chapter and the Map Act, the Parcel Map
Committee shall issue a conditional certificate of compliance pursuant to Cal.
Gov't Code § 66499.35(b).
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.110 Remainder lots.
   (A)   General. A subdivider may designate as a remainder lot the portion of
a subdivision which is not divided for the purpose of sale, lease, or
financing. A designated remainder lot is not counted as a lot for the purpose
of determining whether a parcel map or subdivision map is required.
   (B)   Construction of improvements. For a designated remainder lot, the
fulfillment of construction requirements for improvements is not required
until:
      (1)   A permit or other grant of approval for development of the
remainder lot is issued by the city;
      (2)   The construction of the improvements is required under an agreement
between the subdivider and the city; or
      (3)   The city makes a finding that fulfillment of the construction
requirements is necessary for reasons of:
         (a)   The public health and safety; or
         (b)   The required construction is a necessary prerequisite to the
orderly development of the surrounding area.
   (C)   Agreement for deferred improvements. When fulfillment of the
construction requirements is to be delayed, the subdivider shall record, with
the City Engineer's approval, an agreement with the city, stating:
      (1)   What the required improvements are; and
      (2)   That the subdivider or a successor owner is required to complete
them all before the city will grant a permit or other approval for development.
   (D)   Sale of remainder lots. If a designated remainder lot is subsequently
sold, the city may require the subdivider or the owner to obtain a certificate
of compliance or conditional certificate of compliance in compliance with §
8.24.100.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
DEFINITIONS
§ 8.24.120 Adopted.
   Any words or phrases not defined in this chapter, but which are defined in
the Map Act, shall apply as though set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.130 Definitions.
   The following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them.
   (A)   Definitions, "A".
      ADVISORY AGENCY. The city official or body responsible for acting on an
application, permit, or approval required by this chapter.
      ALLEY. A way intended primarily for vehicular service access to the back
or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street, and providing only
secondary access to such property.
      APARTMENT. Apartment house as defined in §
5.04.010 of the Tulare Municipal Code.
      APPEAL BOARD. A designated board or other official body charged with the
duty of hearing and making determinations upon appeals with respect to
divisions of real property, the imposition of  requirements or conditions, or
the kinds, nature, and extent of the design or improvements, or both,
recommended or decided by the advisory agency to be required.
         APPLICANT. The owner(s), developer, or subdivider of a project as
their interests may appear.
         ARTERIAL. Any street which carries or will carry the major flow of
traffic, and for which the interval and extent of fronting uses, access, and
traffic entering it from side streets and roadways may be restricted and
otherwise controlled.
   (B)   Definitions, "B".
      BICYCLE PATH. A path, trail, route, or land designated for use by
bicycles and other non-motorized traffic.
      BLOCK. An area of land entirely bounded, or to be entirely bounded, by
streets, highways or ways, railroads, or subdivision boundaries, except alleys.
   (C)   Definitions, "C".
      CENTERLINE. An imaginary or actual line dividing a road, street, or path
into equal halves, often marked with a painted line.
      CERTIFICATE. A formal, valid, written authorization.
      CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE. A certificate, recorded by the city,
determining that the subdivision of real property complies with the provisions
of the Map Act and city ordinances enacted pursuant to the Map Act. A recorded
final subdivision map or parcel map shall constitute a certificate of
compliance for the lots of real property described in the map.
      CEQA. The California Environmental Quality Act, which provides an
objective process to disclose and minimize environmental impacts.
      CITY CLERK. The City Clerk of the City of Tulare and designated staff.
      CITY ENGINEER. The City Engineer of the City of Tulare and designated
staff. If registered as a civil engineer after January 1, 1982, the City
Engineer shall not be authorized to prepare, examine, or approve surveying maps
and documents. The examinations, certifications, and approvals of the surveying
maps and documents shall only be
performed by a person authorized to practice land surveying pursuant to the
Professional Land Surveyors Act, Cal. Business and Professions Code §§ 8700 et
seq. or a person registered as a civil engineer prior to January 1, 1982,
pursuant to the Professional Engineers Act, Cal. Business and Professions Code
§§ 6700 et seq.
      CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Tulare and designated
staff.
      COLLECTOR STREET. Any street intermediate in function between minor
streets and arterials which, because of its location relative to other streets
or traffic generators, carries or will carry traffic between minor and arterial
streets, or serves as a primary access to a neighborhood unit, or for the
circulation of traffic within or through such a neighborhood unit.
      COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR. The Director of the Planning Department
and associated staff of the City of Tulare.
      CONDOMINIUM. Includes the following:
         (a)   Real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a
portion of a lot of real property together with a separate interest in space in
a residential, industrial, or commercial building on the real property.
         (b)   A condominium project, as defined in Cal. Civil Code § 4125,
containing two or more condominiums, as defined in Cal. Civil Code § 783.
         (c)   A community apartment project, as defined in Cal. Business and
Professions Code § 11004, containing two or more rights of exclusive occupancy.
         (d)   A stock cooperative, as defined in Cal. Business and Professions
Code § 11003,2, containing two or more separately owned lots or areas.
         (e)   Any other project as defined by state law, including
developments which offer own-your-own or fee-ownership units, where the
individual owns land directly below the "footprint" of the unit.
      CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION. The conversion or division of a single ownership
lot of existing improved real property, such as an apartment project into a
condominium form of ownership involving separate ownership of individual units.
      CUL-DE-SAC. A minor street which connects to another street at one end
only.
   (D)   Definitions, "D".
      DEDICATION. The deliberate setting aside of land by an owner for general
or public use.
      DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT. The Department of Community
Development of the City of Tulare.
      DESIGN.
         (a)   Street alignments, grades and widths.
         (b)   Drainage and sanitary facilities and utilities, including
alignments and grades.
         (c)   Location and size of all required easements and rights-of-way.
         (d)   Fire roads and fire breaks.
         (e)   Lot size and configuration.
         (f)   Traffic access.
         (g)   Grading.
         (h)   Land to be dedicated for park or recreational purposes.
         (i)   Other specific requirements in the plan and configuration of the
entire subdivision as necessary or convenient to ensure consistency with, or
implementation of, the General Plan and applicable specific plan, utility
master plan, or similar plan-level document.
      DEVELOPER.
         (a)   A person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association who
proposes to construct, or constructs, or causes to be constructed, any
development on or for any portion of any land proposed to be subdivided in
accordance with this chapter, or on, or for, any land previously subdivided.
         (b)   The owner or subdivider with controlling proprietary interest in
a condominium project, or the person or organization making application for a
condominium project.
      DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to real estate, including buildings or
other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials.
      DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT. A contract executed and legally binding between
the City of Tulare and a developer(s) that delineates the terms and conditions
agreed upon by two or more parties.
      DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT. Any lot whose front and rear property lines abut
street rights-of-way.
      DWELLING UNIT. A building or a portion of a building containing one or
more habitable rooms used or designed for occupancy by individuals for living
and sleeping purposes, including kitchen and bath facilities.
   (E)   Definitions, "E".
      EASEMENT. The granting of certain property rights or limits on uses by
the property owner to another party.
   (F)   Definitions, "F".
      FINAL SUBDIVISION MAP. A map prepared in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter and the Map Act of the state, designed to be recorded in the
office of the recorder of the county, for subdivisions of five or more lots and
as otherwise provided in the Map Act and this chapter.
      FLOOD LINE. The flood line established pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance
that designates the portion of the flood plain area of a river or stream which
is subject to flood plain zoning regulations.
      FREEWAY. As defined in Cal. Streets and Highways Code of the state, means
a highway which, because of its design and relation to the state and county
highway system, is, or will be used, primarily for fast, heavy, or dense
traffic, and to which rights of access from abutting properties or streets
along the right-of-way therefor will be prohibited or limited.
      FRONTAGE. The front portion of a lot, typically located adjacent to a
street.
      FRONTAGE STREET. A street or road adjacent to an arterial, thoroughfare,
or freeway, which provides access to properties and protection from the
through-traffic on adjacent streets.
   (G)   Definitions, "G".
      GENERAL PLAN. The City of Tulare's statement of goals and policies
adopted by the City Council as a long-range, comprehensive guide to the city's
growth and development.
   (H)   Definitions, "H". None.
   (I)   Definitions, "I".
      IMPROVEMENT PLAN. An engineering plan, submitted by a civil engineer
licensed to practice in the state, showing the design, sanitary sewers,  water
systems, grading, and earthwork, and all other development, appurtenant
structures, and facilities and construction, including engineering
calculations, comprising on-site and off-site improvements required for a
subdivision.
      IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENT. A contract executed and legally binding between
the City of Tulare and another party that delineates the terms and conditions
relating to public improvements and agreed upon by two or more parties.
      IMPROVEMENTS. Street work and utilities, grading and earthwork, to be
installed, or agreed to be installed, by the subdivider and/or developer on the
land to be used for public or private streets, highways, ways, and easements,
as necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivisions or of
the site and local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs, as a condition
prior to the approval and acceptance of the final map or parcel map of the
subdivision. IMPROVEMENTS also refer to such other specific improvements or
types of improvements, the installation of which, either by the subdivider and/
or developer, by public agencies, by private utilities, or by any other entity
approved by the City Council, is necessary or convenient to ensure conformity
to or implementation of the General Plan.
      INDUSTRIAL STREET. A street primarily designed to serve industrial uses.
   (J)   Definitions, "J". None.
   (K)   Definitions, "K".
      KEY LOT. Any lot placed in a block, facing a different direction and
plotted more or less at right angles to the normal pattern for that block.
   (L)   Definitions, "L".
      LANDSCAPING. The planting and maintenance of living plant material,
including the installation, use, and maintenance of any irrigation system for
the plant material, as well as nonliving landscape material (such as rocks,
pebbles, sand, mulch, walls, fences, or decorative paving materials).
      LOCAL ORDINANCE. Refers to the portion of the City of Tulare Municipal
Code regulating the design and improvement of subdivisions.
      LOCAL STREET. A street primarily designed to serve adjacent properties.
      LOT. A portion of land separated from other portions by description, as
on a subdivision or record of survey map for purpose of sale, lease, or
separate use. In common usage, lot and parcel are used interchangeably. The
term lot is used within this chapter to include parcels as defined by the Map
Act and the municipal ordinance.
      LOT LINE. The line bounding a lot, as shown in a survey or map.
   (M)   Definitions, "M".
      MEDIAN. The area separating the traveled ways of opposing directional
movements of vehicular traffic along and within a roadway.
      MERGER. The joining of two or more contiguous lots of land under one
ownership into one lot.
      MOBILE HOME. A structure designed for human habitation and for being
transportable on a street or highway under permit pursuant to Cal. Veh. Code §
35790, and as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 18008. MOBILE HOME does
not include a recreational vehicle, as defined in Cal. Civil Code § 799.29, or
a commercial coach, as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 18001.8.
      MOBILE HOME PARK. An area of land where two or more mobile home sites are
rented, or held out for rent, to accommodate mobile homes used for habitation.
      MONUMENT. A permanent marker set in the ground to mark the boundaries of
a property, as referenced in Cal. Gov't Code § 66434(c).
   (N)   Definitions, "N". None.
   (O)   Definitions, "O".
      OWNER. The individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership or
corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the land to be subdivided
to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under this chapter.
   (P)   Definitions, "P".
      PARCEL. One or more lots, as identified for tax purposes. In common
usage, lot and parcel are used interchangeably. The term lot is used within
this chapter to include parcel as defined by the Map Act and the municipal
ordinance.
      PARCEL MAP. A map prepared in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter and  the Map Act of the state, which map is designed to be recorded in
the office of the County Recorder for subdivisions of fewer than five lots and
as otherwise provided in the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter.
      PARCEL MAP COMMITTEE. The Parcel Map Committee of the City of Tulare,
composed of one Planning Commission member, the Community Development Director
or designee, and the City Engineer or designee.
      PARKWAY. A strip between the sidewalk and the property line or between
the curb and sidewalk within the street right-of-way, or between the pavement
of a frontage street and the primary thoroughfare, arterial street, limited
access highway, or freeway it parallels which is intended to be planted with
trees or otherwise landscaped.
      PARTIAL-WIDTH STREET. A street substandard in the right-of-way width.
      PEDESTRIAN WAY. An improved right-of-way restricted to foot traffic and
providing access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, or
other community facilities.
      PERIPHERAL STREET. An existing street whose right-of-way is contiguous to
the exterior boundary of the subdivision.
      PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the City of Tulare.
      PLANNING DEPARTMENT. The Planning Department of the City of Tulare. The
Community Development Director is the Director of the Planning Department and
associated staff of the City of Tulare.
        PRIVATE STREET. A road owned and maintained by a private party.
      PUBLIC FACILITIES. All improvements installed to serve the public,
including, but not limited to cable television, cemeteries, churches,
communication equipment, corporation yards, electricity substations, fire
stations, hospitals, landscaping, parks, public utility distribution, schools,
sanitary sewer, storm drainage, street improvements, street lights, telephone,
and water facilities.
   (Q)   Definitions, "Q". None.
   (R)   Definitions, "R".
      RECOGNIZED LOT. 
         (a)   Any lot which was a separate lot of record on December 1, 1977,
as shown in the official records of the County Recorder.
         (b)   Any lot which has been, or is, created after December 1, 1977,
in accordance with state law or any applicable city ordinance.
         (c)   Any lot which, at the time of annexation to the city, is a
separate lot of record, as shown in the official records of the County
Recorder.
      REMAINDER LOT. A portion of land which was not divided when only part of
a real property was subdivided.
      REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENT. A contract executed and legally binding between
the City of Tulare and another party that delineates the terms and conditions
relating to reimbursement agreed upon by two or more parties, as described in
the Tulare Municipal Code,
Ch. 8.60 (Benefit Districts) and
Ch. 8.64 (Oversized Construction Reimbursement).
      REVERSION TO ACREAGE. The abandonment of a previously approved
subdivision resulting in a merger of the subdivided lots and reestablishment of
the pre-subdivision lot lines.
   (S)   Definitions, "S".
      SITE DEVELOPMENT. The development of any lot or area of land.
      SPECIFIC PLAN. A plan for a sub-area of the City of Tulare that
implements the goals and policies of the General Plan and follows the
structural requirements in Cal. Gov't Code § 65451.
      SPECIFICATIONS. Specifications for construction materials, methods of
construction, tests, design and construction standards, and related conditions
of the City of Tulare as adopted by ordinance or resolution of the City
Council.
      STREET. A thoroughfare, including a road or highway that provides the
principal means of access to abutting property. For the purpose of interpreting
this chapter, any throughway except an alley shall be considered a street.
      STREET, ARTERIAL. Any street which carries or will carry the major flow
of traffic, and for which the interval and extent of fronting uses, access, and
traffic entering it from side streets and roadways may be restricted and
otherwise controlled.
      STREET, COLLECTOR. Any street intermediate in function between minor
streets and arterials which, because of its location relative to other streets
or traffic generators, carries or will carry  traffic between minor and
arterial streets, or serves as a primary access to a neighborhood unit, or for
the circulation of traffic within or through such a neighborhood unit.
      STREET, STUBBED. A street having only one outlet for vehicular traffic
and which is intended to be extended or continued in the future.
      SUBDIVIDER. A person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who
proposes to divide, divides, or causes to be divided, real property into a
subdivision for him or herself or for others.
      SUBDIVISION. The division of any improved or unimproved land, shown on
the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units,
for the purpose of sale, lease, or financing, whether immediate or future.
Property shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by
roads, streets, utility easements, or railroad rights-of-way. SUBDIVISION
includes a condominium project as defined in Cal. Civil Code § 851, or a
community apartment project as defined in Cal. Business and Professions Code §
11004, or the conversion of five or more existing dwelling units to a stock
cooperative as defined in Cal. Business and Professions Code § 11003.2. Any
conveyance of land to a governmental agency, public entity, or public utility
shall not be considered a division of land for purposes of computing the number
of lots.
      SUBSTANDARD LOT. Any lot which does not meet the minimum dimension or
area requirements for the zone as defined in the City of Tulare Zoning
Ordinance.
      SUBDIVISION MAP ACT. The Subdivision Map Act of the State, Cal. Gov't
Code §§ 66410 et seq, as amended.
   (T)   Definitions, "T".
      TENANT. A person who rents, leases, or subleases, through either a
written or oral agreement, residential property from another.
      TENTATIVE MAP. A map, prepared by or under the direction of a land
surveyor or civil engineer licensed to practice in the state, for the
purpose of showing the design of a proposed subdivision, the existing
conditions in and around such subdivision, and other information as may be
required at the time it is filed in accordance with this chapter. It is
prepared prior to preparation of either a final map or a parcel map.
      TURNAROUND. A circular or semicircular area at the end of cul-de-sac
streets intended to allow for vehicular "U" turns.
   (U)   Definitions, "U".
      UNIT. The particular area of land or airspace that is designed, intended,
or used for exclusive possession or control of individual owners or occupiers,
whether or not they have interests in common areas of the project.
   (V)   Definitions, "V".
      VESTING TENTATIVE SUBDIVISION MAP. A tentative subdivision map that
confers a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance
with the city's ordinance, policies, and standards in effect at the time the
vesting tentative subdivision map application is deemed complete.
   (W)   Definitions, "W".
      WALKWAY. A way, path, or trail designed for pedestrian traffic and not
intended for use as a way for motor-driven vehicles. Public walkways, paths,
and trails shall include only those for which rights-of-way are dedicated or
deeded to and accepted by the city.
      WARRANTY SECURITY. Bonds, cash deposits, instruments of credit, a lien
upon the property, or other form of security submitted by the subdivider to the
city to guarantee the improvements against any defective work or labor done or
defective materials used in the performance of the improvements throughout the
warranty period.
   (X)   Definitions, "X". None.
   (Y)   Definitions, "Y". None.
   (Z)   Definitions, "Z". None.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
TENTATIVE MAPS
§ 8.24.140 Purpose and function of tentative maps.
   (A)   Purpose. These following sections establish procedures for submittal,
review, and action on tentative parcel and tentative subdivision maps,
collectively known as "tentative maps."
   (B)   Function. Tentative maps display the layout of a proposed land
division for review prior to the approval and recordation of a parcel map or
final subdivision map.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.150 When required
   (A)   Tentative subdivision maps.
      (1)   General. A tentative subdivision map is required for subdivisions
creating five or more lots, five or more condominium dwelling units, a
community apartment project containing five or more lots, or for the conversion
of a dwelling to a stock cooperative containing five or more dwelling units.
      (2)   Exceptions. Cal. Gov't Code § 66426 identifies instances when a
parcel map may be prepared instead of a tentative subdivision map regardless of
the number of lots created.
   (B)   Tentative parcel maps. A tentative parcel map is required for
subdivisions creating less than five lots and in cases when a parcel map is
prepared instead of a tentative subdivision map as allowed by Cal. Gov't Code §
66426.
   (C)   Tentative parcel map waivers.
      (1)   General. Consistent with Cal. Gov't Code § 66428, the Community
Development Director may waive the requirement for a tentative parcel map for
the following:
         (a)   Subdivisions created by eminent domain procedures, partition,
probate, or other civil judgments or decrees.
         (b)   Subdivisions created by short-term leases (terminable with 30
days notice) of an operating railroad right-of-way of a railroad corporation as
defined by Cal. Public Utilities Code § 230.
         (c)   Land conveyed to or from a public agency or utility for a public
purpose.
         (d)   Construction of a condominium project on a single lot.
         (e)   A subdivision merged under this title, the California
Subdivision Map Act ("Map Act"), or any prior city ordinance.
         (f)   Any other subdivision division of property which would otherwise
require a parcel map.
      (2)   Application for waiver. A person requesting a tentative parcel map
waiver shall file an application with all the information deemed necessary by
the Community Development Director.
      (3)   Findings. The Community Development Director may grant a tentative
parcel map waiver after conferring with the City Engineer and finding that:
         (a)   The land being divided consists of a lot shown on a recorded
parcel map or final subdivision map or a legally created lot and the full
street improvements have been constructed and monuments are evident.
         (b)   The proposed division of land complies with the requirements of
the city and Map Act as to area, improvement and design, floodwater drainage
control, public street improvements, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply
availability, environmental protection, and any other requirements that may
apply.
      (4)   Conditions of approval. The Community Development Director may
attach conditions to a tentative parcel map waiver to ensure the proposed
division of land complies with the requirements of the California Environmental
Quality Act, the General Plan, specific plans, the Zoning Ordinance, and other
applicable ordinances of the City of Tulare.
      (5)   Final parcel map required. Whenever a tentative parcel map is
waived under this section, a parcel map shall be submitted to and reviewed for
approved by the City Engineer as required by this chapter.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.160 Basic requirements.
   (A)   Compliance with Map Act. Tentative maps shall be filed and processed
in accordance with the Map Act.
   (B)   Consistency. Land may be subdivided and developed only for purposes
that are consistent with the Tulare General Plan, Zoning Ordinance, and any
applicable specific plans.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.170 Review authority.
   (A)   Tentative subdivision maps. The Planning Commission shall take action
on all tentative subdivision map applications.
   (B)   Tentative parcel maps. The Parcel Map Committee shall take action on
all tentative parcel map applications.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.180 Application submittal.
   (A)   Preparation. A tentative map shall be prepared by or under the
direction of a land surveyor or civil engineer licensed to practice in the
State of California.
   (B)   Application contents. A tentative map application shall be filed with
all fees, deposits, information, and materials as required by the city and the
Map Act.
   (C)   Tentative subdivision map contents. A tentative map shall contain the
information listed below, as well as any other information required by the city
and the Map Act:
      (1)   The title of the subdivision and the legal description of the
property.
      (2)   The name and address of the owner of the property being subdivided.
      (3)   The name and address of the surveyor or engineer preparing the map.
      (4)   The approximate acreage.
      (5)   The north point.
      (6)   The scale to which details are drawn; ideally, the scale shall be 1
inch to 50 feet or less, and in no case more than 1 inch to 200 feet.
      (7)   The date on which the map was prepared.
      (8)   Boundary lines and location of adjacent lot lines.
      (9)   The location and name of streets.
      (10)   Width of streets and alleys.
      (11)   The name, location, and width of adjacent streets.
      (12)   Location of existing trees, indicating trunks four inches or
larger in diameter.
      (13)   Dimensions of reservations.
      (14)   Existing structures and adjacent structures, including surrounding
land use and zoning.
      (15)   Watercourses.
      (16)   Land subject to overflow or inundation.
      (17)   Railroads.
      (18)   Lot lines, approximate dimensions, and lot numbers.
      (19)   Approximate radius of curves.
      (20)   Lands and parks to be dedicated for public use.
      (21)   Proposed land uses.
      (22)   Name and tract number of adjoining subdivisions.
      (23)   The name of any geologist or soils engineer who assisted with the
preparation of the tentative map.
   (D)   Water supply assessment. For any residential subdivision(s) seeking
entitlements through the City of Tulare, the subdivider shall submit an
application and any applicable deposit, for a water supply assessment through
the City Engineer requesting written verification from the City of Tulare Water
Division of available water supply to serve the subdivision.
   (E)   Filing. Tentative map applications shall be filed with the Community
Development Director.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.190 Application review.
   (A)   Review for completeness.
      (1)   Initial review. The Community Development Director shall review
each application for completeness and accuracy before it is accepted as being
complete and officially filed.
      (2)   Basis for determination. Community Development Director acceptance
shall be based on full compliance with the provisions of the Map Act and this
chapter.
      (3)   Notification of applicant. Within 30 calendar days of application
acceptance, the Community Development Director shall inform the applicant in
writing that the application is complete and has been accepted for processing
or that the application is incomplete and additional information is required.
      (4)   Submittal of additional information.
         (a)   For an application deemed incomplete, the time used by the
applicant to submit the required additional information shall not be considered
part of the time within which the determination of completeness for resubmitted
materials shall occur.
         (b)   The additional required information shall be submitted in
writing.
   (B)   Referral of application. Within ten days of accepting a complete
application, the Community Development Director shall forward an application
for a tentative map to the City Engineer, the Board of Public Utilities, the
Fire Chief and such other city departments or other public agencies as may be
affected or concerned with the results of the proposed subdivision.
   (C)   Staff report. A staff report for a proposed tentative map shall be
prepared in the following manner.
      (1)   City Engineer evaluation. The City Engineer shall provide the
Community Development Director with a written report to the Planning
Commission, as to whether the application conforms to the provisions of this
title and the Map Act.
      (2)   Community Development Director recommendation. The Community
Development Director shall make a recommendation as to whether the application
should be approved, conditionally approved, or denied.
      (3)   Report. The Community Development Director shall provide a written
report to the Planning Commission, incorporating the City Engineer's report,
affected department(s) considerations and comments, and the Community
Development Director's recommendation.
      (4)   Distribution. The staff report shall be furnished to the applicant
at the same time it is provided to the Planning Commission, but always at least
three days prior to a hearing or action on the map.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.200 Environmental review.
   (A)   CEQA review. After acceptance of a complete application, the Community
Development Director shall review the project for compliance with the
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) to determine whether:
      (1)   The proposed project is not a project as defined by CEQA;
      (2)   The proposed project is exempt consistent with CEQA;
      (3)   A Negative Declaration may be issued;
      (4)   A Mitigated Negative Declaration may be issued; or
      (5)   An Environmental Impact Report (EIR) is required.
   (B)   Compliance with CEQA. These determinations and, where required, the
preparation of appropriate environmental documents, shall be in compliance with
CEQA and any adopted City CEQA Guidelines.
   (C)   Costs. The applicant shall be responsible for payment of all costs
associated with CEQA compliance.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.210 Public notice and hearing.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   A noticed public hearing is required for the approval of a
tentative map.
      (2)   The hearing body shall be the Planning Commission for a tentative
subdivision map and the Parcel Map Committee for a tentative parcel map.
   (B)   Scheduling of the hearing. A public hearing for a tentative map shall
be scheduled after the preliminary finding of exemption from CEQA or
certification of an EIR or Negative Declaration.
   (C)   Noticing. Notice of the public hearing shall be given in compliance
with §
8.24.080 (Public Notice).
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.220 Findings.
   The Planning Commission or Parcel Map Committee may approve an application
for a tentative map only if all of the following findings can be made:
   (A)   Consistency with plans. The proposed subdivision and its design and
improvements are consistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific
plans.
   (B)   Consistency with Zoning Ordinance. The proposed subdivision is
consistent with the Zoning Ordinance and other applicable city ordinances, or a
variance has been granted.
   (C)   Suitability. The site is physically suitable for the proposed type and
density of development.
   (D)   Environmental impacts. The proposed subdivision and its design and
improvements will not cause substantial environmental damage or substantially
and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat.
   (E)   Wastewater. The discharge of waste from the proposed subdivision into
a community sewer system will not result in violation of existing requirements
prescribed by a California Regional Water Quality Control Board Cal. Water Code
Division 7, commencing with § 8000.
   (F)   Water service. The review of the City Engineer indicates that there is
sufficient water to provide for the residents of the subdivision. For
residential subdivisions of more than 500 dwelling units, the subdivision shall
be served by adequate water supply as required by Cal. Gov't Code § 66473.7.
   (G)   Soils and geology. There are no adverse soil or geological conditions,
according to a preliminary soils report or geological hazard report, or the
applicant has demonstrated to the city's satisfaction that any adverse
conditions can be corrected.
   (H)   Public health. The proposed subdivision and its design and
improvements will not cause serious public health problems.
   (I)   Easements. The design of the subdivision and the type of improvements
will not conflict with public easements for access through or the proposed
subdivision. However, the Planning Commission or Parcel Map Committee may grant
an exception to this requirement if equivalent alternative public access is
provided.
   (J)   Environmental documentation. The environmental review documentation is
adequate and conforms to the requirements of CEQA.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.230 Conditions of approval.
   The Planning Commission or Parcel Map Committee may attach conditions to the
approval of a tentative map as needed to ensure:
   (A)   Compliance with the Zoning Ordinance (Title 10), other city
ordinances, the General Plan, any applicable specific plans, and the Map Act.
   (B)   Adequate provision of public services and utilities.
   (C)   Accessibility and connection to existing roads.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.240 Notice to applicant.
   (A)   The Community Development Director shall report the action of the
Planning Commission or Parcel Map Committee in writing to the applicant within
five days after action by the body.
   (B)   If the tentative map was conditionally approved, all such conditions
shall be identified in writing and returned to the applicant.
   (C)   If the tentative map is denied, the Community Development Director
shall identify the reasons in writing to the applicant.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.250 Expiration of maps.
   (A)   Timing of expiration. A tentative map approval expires after 24 months
except where an extension of time is approved as allowed by §
8.24.260 (Extensions).
   (B)   Effect of expiration. The expiration of a tentative map terminates all
subdivision proceedings; no parcel map or final subdivision map may be filed
without first processing a new tentative map.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.260 Extensions.
   (A)   Automatic extensions.
      (1)   Phased final maps. Each time a phased final map is filed before a
tentative map expires, the life of the tentative map is extended for 36 months
from the later of (1) the date of the tentative map's expiration; or (2) the
date of the previously filed final map. To qualify for this extension, the
following two conditions must be met:
         (a)   The subdivider is authorized to file final maps (Map Act, Cal.
Gov't Code § 66456.1); and
         (b)   The subdivider expends a specified minimum amount on public
improvements outside the tentative subdivision map boundary (Map Act, Cal.
Gov't Code § 66452.6(a)(1)).
      (2)   Statutory extensions. The life of a tentative map may be subject to
an additional automatic extensions pursuant to Map Act, Cal . Gov't Code §§
66452.11, 66452.21, 66452.22, 66452.23, and 66452.24.
      (3)   Development moratoria. The life of a tentative map does not include
periods of time during which a development moratorium is in effect after the
approval of the tentative map, up to a maximum of five years. Development
moratoria include a water and/or sewer moratorium, as well as any action by the
city that regulate land use and development.
      (4)   Community Development Director approval. Automatic extensions
allowed by this section shall be approved by the Community Development
Director.
   (B)   Development agreements. The life of a tentative map subject to a
development agreement may be extended for the period of time provided for in
the agreement, but not beyond the duration of the agreement.
   (C)   Discretionary extensions.
      (1)   Maximum extension. A subdivider may request city approval of an
extension to the life of a tentative map up to a maximum of time as authorized
in the Map Act, Cal. Gov't Code § 66452.6.
      (2)   Review authority. The review authority for requested extension
shall be the same as for the original approval (i.e., Parcel Map Committee for
parcel map extension and Planning Commission for tentative subdivision map
extension).
      (3)   Application filing.
         (a)   The subdivider shall file an application for extension at least
30 days before the expiration date and shall state the reasons for requesting
the extension.
         (b)   Once the application for a tentative map is timely filed, the
map is automatically extended for 60 days or until the city acts on the
extension, whichever occurs first.
         (c)   The city may approve an application to extend a tentative map
after the automatic 60-day extension period has expired, so long as the
application itself was filed at least 30 days before the original expiration
date.
      (4)   Application review.
         (a)   The Community Development Director shall review each request for
extension before it is accepted as complete and officially filed.
         (b)   The Community Development Director shall provide a written
report to the Planning Commission or Parcel Map Committee as to whether the
request should be approved, conditionally approved, or denied.
      (5)   Public notice and hearing. The Planning Commission or Parcel Map
Committee shall hold a noticed public hearing to consider the requested
extension in compliance with §
8.24.080 (Public Notice).
      (6)   Findings. The Planning Commission or Parcel Map Committee may
approve an extension only if all of the following findings can be made:
         (a)   The portions of the General Plan, specific plans, the Zoning
Ordinance, and other ordinances of the City of Tulare applicable to the
subdivision have not changed.
         (b)   The character of the site and its surroundings that affect the
applicability of the General Plan, specific plans, the Zoning Ordinance, and
other ordinances of the City of Tulare has not changed.
         (c)   The capacity of public services, utilities, and roads serving
the project has not decreased.
      (7)   Conditions of approval. As a condition of the extension of a
tentative subdivision map, the Planning Commission or Parcel Map Committee may
impose new conditions, or revise existing conditions, on the approved tentative
subdivision map.
   (D   Litigation. A subdivider may request an extension to the life of a
tentative subdivision map during the time a lawsuit against the city is
pending. If approved, the city may extend the life of the map consistent with
the Map Act. The process to request and act on such an extension is as
specified in division (C) (Discretionary extensions) above.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.270 Amendments.
   (A)   Minor revisions. A subdivider may request minor changes or amendments
to an approved tentative parcel map or tentative subdivision map or its
conditions of approval before a parcel or final subdivision map is filed with
the County Recorder.
   (B)   Minor revisions defined. MINOR REVISIONS means changes to an approved
parcel map or tentative subdivisions map that:
      (1)   Does not add any lots, units, or building sites;
      (2)   Is consistent with the intent and spirit of the original map
approval; and
      (3)   Does not conflict with any policies, ordinances, or resolutions of
the city.
   (C)   Other revisions. All proposed changes or amendments other than minor
revisions as defined in this section require the filing and processing of a new
tentative parcel map or tentative subdivision map in compliance with this
chapter.
   (D)   Application. The subdivider shall file an application and filing fee,
in compliance with the Planning Fee Schedule, with the Community Development
Director, using the forms furnished by the Community Development Director,
together with the following additional information:
      (1)   A statement identifying the tentative parcel map or tentative
subdivision map number, the changes requested, the reasons why the changes are
requested, and any facts that justify the changes.
      (2)   Any additional information deemed necessary by the Community
Development Director.
   (E)   Processing of application. Proposed changes shall be processed using
the same procedures as the original parcel map or tentative subdivision map,
except as otherwise provided by this section.
   (F)   Review authority. The review authority for requested changes shall be
the same as for the original approval (i.e., Parcel Map Committee for parcel
map amendments and Planning Commission for tentative subdivision map
amendments).
   (G)   Criteria for approval. The review authority may approve requested
changes if:
      (1)   The findings made to approve the original parcel map or tentative
subdivision map remain valid.
      (2)   The amendments comply with the definition of a minor revisions in
division (B) above.
   (H)   Effect of changes on time limits. Approved changes to a parcel map or
tentative subdivision map or conditions of approval shall not be considered as
approval of a new tentative map, and shall not extend the time limits provided
by §
8.24.260 (Extensions), nor extend any rights in compliance with a vesting
tentative map.
   (I)   Certification of amendments. Minor changes or amendments shall be
indicated on the approved map and certified by the Community Development
Director and City Engineer.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.280 Appeals.
   The action of the Planning Commission or Parcel Map Committee on a tentative
map may be appealed in compliance with §
8.24.080 of this chapter.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.290 Vesting tentative map.
   (A)   Function. The approval of a vesting tentative map confers a vested
right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the city's
ordinance, policies, and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative
map application is deemed complete.
   (B)   When allowed. Whenever this chapter or the Map Act requires that a
tentative map be filed, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed.
   (C)   Procedures; general. The process for application and city review and
action on a vesting tentative map is the same as for a tentative map except as
otherwise provided in this chapter or in the Map Act.
   (D)   Preliminary conference.
      (1)   During the preliminary conference for the vesting tentative map,
city staff shall identify any additional informational items which shall be
filed with the vesting tentative map to enable the city to adequately examine
the vested rights being requested.
      (2)   Following the preliminary conference city staff shall submit to the
applicant a written letter identifying additional requested information.
   (E)   Identification. At the time a vesting tentative subdivision map is
filed it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting
Tentative Subdivision Map" or "Vesting Tentative Parcel Map."
   (F)   Noted inconsistencies. If the vesting tentative map is for a
subdivision whose intended development is inconsistent with the Zoning
Ordinance, this inconsistency shall be noted on the vesting tentative
subdivision map.
   (G)   Duration. The rights conferred by a vesting tentative map last for a
period of two years after the recording of the final subdivision map. This
period may be extended by the city as allowed by Map Act, Cal. Gov't Code §
66498.5(c).
   (H)   Amendments. If the city changes any ordinances, policies, or standards
following the approval of a vesting tentative map, the subdivider may at any
time prior to the map's expiration apply for an amendment to the map to secure
a vested right to proceed with the amended ordinances, policies, or standards.
   (I)   Expiration of rights. The rights conferred by an approved vesting
tentative map shall expire if a final subdivision map or parcel map is not
recorded prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
FINAL SUBDIVISION MAPS AND PARCEL MAPS
§ 8.24.300 Purpose of final subdivision maps and parcel maps.
   Final subdivision maps and parcel maps are the legal means by which property
is subdivided and are required to establish a legal building site. Final
subdivision maps are submitted to the city after approval of a tentative
subdivision map. Parcel maps are submitted to the city after approval of a
tentative parcel map.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.310 Basic requirements.
   (A)   Compliance with Map Act. Final subdivision maps and parcel maps shall
be filed and processed in accordance with the Map Act and this chapter.
   (B)   Consistency. Land shall be subdivided and developed only for purposes
that are consistent with the General Plan, specific plans, the Zoning
Ordinance, and other applicable ordinances of the City of Tulare.
   (C)   Tentative map requirement.
      (1)   The approval of a tentative subdivision map is required prior to
the submission of a final subdivision map.
      (2)   The approval of a tentative parcel map is required prior to the
submission of a parcel map, except when the tentative parcel map requirement is
waived pursuant to §
8.24.150.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.320 Form and contents of final subdivision map and parcel map.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Final subdivision maps and parcel maps shall be based on a survey
and shall conform to Map Act, Cal. Gov't Code § 66434 and any additional
requirements of the City Engineer.
      (2)   Final subdivision maps and parcel maps shall be prepared by or
under the direction of a land surveyor or civil engineer licensed to practice
in the State of California. The California registration number of a registered
civil engineer shall be 33965 or lower, pre-January 1982.
      (3)   The City Engineer may waive a requirement of this section regarding
map contents and accompanying information if the City Engineer finds that the
requirement is not applicable to the subdivision.
   (B)   Map form. The form of final subdivision maps and parcel maps shall
comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   The map shall be legibly drawn, printed, or reproduced by a process
guaranteeing a permanent record in black of tracing cloth or polyester base
film.
      (2)   If ink is used on polyester base film, the ink surface shall be
treated with a suitable substance to assure permanent legibility.
      (3)   The size of each sheet shall be 18 inches by 26 inches.
      (4)   All dimensions shall be in feet and decimals of a foot.
      (5)   Marginal lines shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving
an entirely blank margin of one inch.
      (6)   The exterior boundary of the land included within the subdivision
shall be clearly indicated by distinctive symbols.
      (7)   The scale of the map shall be large enough to show all details
clearly.
      (8)   Each sheet shall be numbered, the relation of one sheet to another
clearly shown, and the total number of sheets shall be shown on each sheet.
      (9)   The tract number or name, scale and north arrow shall be shown on
each sheet.
   (C)   Title sheet. The final subdivision map and parcel map shall include a
title sheet with the following:
      (1)   The tract number or tract name of the subdivision.
      (2)   A general description of all property being subdivided by reference
to subdivision or to sectional surveys. References to subdivisions shall be
worded identically with original records, with references to the books and
pages if the subdivisions are recorded.
      (3)   Affidavits, certificates, acknowledgments, endorsement, acceptance
of dedication and notarial seals required by this chapter or the Map Act.
      (4)   The basis of bearings.
      (5)   A key map showing the proposed subdivision and surrounding
subdivisions and streets located within one-quarter mile radius of the
boundaries of the proposed subdivision.
   (D)   Map specifics. Final subdivision maps and parcel maps shall contain
the following information:
      (1)   All survey and mathematical information and data necessary to
locate or retrace all monuments; interior and exterior boundary lines; bearings
and distances of straight lines; radii, arc lengths, chord bearings and lengths
for all curves; the centers of curves; and ties to existing monuments.
      (2)   The locations and names of streets.
      (3)   The locations and widths of pedestrian ways and bicycle paths.
      (4)   The location, size, and dimensions of public areas.
      (5)   The widths and side lines of all easements. If the easement is not
definitely located and of record, a statement as to the easement shall appear
on the title sheet. Easements shall be clearly labeled and identified and if
already of record, precise reference to the records given. Easements being
dedicated shall be identified in the certificate of dedication.
      (6)   Locations and widths of drainage channels.
      (7)   Location of selected flood lines and proposed flood control works.
      (8)   Locations and widths of railroad rights-of-way.
      (9)   Waivers of rights of access to and from streets and lots and other
parcels of land.
      (10)   Locations and widths of lots to be conveyed to the city.
      (11)   Locations, widths and names of streets, alleys and pedestrian ways
adjacent to the subdivision.
      (12)   The net dimensions of each lot. No ditto marks may be used.
Sufficient data shall be shown to determine readily the bearing and length of
each lot line. On lots containing one acre or more, the final map shall show
net acreage to the nearest one-tenth of an acre.
      (13)   All lots numbered consecutively, commencing with the number "1"
with no omissions or duplications, except for those lots to be conveyed for
public use, which shall be lettered consecutively, commencing with the letter
"A".
      (14)   Suitable primary survey control points including section corners
and monuments existing outside of the proposed subdivision.
      (15)   The location of all permanent monuments within the proposed
subdivision.
      (16)   Ties to and names of adjacent subdivisions.
      (17)   If a soil report has been required, this fact shall be noted on
the map, together with the date of the report and the name of the engineer
making the report.
      (18)   All dimensions shall be in feet and decimals of a foot.
      (19)   If the map includes a designated remainder and the gross area is
five acres or more, that remainder need not be shown on the map but only by
deed reference.
   (E)   Certificates. Map title pages shall contain the following certificates
as required by Map Act, Cal. Gov't Code §§ 66435 - 66443. Forms for
certificates shall be provided by the City Engineer. The certificates may be
combined when approved by the City Engineer.
      (1)   A certificate, signed and acknowledged by all parties having any
record title or interest in the real property subdivided, consenting to the
preparation and recordation of the map.
      (2)   A certificate, signed and acknowledged by all parties having any
record title or interest in the land subdivided, offering for dedication rights
of access to and from prescribed streets, lots, and parcels of land.
      (3)   A certificate of the registered civil engineer or licensed land
surveyor who prepared the survey and the map.
      (4)   A certificate for execution by the Community Development Director.
      (5)   A certificate for execution by the City Engineer and City Surveyor,
if applicable.
      (6)   A certificate for execution by the County Recorder.
      (7)   Certificate of acceptance of dedication.
      (8)   Certificate for the construction of off-site and on-site
improvements.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.330 Procedures for approval.
   (A)   Timing. Final subdivision maps and parcel maps shall be filed with the
City Engineer before the tentative map expires. The expiration of the tentative
map terminates all proceedings, and no final map can be filed without first
processing a new tentative map.
   (B)   Submittal materials. One original tracing and two copies of a final
subdivision map or parcel map shall be submitted to the City Engineer together
with the following materials:
      (1)   All filing fees as required by the city's adopted fee schedule.
      (2)   Title report with Guarantee of Title.
      (3)   Guarantee of title.
      (4)   Improvement agreement consistent with §
8.24.510 (Improvement agreements) if required public improvements are not
completed prior to approval of a final map or deferred.
      (5)   A soil report prepared by a registered civil engineer describing
soil characteristics, soil suitability and shrink-swell characteristics for
roads and buildings, depth of bedrock and other soil limitations.
      (6)   A hydrology report prepared by a registered civil engineer
describing site drainage characteristics, surface runoff, and conditions of
water table, if required.
      (7)   Deeds for existing easements or rights-of-way.
      (8)   Declarations of covenants, conditions, and restrictions and any
other governing documents.
      (9)   Evidence satisfactory to the City Engineer that public utility
companies can adequately serve the area.
      (10)   Traverse sheets showing closures of exterior boundaries of the
subdivision, all interior streets, and lots.
   (C)   City Engineer review.
      (1)   The City Engineer, in consultation with the Community Development
Director, shall review the map for conformance with the approved tentative
subdivision map, conditions of approval, and all applicable requirements of
this chapter and the Map Act.
      (2)   The subdivider shall make corrections and additions until the map
is acceptable to the City Engineer.
   (D)   Final subdivision map approval.
      (1)   The City Council shall conduct a noticed public hearing to consider
approval of a final subdivision map within 45 days of its certification by the
City Engineer.
      (2)   The City Council shall approve the final subdivision map if it
complies with all requirements of this chapter and the Map Act. At the time of
approval, the City Council shall also accept or reject any offers of
dedication.
      (3)   City Council disapproval of a final map shall be accompanied by a
finding that identifies the conditions that have not been met.
   (E)   Final parcel map approval.
      (1)   Final parcel maps that do not include dedications or improvement
agreements may be approved by the City Engineer.
      (2)   The City Engineer may also accept or reject dedications and offers
of dedications that are made by a statement on the map.
   (F)   Condominium, stock cooperatives, and community apartment conversions.
Before the City Council may approve a final map for a condominium, stock
cooperatives, and community apartment conversion, the City Council shall make a
finding that each tenant has received all notices and rights as specified in
Cal. Gov't Code § 66427.1.
   (G)   Recordation. After the city approves a final subdivision map or parcel
map, the City Engineer shall transmit the map to the County Recorder. The final
subdivision map or parcel map becomes valid and goes into effect after it is
filed by the County Recorder.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.340 Phasing of final maps.
   (A)   When permitted. Multiple final subdivision maps relating to an
approved tentative subdivision map may be filed if:
      (1)   The subdivider states in the tentative map application the
subdivided intention to file multiple final maps; or
      (2)   After filing of the tentative map, the Planning Commission and the
subdivider agree to the filing of multiple final maps subject to revised
conditions of approval.
   (B)   Separate subdivision numbers. Each final subdivision map which
constitutes a part of the approved tentative subdivision map shall have a
separate subdivision number.
   (C)   Improvement agreements. The subdivision improvement agreement executed
by the subdivider shall provide for the construction of improvements as
required to ensure a logical and orderly development of the whole subdivision.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.350 Survey and monuments.
   (A)   Survey required.
      (1)   Final subdivision maps and parcel maps shall be based upon a
complete and accurate survey of the land to be subdivided prepared by a
California- registered civil engineer or land surveyor.
      (2)   All found monuments, property lines, centerlines of streets,
alleys, and easements adjoining or within the subdivision shall be tied into
the survey.
   (B)   Monuments required.
      (1)   At the time of making the survey for a final subdivision map or
parcel map, the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient, durable monuments
which conform with Cal. Business and Professions Code § 8771 so that another
engineer or surveyor may readily retrace the survey.
      (2)   Prior to recording final subdivision maps and parcel maps, at least
one exterior boundary line shall be identified by a monument.
      (3)   Additional monuments shall be set as required by the City Engineer.
      (4)   Interior monuments need not be set at the time the map is recorded,
if both the following are true:
         (a)   The engineer or surveyor certifies on the map that the monuments
will be set on or before a specified later date.
         (b)   The applicant furnishes to the City Engineer security
guaranteeing the payment of the cost of setting such monuments.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.360 Corrections and amendments.
   If agreed upon by the City Engineer, a recorded final subdivision map or
parcel map may be amended to correct errors and omissions in the map or to
reflect changed circumstances subsequent to map approval. Amendments may be
requested using an amendment map or a certificate of corrections and shall be
approved by either the City Engineer or the Planning Commission depending on
the nature of the amendments. Amendments shall be reviewed and approved in a
manner consistent with this section and Cal. Gov't Code § 66469 or 66472.1.
   (A)   General. The following applies to requested amendments reviewed by
both the City Engineer and the City Council.
      (1)   Amending maps shall conform to the requirements of §
8.24.320 (Form and contents of final subdivision map and parcel map).
      (2)   Amending maps and certificates of correction shall identify the
corrections made, the names of the property owner affected by the correction or
amendment, and the date of the filing or recording of the original map.
      (3)   Amending maps and certificates of correction shall be prepared and
signed by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor.
      (4)   Requested amendments may not impose any additional burden on the
property owners and may not alter any right, title, or interest in the property
reflected on the recorded map.
   (B)   Amendments allowed with City Engineer approval. The City Engineer may
approve map amendments to correct for errors and omissions as specified in Cal.
Gov't Code § 66469.
      (1)   Within 20 working days of receiving an amending map or certificate,
the City Engineer shall review the submittal for compliance with the
requirements of this section.
      (2)   If the certificate complies, the City Engineer shall endorse a
statement on it of examination and certification, and present it to the County
Recorder for recordation.
      (3)   If an amending map or certificate fails to comply with the
requirements of this section, the City Engineer shall notify the applicant in
writing of the changes needed for compliance,
      (4)   Within ten working days of receiving a revised amending map or
certificate, the City Engineer shall review the revised submittal for
compliance.
      (5)   Once the amending map or certificate is in compliance, the City
Engineer shall present it to the County Recorder for recordation.
   (C)   Amendments requiring City Council approval. Map amendments to reflect
changed circumstances that make map conditions no longer necessary or
appropriate may be approved by the City Council in a manner consistent with
this section and Cal. Gov't Code § 66472.1.
      (1)   Within 30 days of receiving an amending map or certificate, the
City Engineer shall examine the certificate of correction for compliance with
the requirements of this section.
      (2)   After the application is deemed complete and a CEQA determination
has been made, the requested amendments shall be scheduled for review by the
City Council at a noticed public hearing.
      (3)   The City Council may approve the requested amendment if all of the
following findings can be made:
         (a)   There are changes in circumstances that make any or all of the
conditions of the map no longer appropriate or necessary.
         (b)   The modifications do not impose any additional burden on the
property owners.
         (c)   The modifications do not alter any right, title, or interest in
the property
         (d)   The map as modified conforms to Cal. Gov't Code § 66474.
      (4)   The City Council shall confine the hearing to consideration of, and
action on, the proposed modification.
   (D)   Recording.
      (1)   The certified amending map or certificate of correction shall be
filed or recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
      (2)   After accepted and indexed by the County Recorder, the original map
shall be deemed to have been conclusively corrected.
   (E)   Amendment of an approved subdivision.
      (1)   If an applicant wishes to amend a recorded final subdivision map or
parcel map in a manner that affects a property right, the applicant must file a
new tentative map or new parcel map if no tentative map is required, in
compliance with this title.
      (2)   New maps are also required for amendments to the characteristics of
an approved subdivision including but not limited to the number or
configuration of parcels, location of streets or easements, or the nature of
required improvements.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
OTHER SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES
§ 8.24.370 Purpose.
   The purpose of this subchapter on other subdivision procedures is to provide
a process for lot line adjustments, lot mergers, map corrections and
amendments, and reversions to acreage.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.380 Lot line adjustments.
   (A)   Purpose. This section provides a process for the legal adjustment of
property lines that do not create new lots, pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 66412
(d).
   (B)   When allowed. Lot line adjustments processed under this section are
allowed only when:
      (1)   The lot line adjustment involves a maximum of four lots;
      (2)   The land taken from one lot is added to an adjoining lot; and
      (3)   A greater number of lots than originally existed is not created.
   (C)   Review authority.
      (1)   General. The Parcel Map Committee shall take action on all lot line
adjustment applications not requiring a variance.
      (2)   Variance required. The Planning Commission shall take action on all
lot line adjustment applications requiring a variance.
   (D)   Application submittal.
      (1)   Initiation. An applicant may initiate a lot line adjustment by
submitting an application to the Community Development Director.
      (2)   Required form. An application for a lot line adjustment shall be on
a form approved by the Community Development Director.
      (3)   Application contents. The application shall include at a minimum:
         (a)   A legal description of the existing lots.
         (b)   A preliminary title report for the existing lots.
         (c)   A legal description of the resulting adjusted lots.
         (d)   A map of the existing lots, the proposed adjustment, and all
structures located on the lots.
      (4)   Preparer of map. The map of the proposed adjustment shall be
prepared by or under the direction of a land surveyor or civil engineer
licensed to practice in the State of California. The California registration
number of a registered civil engineer shall be 33965 or lower, pre-January
1982.
      (5)   Survey. The Community Development Director or City Engineer may
require a survey of the properties involved if the city finds the survey
necessary to provide an adequate description of the subject properties.
      (6)   Fees. The application shall be subject to the fees as set forth in
the City of Tulare's Planning Fee Schedule.
   (E)   Application review.
      (1)   Initial review. The Community Development Director shall review
each application for completeness and accuracy before it is accepted as being
complete and officially filed.
      (2)   Basis for determination. The Community Development Director
acceptance shall be based on full compliance with the provisions of the Map Act
and this chapter.
      (3)   Notification of applicant. Within 30 calendar days of application
acceptance, the Community Development Director shall inform the applicant in
writing that the application is complete and has been accepted for processing
or that the application is incomplete and additional information is required.
      (4)   Review of complete application. The Community Development Director,
in consultation with the City Engineer, shall review the complete application
to verify compliance with the requirements of this chapter, the Map Act, the
General Plan, specific plans, the Zoning Ordinance, and other applicable
ordinances of the City of Tulare.
   (F)   Meetings and hearing to act on application.
      (1)   Scheduling. Meetings to take action on a proposed lot line
adjustment shall be scheduled after the preliminary finding of exemption from
CEQA or certification of an EIR or Negative Declaration.
      (2)   General. For lot line adjustments not requiring a variance, the
Parcel Map Committee shall meet to review and take action on the application.
No public notice is required.
      (3)   Variance required. For a lot line adjustment requiring a variance,
the application shall be considered by the Planning Commission at a noticed
public hearing in compliance with Tulare Municipal Code,
Chapter 10.16 (Public Hearings) of the Zoning Code.
   (G)   Criteria for decision. The review authority shall approve a lot line
adjustment application if all of the following findings can be made:
      (1)   The proposed lot line adjustment complies with all requirements of
this chapter and the Map Act.
      (2)   The resulting lots are consistent with the General Plan, specific
plans, the Zoning Ordinance, and other applicable ordinances of the City of
Tulare.
   (H)   Conditions of approval. The review authority may attach conditions to
the approval of a lot line adjustment only for the following reasons:
      (1)   To ensure compliance the requirements of the California
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), the General Plan, any applicable specific
plans, the Zoning Ordinance, and other ordinances of the City of Tulare.
      (2)   To require the prepayment of real property taxes prior to the
approval of the lot line adjustment.
      (3)   To facilitate the relocation of existing utilities, infrastructure,
or easements.
   (I)   Appeals. The determination of the review authority may be appealed in
compliance with §
8.24.080 of this chapter.
   (J)   Recordation. The lot line adjustment shall be reflected in a deed,
which shall be filed by the Applicant with the County Recorder.
      (1)   Expiration. A lot line adjustment approval shall be valid for one
year from the date of approval. If the adjustment lots are not recorded within
that one-year period, the approval shall expire.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.390 Voluntary lot mergers.
   (A)   Purpose. This section provides a process for the voluntary merger of
contiguous lots under common ownership in compliance with Cal. Gov't Code §§
66451.10 through 66.451.33. Voluntary mergers may also occur by filing a parcel
map or final subdivision map, which has the effect of creating a new
subdivision.
   (B)   When allowed. Lot mergers processed under this section are allowed
only when one or more of the following apply:
      (1)   The lots are contiguous and held by the same owner.
      (2)   One of the lots does not conform to the minimum lot size standard
specified in the Zoning Ordinance.
      (3)   One of the lots does not contain a structure for which a building
permit is required, or contains only an accessory structure.
      (4)   At least one of the lots meet one or more of the requirements
specified in Cal. Gov't Code § 66451.11(b).
   (C)   Review authority. The Parcel Map Committee shall take action on all
voluntary parcel map merger applications.
   (D)   Application submittal.
      (1)   Initiation. An applicant may initiate a voluntary lot merger by
submitting an application to the Community Development Director.
      (2)   Required form. An application for a lot merger shall be on a form
approved by the Community Development Director.
      (3)   Application contents. The application shall include at a minimum:
         (a)   A legal description of the existing lots.
         (b)   A preliminary title report for the existing lots.
         (c)   A legal description of the resulting merged lots.
         (d)   A map of the existing lots, the proposed merged lots, and all
structures located on the lots.
      (4)   Preparer of map. The map of the proposed merger shall be prepared
by or under the direction of a land surveyor or civil engineer licensed to
practice in the State of California. The California registration number of a
registered civil engineer shall be 33965 or lower, pre-January 1982.
      (5)   Survey. The Community Development Director or City Engineer may
require a survey of the properties involved if the city finds the survey
necessary to provide an adequate description of the subject properties.
      (6)   Fees. The application shall be subject to the fees as set forth in
the City of Tulare's Planning Fee Schedule.
   (E)   Application review.
      (1)   Initial review. The Community Development Director shall review
each application for completeness and accuracy before it is accepted as being
complete and officially filed.
      (2)   Basis for determination. The Community Development Director
acceptance shall be based on full compliance with the provisions of the Map Act
and this chapter.
      (3)   Notification of applicant. Within 30 calendar days of application
acceptance, the Community Development Director shall inform the applicant in
writing that the application is complete and has been accepted for processing
or that the application is incomplete and additional information is required.
      (4)   Review of complete application. The Community Development Director,
in consultation with the City Engineer, shall review the complete application
to verify compliance with the requirements of this title, the Map Act, the
General Plan, specific plans, the Zoning Ordinance, and other applicable
ordinances of the City of Tulare.
   (F)   Public notice and hearing.
      (1)   No public hearing is required for a voluntary lot merger unless
requested by the applicant.
      (2)   If a hearing is requested, notice of the public hearing shall be
given in compliance with §
8.24.070 (Public Notice).
   (G)   Criteria for decision. The Parcel Map Committee shall approve a lot
merger application if all of the following findings can be made:
      (1)   The proposed lot merger complies with all requirements of this
chapter and the Map Act.
      (2)   The resulting lots are consistent with the General Plan, specific
plans, the Zoning Ordinance, and other applicable ordinances of the City of
Tulare.
   (H)   Conditions of approval. The Parcel Map Committee may attach conditions
to the approval of a lot line to ensure compliance the requirements of the
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), the General Plan, any applicable
specific plans, the Zoning Ordinance, and other ordinances of the City of
Tulare.
   (I)   Post-approval procedures.
      (1)   Appeals. The determination of the Parcel Map Committee may be
appealed by the applicant in compliance with §
8.24.080 of this chapter.
      (2)   Recordation. After approval of a lot merger, the applicant shall
file a notice of merger with the County Recorder describing the property and
specifying the names of the record owners.
      (3)   Effective date. Mergers become effective once the notice of merger
is filed for record with the County Recorder.
   (J)   Un-mergers. Any lot merged prior to January 1, 1984 for which there is
no recorded notice of merger is deemed unmerged if:
      (1)   The lot is in compliance with the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code §
66451.30(a).
      (2)   The lot meets none of the conditions listed under Cal. Gov't Code
66451.30(b).
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.400 Mandatory lot mergers.
   The city may require the merger of contiguous lots under single ownership if
one of the lots does not conform to the minimum lot size to allow use or
development in compliance with the Zoning Ordinance and if all of the
requirements specified in Cal. Gov't Code § 66451.11(b) are met. In such a
case, the procedures and requirements for a mandatory lot merger shall be as
specified in Cal. Gov't Code §§ 66451.10 through 66451.33
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.410 Reversion to acreage.
   (A)   Purpose. This section provides a process for eliminating the
subdivision of previously subdivided lots and returning them to their original
configuration.
   (B)   Initiation. Applications may be initiated in one of two ways:
      (1)   Petition by owners of record. Proceedings to revert subdivided
property to acreage may be initiated by petition of all the owners of record of
the property.
      (2)   Petition by City Council resolution. The City Council, at the
request of any person or on its own motion, may by resolution initiate
proceedings to revert property to acreage. The City Council shall direct the
Community Development Director to obtain the necessary information to initiate
and conduct proceedings.
   (C)   Review authority. The Parcel Map Committee shall take action on all
reversions to acreage.
   (D)   Application submittal.
      (1)   Required form. An application for a reversion to acreage shall be
on a form approved by the Community Development Director.
      (2)   Application contents. The application shall include at a minimum:
         (a)   Evidence of title to the real property within the subdivision.
         (b)   A final map which delineates dedications which will not be
vacated and dedications which are a condition to reversion.
         (c)   Other information and materials as necessary to enable the
Parcel Map Committee to make all of the determinations and findings as required
by this section.
      (3)   Preparer of map. The final map for the reversion to acreage shall
be prepared by or under the direction of a land surveyor or civil engineer
licensed to practice in the State of California. The California registration
number of a registered civil engineer shall be 33965 or lower, pre-January
1982.
      (4)   Fees. The application shall be subject to the fees as set forth in
the City of Tulare's Planning Fee Schedule.
      (5)   Contents. The application for reversion to acreage shall include,
at a minimum:
         (a)   Contents meeting the submittal requirements for a tentative map,
as determined necessary by the Community Development Director.
         (b)   Evidence of title to the real property.
         (c)   A final map in the form prescribed by this title which
delineates dedications that will not be vacated and dedications required as a
condition to reversion.
         (d)   Evidence of one of the following:
            1.   The consent of all of the owners of interest in the property.
            2.   None of the improvements required to be made have been made
within two years from the date the final map or parcel map was filed for
record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the
improvements, whichever is later.
            3.   No lots shown on the final subdivision map or parcel map have
been sold within five years from the date such final or parcel map was filed
for record.
      (6)   Fees. The application shall be subject to a fee as set forth in the
City of Tulare's Planning Fee Schedule.
   (E)   Application review.
      (1)   Initial review. The Community Development Director shall review a
reversion to acreage application for completeness and accuracy before it is
accepted as being complete and officially filed.
      (2)   Basis for determination. The Community Development Director
acceptance shall be based on full compliance with the provisions of the Map Act
and this chapter.
      (3)   Notification of applicant. Within 30 calendar days of application
acceptance, the Community Development Director shall inform the applicant in
writing that the application is complete and has been accepted for processing
or that the application is incomplete and additional information is required.
      (4)   Review of complete application. The Community Development Director,
in consultation with the City Engineer, shall review the complete application
to verify compliance with the requirements of this chapter, the Map Act, the
General Plan, specific plans, the Zoning Ordinance, and other applicable
ordinances of the City of Tulare.
   (F)   Public notice and hearing.
      (1)   A noticed public hearing before the Parcel Map Committee is
required for the approval of a reversion to acreage.
      (2)   Notice of the public hearing shall be given in compliance with §
8.24.080 (Public Notice).
      (3)   The public hearing shall be scheduled after the preliminary finding
of exemption from CEQA or certification of an EIR or Negative Declaration.
   (G)   Findings. Subdivided property may be reverted to acreage only if the
Parcel Map Committee finds that:
      (1)   Dedications, or offers of dedication, to be vacated or abandoned by
the reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or prospective public
purposes.
      (2)   All of the following are true:
         (a)   All owners of an interest in the real property within the
subdivision have consented to reversion.
         (b)   None of the improvements required to be made within two years
from the date the final or parcel map was filed for record, or within the time
allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later,
have been completed.
         (c)   No lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within
five years from the date such map was filed for record.
   (H)   Conditions of approval. The Parcel Map Committee shall require the
following as conditions of the reversion:
      (1)   Dedications or offers of dedication necessary for the purposes
specified by city ordinance following reversion.
      (2)   Retention of all previously paid fees, deposits, or securities if
necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter.
   (I)   Post-decision procedures.
      (1)   Appeals. The determination of the Parcel Map Committee may be
appealed in compliance with §
8.24.080 of this chapter.
      (2)   Return of fees. Except as provided in elsewhere in this title, upon
filing of the final map for reversion to acreage with the County Recorder, all
unencumbered or unutilized fees and deposits shall be returned to the
subdivider and all improvement securities shall be released by the City
Engineer.
   (J)   Effective date. A reversions to acreage becomes effective upon the
final map being filed for record by the County Recorder.
   (K)   Alternatives procedures.
      (1)   For subdivisions of four or fewer contiguous lots with a single
owner, a parcel map may be used to revert to acreage in compliance with Cal.
Gov't Code § 66499.20.1.
      (2)   Subdivided lands may be merged and resubdivided without reverting
to acreage by filing a new map over the old map in compliance with Cal. Gov't
Code § 66499.20.1.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 8.24.420 General design standards.
   (A)   Applicability. The design of all subdivisions shall conform to the
standards in this chapter, as well as the following:
      (1)   The latest edition of the Design Guidelines and Standard Drawings
and Specifications in the office of the City Engineer.
      (2)   The applicable portions of the latest edition of the State of
California, Department of Transportation Standard Specifications.
      (3)   The latest edition of the American Public Works Association
Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction.
   (B)   Authority of the City Engineer. The City Engineer is authorized to
approve improvement plans which comply with the adopted standards.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.430 Block design.
   Block design shall conform to the Zoning Ordinance, the General Plan, any
applicable specific plans, and the following:
   (A)   Length. Block length shall not exceed 1,000 feet between street
centerlines, unless the previous adjacent layout or special conditions justify
a variation from this requirement.
   (B)   Width. Block width shall be sufficient to permit the plotting of two
tiers of lots of normal depth, typically at least 250 feet between street
centerlines.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.440 Lot design.
   Lot design shall conform to the Zoning Ordinance, the General Plan, any
applicable specific plans, and the following:
   (A)   Dimensions.
      (1)   Minimum lot dimension. Minimum lot dimensions shall be as specified
in the Zoning Ordinance.
      (2)   Key lots (flag lots). Key lots shall be avoided where possible and
are subject to the approval of the Planning Commission or City Council.
      (3)   Sidelines. Sidelines of all lots shall be at right angles or radial
to the centerline of the street, wherever feasible.
   (B)   Frontage.
      (1)   Each lot of land shall have the minimum lot frontage required by
Zoning Ordinance on a public street, or a private street that provides a
connection to a public street unless otherwise approved by variance.
      (2)   No double frontage lots shall be approved, except where necessary
due to topographical conditions, the existence of a primary thoroughfare,
arterial street, or other unique circumstances.
   (C)   Boundary. No lot shall be divided by a county, city, school district
or any other taxing district boundary line.
   (D)   Easements. To the extent legally permissible, easements shall be
dedicated by the subdivider for public utility use along all lot lines, where
necessary, for the extension of sewer, storm drainage, flood control, water, or
public utility lines.
(Ord. 15-12-2015)
§ 8.24.450 Street design and improvements.
   The location, width, and alignment of streets shall conform to the General
Plan and applicable specific plans, any applicable design guidelines adopted by
the City Council, except where alternative standards are approved by the City
Council. Streets shall be designed for the most advantageous development of the
area in which the subdivision lies and for high connectivity with surrounding
areas. Specific requirements shall be as follows:
   (A)   Street configuration.
      (1)   Width.
         (a)   The width of streets shall be per the latest edition of the
Design Guidelines and Standard Drawings and Specifications in the office of the
City Engineer.
         (b)   Street classifications shall be consistent with the General Plan
Transportation and Circulation Element and any applicable specific plan.
         (c)   Part-width streets shall be permitted only on the periphery of a
subdivision as required by the City Engineer and approved by the Planning
Commission or City Council.
         (d)   Part-width streets shall contain a minimum of two 12-foot-wide
travel lanes, one 8-foot-wide parking lane along project frontage, and a paved
4-foot shoulder.
Table 08-24-1: Minimum Right-of-Way Width
Street Class Minimum Width
Table 08-24-1: Minimum Right-of-Way Width
Street Class            Minimum Width
Local street            58 feet
Cul-de-sac street       54 feet
Collector street        72 feet
Industrial street       72 feet
Minor arterial          96 feet
Major arterial (4 lane) 114 - 122 feet
Major arterial (6 lane) 136 - 144 feet
 
      (2)   Centerlines.
         (a)   Existing or planned streets shall continue the centerlines of
the existing streets as far as practical, in accordance with the City Design
Guidelines and Standard Drawings and Specifications and as approved by the City
Engineer.
         (b)   The centerlines shall be offset at least 150 feet if no
extensions from existing centerlines exist.
      (3)   Connectivity. Street configuration shall provide maximum
connectivity for pedestrians, bicycles, and vehicles within subdivisions.
      (4)   Private streets. New private streets are permitted only if they
meet all of the following requirements:
         (a)   The Planning Commission or City Council determines that a
private street system will not be a substantial detriment to adjoining
properties, or to the properties served by the private street system, and will
not disrupt or prevent the establishment of an orderly circulation system in
the vicinity of the subdivision.
         (b)   All private streets shall comply with the current edition of the
City's Design Guidelines and Standard Drawings and Specifications in the office
of the City Engineer.
         (c)   The subdivider shall establish provisions, approved by the City
Engineer and City Attorney, for a homeowners' association or other organization
to assume responsibility for the maintenance and ownership of private streets,
alleys and their rights-of-way, including any trees and landscaping provided
within the street and alley rights-of-way.
         (d)   The Planning Commission or City Council may require that a
proposed private street be subject to an offer of dedication pursuant to Cal.
Gov't Code § 66477.1.
         (e)   Public utilities within private streets shall require dedication
of public utility easements for their maintenance.
      (5)   Alleys.
         (a)   Alleys shall be at least 20 feet in width.
         (b)   Alleys may be allowed in residential subdivisions when
determined to be desirable by the Planning Commission or City Council for any
of the following reasons:
            1.   The unusual size, shape or topographical character of the
property to be subdivided.
            2.   The relationship to existing or proposed adjacent commercial,
industrial, or high-density residential development or adjacent railroad or
canal rights-of-way.
            3.   The need to maintain continuity of existing alleys where the
property to be subdivided is located immediately between existing residential
blocks where alleys are provided.
            4.   To improve traffic circulation or to reduce possible traffic
conflicts.
            5.   To provide rear access to parking and reduce the visual impact
of garages, and provided that the city will not be required to provide on-going
maintenance.
            6.   To comply with street configuration requirements of this
chapter.
      (6)   Sidewalks.
         (a)   Concrete sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of all
streets.
         (b)   Sidewalk widths shall be in accordance with the General Plan,
applicable specific plan, the latest edition of the city's Design Guidelines
and Standard Drawings and Specifications in the office of the City Engineer, or
as specified by the City Engineer.
      (7)   Cul-de-sacs or stubbed streets.
         (a)   The use of cul-de-sac or stubbed streets in residential
subdivisions shall be minimized so as to meet the requirement for connectivity,
above.
         (b)   Where cul-de-sacs or stubbed streets are used, they shall not
exceed 500 feet in length.
         (c)   Where necessary to give access to or permit a satisfactory
future subdivision of adjoining land, streets shall extend to the boundary of
the property proposed for subdivision and the resulting stubbed streets may be
approved within a dedicated easement.
         (d)   Cul-de-sacs shall be open at their end for pedestrian access
whenever possible.
         (e)   The property line radius at the terminus of the cul-de-sac shall
be designed so as to provide a uniform parkway width.
         (f)   Barriers shall be erected to the City of Tulare specifications,
at the expense of the subdivider, at the ends of all stubbed streets.
         (g)   For stubbed streets more than one lot in length, a temporary
turnaround having a minimum radius of 50 feet measured to the property line is
required until the street is extended.
      (8)   Curved streets. The centerline curve radius on all streets shall
conform to accepted engineering standards of design and shall be subject to the
approval of the City Engineer.
      (9)   Grades. Street grades, longitudinal to the centerline, shall be not
less than 0.2%. Any grade deviation shall be approved by the City Engineer.
      (10)   Intersections. Street intersections shall be as near to right
angles as practicable.
         (a)   Where new streets intersect existing "tee" intersections, the
new centerline shall align as closely as possible with that of the opposite
street.
         (b)   At street intersections the block corners shall be rounded at
the property line with a curve having a radius of not less than 20 feet.
         (c)   A greater curve radius may be required if streets intersect
other than at right angles, or required by the City Engineer.
      (11)   Continuation of existing streets. Streets that are a continuation
of streets on contiguous property shall be aligned to ensure that their
centerlines coincide. In cases where straight continuations are not practical,
such centerlines shall be continued by curves of appropriate radii.
      (12)   Traffic conflicts. When a subdivision lot fronts on any primary
thoroughfare or arterial streets designated in the Transportation and
Circulation Element of the General Plan, one or more of the following methods
may be applied to lessen potential traffic conflicts:
         (a)   Frontage streets.
         (b)   Backing lot treatment.
         (c)   Common driveways.
         (d)   Driveway access onto alleys.
         (e)   Other suitable method approved by the Planning Commission or
City Council.
         (f)   Access limitations.
   (B)   Street lighting.
      (1)   The subdivider shall provide and install street lights on all
streets where required by the city.
      (2)   The lighting system shall be designed and constructed to city and
serving public utility standards.
   (C)   Street names.
      (1)   All new streets, public or private, shall be named consistent with
the City of Tulare Street Naming Policy. The names shall be chosen by the city,
or the subdivider or developer, subject to the review and approval of the City
Street Naming Committee.
      (2)   Street name signs shall be installed at intersections of all
streets and highways, including private streets and at such other locations
designated by the City Engineer.
      (3)   All street name signs shall conform to city standards.
      (4)   Proposed street names shall not duplicate or too closely
approximate phonetically the names of any streets in the city or its immediate
environs. Where streets are functional continuations of existing streets, the
existing street name shall be used.
      (5)   All east-west streets shall be known as "Avenue"; all north-south
streets shall be known as "Street"; all curvilinear or diagonal streets shall
be known as "Drive"; very short or cul-de-sac streets shall be known as
"Court," "Circle," or "Place."
   (D)   Median islands.
      (1)   Raised median islands shall be required in accordance with the
provisions of the General Plan Transportation/Circulation Element, City
Standards, and any applicable specific plans.
      (2)   Median islands shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
city standards.
      (3)   Median islands shall be treated or landscaped and irrigated in
conformance with the General Plan and City landscape standards.
   (E)   Monuments.
      (1)   Placement.
         (a)   Monuments shall generally be placed at the angle point on the
exterior boundary lines of the tract, at the intersections of centerlines of
streets, the beginning and ends of curves, points of reverse curvature, points
of compound curvature along street centerlines, street bulb connections, and
eccentric cul-de-sacs.
         (b)   Monuments may be placed on offset lines.
      (2)   Lot stakes.
         (a)   Lot stakes shall be set six inches below finished grade at
property corners.
         (b)   Lot stakes shall be of iron pipe or rod, one-half inch in
diameter and 18 inches in length.
   (F)   Ownership transfer or dedication.
      (1)   Existing private streets may be transferred or dedicated to the
city only if sufficient funds are placed on deposit or repairs are made to
ensure that the street meets the standards for streets set forth in this
chapter and any other applicable requirements.
      (2)   The city may require the establishment of an assessment district
for street and storm drain maintenance for any existing private street
transferred or dedicated to the city.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 12-21-2021; Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.460 Trees and landscaping.
   This section provides regulations necessary to govern the installation,
maintenance and preservation of trees. All subdivisions shall comply with the
provisions of
Chapter 8.32, Street Trees.
   (A)   Tree removal. Trees protected by
Chapter 8.32  (Street Trees) of the Tulare Municipal Code shall require a
permit prior to removal.
   (B)   Trees in right-of-way.
      (1)   Parkway trees and irrigation systems shall be provided and planted
along all streets and highways.
      (2)   Trees shall be installed in the manner and shall conform to the
size and species specified in the City Street Trees Master Plan and in
compliance with the
Chapter 8.32 (Street Trees) of the Tulare Municipal Code.
      (3)   In full-width sidewalks, tree wells shall be provided as required
by city standards.
   (C)   Street tree and landscaping plan. The subdivider shall provide a
master street tree and landscaping plan as part of the subdivision improvement
plans. The plant species, planting methods, and planting locations shall
conform to the specifications in §
8.32.050 (Street Tree Plan) of the Tulare Municipal Code and are subject to the
approval of the Recreation and Parks Director.
   (D)   Responsibility. The responsibility for planting street trees and
landscaping and financing their maintenance shall be as follows:
      (1)   The subdivider shall complete all street tree and landscape
planting as part of the subdivision improvements.
      (2)   The subdivider shall submit security, subject to the approval of
the City Engineer and City Attorney, for a period of one year following the
completion and acceptance of the street tree and landscaping work in the sum
equal to 10% of their actual construction cost and reasonable attorney fees,
expert fees, and court costs.
      (3)   The subdivider shall agree to pay the city for all costs to
maintain the trees and landscaping in a vigorous and thriving condition for a
period of one year after completion, and as determined by the City Engineer.
      (4)   Maintenance costs shall be provided for by an assessment district
and be based on the amounts specified in the most recent publication of the
Annual Engineers Report for the Levy of Assessments for the Landscaping and
Lighting Districts.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.470 Energy conservation.
   (A)   Passive heating and cooling.
      (1)   The subdivider shall provide for future passive or natural heating
or cooling opportunities in the subdivision, to the extent that this can be
accomplished within a reasonable period of time, given economic, environmental,
social, and technological constraints.
      (2)   Examples of passive or natural heating opportunities in subdivision
design include:
         (a)   Design of lot size and configuration to permit orientation of a
structure in an east-west alignment for southern exposure.
         (b)   Design of lot size and configuration to permit orientation of a
structure to take advantage of shade or prevailing breezes.
   (B)   Local considerations.
      (1)   In providing for future passive or natural heating or cooling
opportunities in the design of a subdivision, consideration shall be given to
local climate, site contours, configuration of the lot to be divided, and other
design and improvement requirements.
      (2)   Provision of passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities
shall not result in reducing allowable densities or the percentage of a lot
that may be occupied by a building or structure under applicable zoning
regulations in effect at the time a tentative subdivision map or tentative
parcel map is filed.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
IMPROVEMENTS
§ 8.24.480 Purpose.
   (A)   This chapter establishes standards for the design, construction, and
installation of public improvements located within subdivisions.
   (B)   These standards are intended to implement the General Plan and protect
the public health, safety, welfare, and aesthetics of the community.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.490 Applicability.
   All subdivisions shall provide improvements required by this chapter and any
additional improvements required by conditions of map approval.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.500 Improvement Requirements.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Conformance. All subdivision improvements shall conform to city
standard plans and specifications. This requirement applies to all public and
private improvements and other public or private infrastructure.
      (2)   Exception. The City Engineer may allow deviations from the City
Design Guidelines and Standard Drawings and Specifications pertaining to
private subdivision improvements and infrastructure, except for private
streets, which must comply with city standards.
      (3)   Filing. Copies of the City Design Guidelines and Standard Drawings
and Specifications shall be maintained on file in the office of the City
Engineer.
      (4)   Phased maps.
         (a)   Whenever a subdivider submits a final map for a fraction or
portion of the area shown for subdivision on a tentative subdivision map or
tentative parcel map, the subdivider shall prepare a master water, sewer, and
storm drain plan for the complete map area.
         (b)   The subdivider shall submit the master water, sewer, and storm
drain plan prepared by a registered civil engineer for review by the City
Engineer at the time of the filing of the first phased map is submitted for any
of the affected area.
      (5)   Submittals. The plans, profiles, and specifications of all
improvements required by the provisions of this section shall be submitted to
and approved by the City Engineer prior to the filing of the final subdivision
map or parcel map.
   (B)   Public access. All streets, including alleys, shall be consistent with
the Tulare Municipal Code, established city policy on street design and
improvements and the following:
      (1)   All subdivided lots shall have access to a public or private
street.
      (2)   The map shall clearly identify streets and alleys, and drainage,
public utilities, and other public easements within the public right-of-way.
      (3)   Streets with no access at the end or at the boundary of subdivision
shall be dedicated unconditionally to the city when required by the city.
   (C)   Street infrastructure. All street infrastructure shall be installed as
required by the City Design Guidelines and Standard Drawings and
Specifications.
      (1)   Street lighting. Street design shall include street lighting.
      (2)   Street trees. Each subdivider shall comply with all applicable
sections of the Street Tree Planting ordinance.
      (3)   Signs. Street name signs, directional signs, warning signs,
markers, barricades, regulatory signs, and other safety devices and public
facilities shall be installed by the subdivider.
   (D)   Pedestrian and bicycle paths. Pedestrian ways and bicycle paths shall
be improved per the City Design Guidelines and Standard Drawings and
Specifications.
      (1)   The subdivider shall install sidewalks along all streets as
required by the City of Tulare Public Improvement Standards.
      (2)   The subdivider shall construct bicycle paths and pedestrian ways
within an approved subdivision in compliance with the Transportation and
Circulation Element of the General Plan and any applicable specific plan.
   (E)   Transit facilities and railroad crossings. The subdivider shall
provide a dedication or an irrevocable offer of dedication for local transit
facilities to serve residents of the subdivision.
      (1)   Improvements. Improvements include but are not limited to bus
turnouts, benches, shelters, landing pads, and other similar items.
      (2)   Railroad crossings.
         (a)   The subdivider shall provide improvements for all railroad
crossings necessary to provide safe access to and circulation within the
subdivision.
         (b)   All expense of railroad crossings shall be paid by the
subdivider.
         (c)   The subdivider shall prepare all necessary documentation for
railroad crossings, which includes, but is not limited to, all documents
necessary for an application to the California Public Utilities Commission
(CPUC) for the establishment and improvement of the crossing.
   (F)   Bridges, culverts, and major thoroughfares.
      (1)   General. Bridges, culverts, and other similar structures shall be
installed for drainage, access, or public safety, as deemed necessary by the
City Engineer.
      (2)   Placement. Bridges, structures, and culverts shall be placed at
grades and shall be of design and size approved by the City Engineer.
   (G)   Storm drainage and flood control.
      (1)   Stormwater runoff from the subdivision shall be collected and
conveyed by a storm drain system consistent with the City Design Guidelines and
Standard Drawings and Specifications and approved by the City Engineer.
      (2)   The storm drain system shall provide for the protection of abutting
and off-site properties that would be adversely affected by any increase in
run-off attributed to the development.
      (3)   The location, size, and type of watercourses or drainage works, and
all drainage of streets and other drainage works between streets, shall comply
with city standards or as required by the City Engineer.
      (4)   The city may require the establishment of an assessment district to
ensure the future maintenance of the storm drain system.
      (5)   Within selected flood lines, the subdivider shall comply with the
requirements of the FEMA National Flood Insurance Program and the City Design
Guidelines and Standard Drawings and Specifications as to the construction of
all flood control works.
   (H)   Irrigation ditches and wells.
      (1)   Existing irrigation ditches within a subdivision shall be
abandoned. Irrigation ditches that cannot be abandoned shall be placed in
conduits or structures covered according to the plans and specifications of the
City Engineer and the Tulare Irrigation District.
      (2)   Any abandoned well or existing well within a proposed subdivision
shall be completely filled and capped as per the City Design Guidelines and
Standard Drawings and Specifications.
   (I)   Grading.
      (1)   Subdivisions shall incorporate grading and erosion control measures
consistent with city standards and approved by the City Engineer.
      (2)   All grading within the city shall employ the best available
management practices, as determined by the City Engineer, to minimize airborne
dust, erosion, sedimentation, and unnecessary grading.
      (3)   Grading and erosion control measures shall prevent sedimentation or
damage to off-site properties.
   (J)   Sewage facilities.
      (1)   All sanitary sewer lines, appurtenances, and service connections
shall be constructed or laid to the lines and grades approved by the City
Engineer.
      (2)   Sanitary sewer lines shall be of the size and design as approved by
the City Engineer.
      (3)   The subdivider shall install an approved sewer connection to the
property line of each lot within the subdivided area and mark an "S" on the
curb face so that it may be easily located.
      (4)   The subdivider shall be required to extend sewer lines at the
subdivider's own expense from the nearest point of connection with existing
city mains.
   (K)   Water supply system.
      (1)   Water mains shall be constructed to serve each lot within the
subdivision and shall be of a size and design as approved by the City Engineer.
      (2)   The subdivider shall be required to extend water mains at the
subdivider's own expense from the nearest point of connection with the existing
city mains.
   (L)   Fire hydrants. The subdivider shall install fire hydrants, with their
associated underground water pipes and appurtenances, of sizes and locations as
required and approved by the City Engineer.
   (M)   Underground utilities and service lines.
      (1)   Utility lines, including but not limited to electric,
communications, street lighting, and cable television, shall be placed
underground.
      (2)   The subdivider is responsible for complying with the requirements
of this section, in accordance with applicable tariffs of the respective
service utilities as filed with the California Public Utilities Commission
(CPUC), and shall make the necessary arrangements with the utility companies
for the installation of the facilities.
      (3)   Appurtenances and associated equipment such as surface-mounted
transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed
ducts in an underground system may be placed above ground with prior city
approval.
      (4)   The above requirements do not apply to utility lines which do not
provide service to the area being subdivided or to electric distribution and
transmission lines with a capacity in excess of 66 kV.
      (5)   Subject to the City's Engineer's approval, where joint use poles
are permitted to remain, all lines using the poles may remain in place. All
service to individual lots shall be placed underground.
      (6)   Underground cables, conduit and conductors, and all materials and
appurtenances necessary, shall be installed according to the City Design
Guidelines and Standard Drawings and Specifications and the serving public
utility company.
   (N)   Off-site improvements. Requirements for construction of off-site
improvements shall be as provided in Cal. Gov't Code § 66462.5.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.510 Improvement Agreements.
   (A)   Purpose. This section establishes requirements for agreements between
the city and a subdivider related to incomplete improvements, deferred
improvements, and reimbursement for installed improvements.
   (B)   Incomplete improvements.
      (1)   Agreement required. When all improvements and conditions of
approval required by this chapter and the California Subdivision Map Act ("Map
Act") are not completed before the approval of the final subdivision map or
parcel map, the subdivider shall enter into an agreement with the city to
complete all of the required improvements and conditions within a specified
time period.
      (2)   Preparation and approval. The agreement shall be prepared by the
City Engineer, approved by the City Attorney, and executed by the subdivider.
      (3)   Agreement contents. The agreement shall be in a form acceptable to
the City Attorney and City Council and subject to a deposit as established by
the City Engineer. It shall include the following:
         (a)   A list of the improvements, dedications, and in-lieu fees,
indicating those improvements that have not been constructed.
         (b)   A schedule for completing the improvements.
         (c)   Estimated cost of improvements.
         (d)   Types of security for faithful performance, labor and material,
payment and maintenance.
         (e)   A requirement that the improvements be completed at the
subdivider's expense.
         (f)   A subordination agreement signed by any person or entity that
has any interest in the subdivision that may arise to a fee interest in the
future.
      (4)   Repair and maintenance. The agreement shall provide the following
information on repair and maintenance on improvements:
         (a)   A statement asserting that the subdivider shall repair any
damage to a public street or any other public property or improvement, which
results from or is incidental to, the construction of improvements by the
subdivider in the subdivision for 12 months following approval of the
agreement.
         (b)   A maintenance security or bond sufficient to insure maintenance
and repairs of all improvements within the subdivision for a period of one year
after acceptance of the improvements by the City Council.
      (5)   Recordance required. The executed improvement agreement shall be
recorded in the office of the County Recorder and shall bind the subdivider's
successors-in-interest.
      (6)   Development agreement. A development agreement may be used in lieu
of, or in addition to, an improvement agreement, provided that it contains the
provisions described in division (B) above at a minimum. Where public
improvements are required, improvement plans, engineering calculations, and
cost estimates shall be submitted and approved by the City Engineer prior to
acceptance of a final subdivision map or parcel map for filing.
   (C)   Deferred improvement agreements. To the extent authorized by the Map
Act, the city may allow subdivision improvements to be deferred until a later
date. When deferment is allowed, the subdivider shall enter a deferred
improvement agreement in a form acceptable to the City Engineer and City
Attorney for installment of all deferred improvements at a specified later
time. Deferred improvement agreements shall comply with the following
requirements:
      (1)   The subdivider shall begin construction of improvements within 90
days of the receipt of the notice to proceed from the city, or as mutually
agreed upon in writing.
      (2)   In the event of a default by the subdivider, the city is authorized
to have construction done and charge the entire cost and expense to the
subdivider, including interest from the date of notice of the cost and expense
until paid. The interest rate shall be consistent with the requirements of
Article 15, Section 1 of the California State Constitution.
      (3)   The city shall record the agreement with the County Recorder and
shall constitute notice to all successors and assignees of title to the real
property of the obligations specified in the agreement.
      (4)   The obligations under the agreement shall constitute a lien in a
sufficient amount necessary to fully reimburse the city, including interest,
subject to foreclosure in the event of a default in payment. The obligations
under the agreement shall run with the property and constitute a lien against
it.
      (5)   In the event of litigation caused by default of the subdivider, the
subdivider agrees to pay all costs involved, including reasonable attorneys'
fees. Those costs shall become a part of the lien against the real property.
      (6)   The construction of deferred improvements shall conform to this
chapter and all applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance in effect at the
time of construction.
   (D)   Reimbursement agreements. Any reimbursement agreement shall be
prepared as described in Chapter 8.60 (Benefit Districts) and Chapter 8.64
(Oversized Construction Reimbursement). The subdivider may request
reimbursements for installed improvements when the following conditions are
met:
      (1)   Improvements are greater than minimum size required.
      (2)   Improvements contain supplemental capacity, length, number, or size
for the benefit of property not within the subdivision.
      (3)   Improvements are to be dedicated to the public.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.520 Improvement security.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   The city shall require a subdivider to furnish a security for the
completion of subdivision improvements consistent with this section and Cal.
Gov't Code §§ 66499 et seq.
      (2)   The security shall be furnished to ensure the faithful performance
of the terms of an improvement agreement, secure of payment for materials and
labor, and provide guarantee and warranty for up to one year after completion
of improvements.
      (3)   All improvement securities shall be reviewed and approved by the
City Engineer and the City Attorney.
   (B)   Form and amount of security.
      (1)   Security may be provided through bonds, cash deposits, instruments
of credit, a lien upon the property, or other form of security acceptable to
the city.
      (2)   The amount of security shall not exceed the amounts specified in
Cal. Gov't Code §§ 66499.3 and 66499.4.
   (C)   Release of improvement security.
      (1)   Performance security.
         (a)   For public improvements to be dedicated to the city, the city
shall release a performance security only after accepting all completed
improvements.
         (b)   For improvements that will not be dedicated to the city, the
city shall release a performance security only after:
            1.   The subdivider submits certification by a registered civil
engineer that the improvements have been constructed in accordance with the
approved plans and specifications; and
            2.   The improvements pass any final inspections required by the
city.
         (c)   Performance and payment security shall be released only upon
receipt of any required maintenance or warranty agreements and security.
         (d)   The city may permit a partial release of performance security as
work progresses consistent with Cal. Gov't Code § 66499.7.
      (2)   Payment bond. Release and reduction of a material and labor
security shall be consistent with Cal. Gov't Code § 66499.7.
      (3)   Warranty security. The city shall release a warranty security upon:
         (a)   Satisfactory completion of the warranty period; and
         (b)   Correction of all deficiencies appearing on the warranty
deficiency list for the subdivision.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 8.24.530 Installation of improvements.
   (A)   Time of completion.
      (1)   General.
         (a)   The subdivider shall complete the improvements for a subdivision
within 12 months from the recording of the final subdivision map or parcel map,
unless an extension up to six months is requested and granted by the City
Engineer.
         (b)   If the subdivider fails to complete the improvements within the
specified time, the city may require the uncompleted improvements to be
completed, and the parties executing the performance security shall be firmly
bound for the payment of all costs.
      (2)   Extensions.
         (a)   The City Engineer may extend the completion date upon written
request by the subdivider and the submittal of adequate evidence to justify the
extension, at least 30 days before expiration of the subdivision improvement
agreement.
         (b)   In passing upon a request for a subdivision improvement
agreement extension, the city may require any of the following:
            1.   Revision of improvement plans to provide for current design
and construction standards when required by the City Engineer.
            2.   Revised improvement construction estimates to reflect current
improvement costs as approved by the City Engineer.
            3.   Increase of improvement securities in compliance with revised
construction estimates.
            4.   Increase of inspection fees to reflect current construction
costs. Inspection fees are not subject to decrease or refund.
            5.   The Council, as a condition of approval to extension, may
impose additional requirements relating to the physical improvements, which
would bring the project into compliance with current ordinances, policies, and
standards.
         (c)   The subdivider shall pay the costs incurred by the city in
processing the extension request and extension agreement.
   (B)   Acceptance.
      (1)   Inspection request. When all subdivision improvements have been
completed, the subdivider shall request inspection in writing, and approval of
all such subdivision improvements by the City Engineer.
      (2)   Recommendation and approval. Upon approval of the inspection, the
City Engineer shall recommend to the City Council acceptance of the public
subdivision improvements subject to the conditions of the executed improvement
agreement, and the subdivider shall be relieved of all obligations for further
maintenance and repairs of the improvements from and after the date or dates in
acceptance and maintenance agreement.
      (3)   Final inspection of private improvements. The City Engineer shall
provide final inspection and acceptance of private subdivision improvements and
other private infrastructure prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy on
any building permit on those lots within the subdivision.
(Ord. 15-12, passed 12-15-2015)
 
CHAPTER 8.26: PARKLAND DEDICATION OR QUIMBY FEE REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL
DEVELOPMENT REQUIRING A TENTATIVE MAP OR PARCEL MAP
Section
   
8.26.010   Purpose and findings.
   
8.26.020   Authority.
   
8.26.030   Definitions.
   
8.26.040   Parkland dedication standard.
   
8.26.050   Parkland dedication and/or in-lieu fee requirements.
   
8.26.060   Formulas for calculating amount of parkland dedication and/or Quimby
fees.
   
8.26.070   Public improvements on dedicated parkland.
   
8.26.080   Criteria for requiring combination of parkland dedication and Quimby
fees.
   
8.26.090   Determination as to requirement for fee or dedication.
   
8.26.100   Procedure for making payment or dedication.
   
8.26.110   Procedure for merchant builders.
   
8.26.120   Time for constructing improvements and amenities.
   
8.26.130   Developments annexed to the city.
   
8.26.140   Exception for commercial and industrial developments.
§ 8.26.010    Purpose and findings.
   (A)   Purpose. This chapter is adopted to implement the provisions of the
Quimby Act, which authorize a city to require the dedication of land for park
or recreation facilities, or payment of fees in-lieu thereof (or a combination
of both), incident to and as a condition of approval for a tentative map or
parcel map.
      (1)   The park and recreational facilities for which dedication of land
and/or payment of a fee in-lieu thereof is required by this chapter are in
accordance with the Open Space and Conservation Element of the General Plan of
the city and shall supersede any previously adopted plan to the extent of any
inconsistency.
      (2)   The land, fees, or combination thereof that are dedicated pursuant
to this chapter are to be used only for the purposes of developing new or
rehabilitating existing pocket, neighborhood, community, or regional park or
recreational facilities to serve the subdivision that prompts the dedication,
and the amount and location of land to be dedicated or the fees to be paid will
bear a reasonable relationship to the use of the park and recreational
facilities by future inhabitants of the subdivisions subject to this chapter.
   (B)   Findings. The amount of existing park area in the city is currently
below four acres of park area per 1,000 city residents. The enactment of this
chapter prevents new residential development from significantly further
reducing the quality and availability of public services provided to residents
of the city by requiring new residential development to contribute to the cost
of expanding the availability of park and recreational facilities and amenities
in the city.
(Ord. 2023-07, passed 8-15-2023)
§ 8.26.020    Authority.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the Quimby Act.
(Ord. 2023-07, passed 8-15-2023)
§ 8.26.030    Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the terms and words identified below shall
be defined as follows:
   AVERAGE NUMBER OF PERSONS PER DWELLING UNIT. Average number of persons per
household in the city, based on the most recent data available in the form of
the federal census. The most recent AVERAGE NUMBER OF PERSONS PER DWELLING UNIT
may be reflected in a City Council resolution as determined by the Director,
Community and Economic Development.
   CITY. The City of Tulare.
   DWELLING UNIT. Includes each single-family dwelling, multifamily dwelling,
or each mobile home space designed to contain a mobile home trailer on a semi
permanent or permanent basis. Single-family residential units, multifamily
residential units, and mobile home units shall be defined according to the
latest decennial U.S. or State of California Department of Finance census.
   LAND ACQUISITION COST PER ACRE. The estimated per acre value of vacant
residential land costs in the city as determined by the City Council based upon
receipt sale records or appraisal. The most recent LAND ACQUISITION COST PER
ACRE may be reflected in a City Council resolution. If the subdivider objects
to such a valuation, the subdivider, at its own expense, may obtain an
appraisal of the property by a qualified appraiser approved by the city, whose
appraisal may be accepted or rejected by the City Community and Economic
Development Director.
   MERCHANT BUILDER. An individual, company, partnership, corporation, or
similar entity that obtains land previously subdivided for the purpose of
constructing new residential units upon the subdivided land.
   NUMBER OF DWELLING UNITS. The number of dwelling units as determined by the
city based upon the number of units allowed pursuant to the standards of the
city’s Zoning Code or as otherwise specified by the city on the property
included in the subdivision at the time the tentative map or parcel map is
filed for approval.
   PARK DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT. An agreement entered pursuant to §
8.26.130 of this chapter.
   QUIMBY ACT. Cal. Gov’t Code § 66477, as amended from time to time, or any
successor statute.
   QUIMBY FEES. Fees paid as a condition to the approval of a tentative map or
parcel map pursuant to this chapter and the Quimby Act in lieu of dedicating
land to the city for park and recreational purposes.
   RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. Any development that creates new or increases the
number of existing dwelling units on a property.
   SUBDIVISION MAP ACT. Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 66410 et seq., as amended from time
to time, or any successor statute.
(Ord. 2023-07, passed 8-15-2023)
§ 8.26.040   Parkland dedication standard.
   All standards for park dedication and improvement shall comply with the
Quimby Act, the California Subdivision Map Act, the Parks Master Plan, and the
Open Space and Conservation Element of the city’s General Plan. The dedication
and improvement of land and/or Quimby fees for park or recreational purposes
shall be at the rate of either three or four acres of park area (and/or Quimby
fees) per 1,000 subdivision residents, with this amount determined by the
existing service level at the time of application for a tentative map or parcel
map. If the existing service level of park area at the time of subdivision
application exceeds four acres per 1,000 residents, the rate will be four acres
per 1,000 residents. However, the rate will be three acres per 1,000 residents
if the existing service level of developed park area at the time of subdivision
application is less than four acres per 1,000 residents.
(Ord. 2023-07, passed 8-15-2023)
§ 8.26.050   Parkland dedication and/or in-lieu fee requirements.
   As a condition of approval of any tentative map or parcel map, the city
shall require the dedication of land and/or improvements/amenities, or payment
of a fee in-lieu thereof, or a combination of both, at the option of the city,
for park or recreational purposes to serve the future residents of the
subdivided property.
   (A)   This requirement shall apply to all residential subdivisions, except
those exempted by the Quimby Act.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (C), below, if a proposed subdivision
contains less than 50 parcels, the subdivider shall not be required to dedicate
any land for park and recreational purposes without his or her consent but may
instead choose to pay a fee equivalent to the rate of four acres per 1,000
residents, in accordance with §
8.26.060(B), below.
   (C)   When a condominium, stock cooperative, or community apartment project
exceeds 50 dwelling units, dedication of land may be required notwithstanding
that the number of parcels may be less than 50. Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code §
66477(e), these kinds of developments shall be eligible to receive a credit, as
determined by the legislative body, against the amount of land required to be
dedicated, or the amount of the fee imposed, pursuant to this section, for the
value of private open space within the development which is usable for active
recreational uses.
   (D)   Notwithstanding the requirement in this section that fees be used to
serve the subdivision for which the fees were paid, fees may be used for the
purpose of developing new or rehabilitating existing park or recreational
facilities in a neighborhood other than the neighborhood in which the
subdivision for which fees were paid as a condition to the approval of a
tentative map or parcel map is located, if all of the following conditions are
met:
      (1)   The neighborhood in which the fees are to be expended has fewer
than three acres of park area per 1,000 members of the neighborhood population.
      (2)   The neighborhood in which the subdivision for which the fees were
paid has a park area per 1,000 members of the neighborhood population that
meets or exceeds the ratio calculated pursuant to this chapter.
      (3)   The City Council holds a public hearing before using the fees
pursuant to this chapter, and at that public hearing, makes a finding supported
by evidence that it is reasonably foreseeable that future inhabitants of the
subdivision for which the fee is imposed will use the proposed park and
recreational facilities in the alternative neighborhood where the fees are
spent.
      (4)   The fees shall be used within the geographic boundaries of the
city, so long as a reasonable relationship can be demonstrated between the
location of the use of the fees and the subdivision for which the fees were
paid.
      (5)   The fees shall be used in a manner consistent with the Parks Master
Plan and the Open Space and Conservation Element of the city’s General Plan, as
well as any policy, standard, principle or guideline adopted in accordance
therewith.
(Ord. 2023-07, passed 8-15-2023)
§ 8.26.060   Formulas for calculating amount of parkland dedication and/or
Quimby fees.
   (A)   Formula for calculating the “dedication of land”. Where the
requirements of this chapter are solely complied with on the basis of providing
parkland, the minimum amount of land measured in acres to be provided shall be
based on the existing level of service for developed park area per 1,000
residents as stipulated in §
8.26.040 of this chapter:
 
Number of Dwelling   Average Number of   .003 (3 Acres per   Number of Acres to
Units              X Persons per       X 1,000 Residents)  = be Dedicated
                     Dwelling Unit
OR                                                       
Number of Dwelling   Average Number of   .004 (4 Acres per   Number of Acres to
Units              X Persons per       X 1,000 Residents)  = be Dedicated
                     Dwelling Unit
 
   Whenever land is dedicated pursuant to this chapter, the subdivider shall
provide the public improvements, as set forth in §
8.26.070 of this chapter.
   (B)   Formula for calculating the fee amount “Quimby fees”. Where the
requirements of this chapter are solely complied with on the basis of the
payment of in-lieu fees, such fees shall be calculated, at either of the two
ratios stipulated in §
8.26.040 of this chapter, on a per residential unit basis, as follows:
 
Number of        Average Number   .003 (3 Acres   Land            Total Quimby
Dwelling Units X of Persons per X per 1,000     X Acquisition   = Fee
                 Dwelling Unit    Residents)      Cost per Acre
OR                                                          
Number of        Average Number   .004 (4 Acres   Land            Total Quimby
Dwelling Units X of Persons per X per 1,000     X Acquisition   = Fee
                 Dwelling Unit    Residents)      Cost per Acre
 
   The Land Acquisition Cost per Acre amount of the Quimby fees may be adopted
by resolution of the City Council. The Council may adopt and/or revise the fee
amount as often as on an annual basis.
   (C)   Formula for calculating a combination of dedicated land and Quimby
fees. Where the requirements of this chapter are complied with by both the
provision of parkland and payment of Quimby fees, the amount of the Quimby fees
shall be computed by determining the required amount of parkland in accordance
with the provisions of division (A) and subtracting the amount of parkland
actually provided. The remainder shall be converted to a fee in accordance with
the provisions of division (B).
(Ord. 2023-07, passed 8-15-2023)
§ 8.26.070    Public improvements on dedicated parkland.
   The subdivider shall provide utility and full street improvements consistent
with the Circulation Element of the adopted General Plan and the city’s
subdivision regulations in
Chapter 8.24 of the Tulare Municipal Code, including but not limited to curbs,
gutters, sidewalks, street paving, sewer, water and drainage improvements. The
full cost of such improvements shall be borne by the subdivider and shall not
be deducted from or credited against any fees or other amounts due the city
under this chapter or otherwise. The land to be dedicated and improvements to
be made pursuant to this chapter shall be approved by the city.
(Ord. 2023-07, passed 8-15-2023)
§ 8.26.080    Criteria for requiring combination of parkland dedication and
Quimby fees.
   For subdivisions consisting of 50 or more units, the subdivider shall have
the option to either dedicate land or pay Quimby fees or a combination of both
on the following basis:
   (A)   General Plan requirements. When only a portion of the subdivision is
proposed for a future park site(s) in conformance with this chapter, such
portion shall be dedicated to the city for park and recreational purposes
pursuant to the dedication standards set forth in §
8.26.040, and any remaining parkland dedication requirements shall be satisfied
through Quimby fees computed pursuant to §§
8.26.060(A) and (B). If no parkland dedication is provided, the subdivider
shall pay Quimby fees for the full three or four acres per 1,000 residents
computed pursuant to §
8.26.060(C).
   (B)   Remainder dedications. When a major portion of a park or recreational
site/facility serving the proposed subdivision has already been acquired by the
city, and only a portion of additional land is needed from the subdivision to
complete the site/facility, such remaining portion shall be dedicated to the
city pursuant to the standards set forth in §
8.26.040, and any remaining parkland dedication requirements shall be satisfied
through Quimby fees computed pursuant to §
8.26.060(C). Such fees may be used for either the improvement of the existing
park and recreational site/facility or for the improvement of other park and
recreational sites/facilities serving the subdivision at the sole discretion of
the city.
(Ord. 2023-07, passed 8-15-2023)
§ 8.26.090    Determination as to requirement for fee or dedication.
   (A)   Whether the city accepts land dedication or elects to require payment
of Quimby fees, or a combination of both, shall be determined by consideration
of the following:
      (1)   Reasonable relationship. That the amount and location of land to be
dedicated or the fees to be paid shall bear a reasonable relationship to the
use of the park and recreational facilities by the future inhabitants of the
subdivision.
      (2)   Compatibility. Compatibility of dedication with the Open Space and
Conservation Element of the city’s General Plan and any policy, standard,
principle or guideline adopted in accordance therewith.
      (3)   Physical characteristics. Topography, geology, access, and location
of land in the development available for dedication.
      (4)   General suitability. Suitability for patrol, supervision, and
maintenance.
      (5)   Geographic dimensions. Size and shape of the development and land
available for dedication.
      (6)   Feasibility. The feasibility of dedication.
      (7)   Alternative and additional parkland in the vicinity. Availability
of previously acquired park property.
   (B)   The determination of the Planning Commission upon the recommendation
of the Community and Economic Development Director as to whether land shall be
dedicated or whether Quimby fees shall be paid, or a combination of both, shall
be based upon the above factors in the totality of the circumstances, and shall
be final and conclusive, unless timely appealed to the City Council pursuant to
§
10.20.020 “Appeal” of the Tulare Municipal Code.
(Ord. 2023-07, passed 8-15-2023)
§ 8.26.100    Procedure for making payment or dedication.
   (A)   Application by subdivider. At the time of filing a tentative map or
parcel map application, the subdivider shall, as part of such filing, state in
writing whether it desires to dedicate property for park and recreational
purposes, or to pay Quimby fees, or a combination of both. If the subdivider
desires to dedicate land for this purpose, the area shall be designated on the
tentative tract map or parcel map as submitted.
   (B)   Action of city. At the time of the tentative tract map or parcel map
approval and in accordance with the criteria set forth in this chapter, the
Quimby Act, the California Subdivision Map Act, the Open Space and Conservation
Element of the city’s General Plan and any policy, standard, principle or
guideline adopted in accordance therewith, the City Community and Economic
Development Director shall determine as part of such approval, whether to
require a dedication of the land within the subdivision, payment of Quimby
fees, or a combination of both, based upon the totality of circumstances. The
conditions of approval of any applicable tentative map or a parcel map shall
require the dedication of land, the payment of Quimby fees, or a combination of
both for park and recreational purposes to serve the future inhabitants of the
subdivision. If the land is to be dedicated, the proposed dedication shall be
shown on the approved tentative map or parcel map.
   (C)   Payment of in-lieu fees. Prior to the issuance of a building permit,
the Community and Economic Development Director or his/her designee shall
determine the amount of land to be dedicated and/or Quimby fees to be paid by
the subdivider. Any fee required under this chapter shall be paid directly to
the city prior to the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy of any
dwelling unit in the subdivision. The fees shall be placed in a specially
designated fund and are used only for the acquisition and development of new,
or improvement and/or rehabilitation of existing, park and recreational
facilities. Any fees collected under this chapter shall be appropriated by the
City Council, but need not be spent, within five years after the payment of
such fees or the issuance of building permits on one half of the lots created
by the subdivision, whichever occurs later. If such fees are not appropriated,
they shall be distributed and paid to the then record owners of the subdivision
in the same proportion that the size of their lot bears to the total area of
all lots within the subdivision.
   (D)   Dedication of parkland. A dedication of parkland shall be made prior
to the recordation of any applicable tentative map or parcel map. Where
dedication is offered and accepted, such dedication shall be accomplished in
accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. All land dedicated
to the city shall be conveyed in fee simple to the city free and clear of all
encumbrances except those which will not interfere with the use of the property
for its intended purposes and which the city agrees to accept.
   (E)   Improvement of parkland. The subdivider may choose to improve the
dedicated parkland with amenities such as grass, trees, playground equipment
and other improvements typical of a city park. If such improvements are made to
the dedicated parkland, the cost of said improvements shall be estimated and
applied as a credit against the parkland or the in-lieu fee identified as
required per the calculation identified in §
8.26.060. The cost of said improvements and associated credit shall be
determined in a manner meeting the approval of the Community Services Director.
(Ord. 2023-07, passed 8-15-2023)
§ 8.26.110   Procedure for merchant builders.
   (A)   When a proposed subdivision is a part of a major land development
project, and the owner of such land proposes to permit development by one or
more merchant builders, provisions for park and recreational facilities shall
be made by the major landowner through the adoption of a comprehensive plan and
not by the individual merchant builders. Where park and recreation facilities
have been dedicated by requirements of the city in excess of this chapter’s
requirements, the major landowner may, at the discretion of the city, be given
100% credit for the excess on subsequent projects within the adopted
comprehensive plan.
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, a MAJOR LAND DEVELOPMENT PROJECT
shall be a land development project exceeding 40 acres in size.
   (C)   Where development is proposed for construction in increments, a
schedule for providing the park and recreation facilities shall be submitted
for consideration by the city. All park facilities shall be developed
consistent with any schedule approved by the city.
(Ord. 2023-07, passed 8-15-2023)
§ 8.26.120   Time for constructing improvements and amenities.
   (A)   A subdivider and the city may enter into a park development agreement
that provides a schedule for the initiation, planning, design, construction,
installation, completion and, where appropriate, dedication of any park and
recreational improvements and/or amenities required by this chapter. A park
development agreement shall:
      (1)   Clearly state the intent of the agreement is to establish a means
to assure that park and recreational improvements and/or amenities are provided
to the residents of the subdivision as required by this chapter;
      (2)   Specify the timing of the development of these improvements and/or
amenities in relation to the development of residential dwelling units;
      (3)   Provide sufficient surety to guarantee that the improvements and/or
amenities are completed and ready for public use within the timeframes
specified in the agreement; and
      (4)   Provide that failure to comply with any deadline for the
development of the improvements and/or amenities shall halt the issuance of
building permits and suspension of all building inspections for residential
dwelling units within the subdivision.
   (B)   In the absence of a park development agreement, all park and
recreational improvements and/or amenities required by this chapter shall be
constructed, installed, completed and ready for public use prior to the earlier
of:
      (1)   The issuance of the first certificate of occupancy for any
residential dwelling unit within the subdivision; or
      (2)   The final building inspections for any residential dwelling unit
within the subdivision.
(Ord. 2023-07, passed 8-15-2023)
§ 8.26.130   Developments annexed to the city.
   Where a proposed development lies within an area not currently within the
city’s corporate boundaries but intended to be annexed into the city by the
subdivider, the subdivider shall dedicate land, pay Quimby fees, or a
combination of both, in accordance with the city’s General Plan and in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and the General Plan shall be
amended within 180 days following approval of the annexation.
(Ord. 2023-07, passed 8-15-2023)
§ 8.26.140    Exception for commercial and industrial developments.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any industrial or
commercial development.
(Ord. 2023-07, passed 8-15-2023)
CHAPTER 8.28: [REPEALED BY ORD. 15-12]
CHAPTER 8.32: STREET TREES
Section
   
8.32.010   Purposes and objectives.
   
8.32.020   Definitions.
   
8.32.030   Reserved.
   
8.32.040   Responsibilities of the Director.
   
8.32.050   Street tree plan.
   
8.32.060   Street tree and plant maintenance.
   
8.32.070   Protection of street trees.
   
8.32.080   Duty to trim trees.
   
8.32.090   Location and spacing standards.
   
8.32.100   Unauthorized planting.
   
8.32.110   Criteria for granting tree removal permits.
   
8.32.120   Standards and specifications.
   
8.32.130   Preservation of desirable trees— Heritage trees.
   
8.32.140   Tree preservation in construction areas.
   
8.32.150   Tree well installation, planting and maintenance.
   
8.32.160   Root barriers.
   
8.32.170   Tree planting requirements for new residential construction.
   
8.32.180   New residential planting—Fee and maintenance requirements.
   
8.32.190   Departmental cooperation.
   
8.32.200   Liability.
   
8.32.210   Appeals.
   
8.32.220   Penalties.
§ 8.32.010   Purposes and objectives.
   It is hereby declared that in order to promote the best interests of the
city and its citizens, there be established a comprehensive program for the
installation, maintenance and preservation of street trees and selected other
trees within the city. This chapter provides regulations necessary to govern
the installation, maintenance and preservation of street trees as a means to
achieve the following objectives:
   (A)   To enhance property values;
   (B)   To reduce street noise, glare and heat;
   (C)   To purify the air by reducing dust and other air contaminants;
   (D)   To provide shade and wind protection;
   (E)   To screen unsightly objects and scenes;
   (F)   To keep the city’s streets free from dead, unhealthy and hazardous
trees;
   (G)   To beautify and provide a pleasing, restful, healthful environment;
and
   (H)   To preserve trees with historic or unusual value for the inhabitants
of this city.
(1995 Code, § 8.32.010) (Ord. 08-12, passed 7-15-2008)
§ 8.32.020   Definitions.
   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the words and phrases used in
this chapter shall have the same meaning as described thereto, unless from the
context hereof it clearly appears that a different meaning is intended.
   CROWN DRIPLINE. A vertical line extending from the outermost branch tips of
the tree to the ground.
   DEPARTMENT. The Parks, Library and Recreation Department.
   DIRECTOR. The Community Development Director or designee.
   MAINTAIN or MAINTENANCE. When used in reference to street trees shall mean
and include pruning, spraying, mulching, watering, fertilizing, cultivating,
supporting, treating for disease or injury and promoting the health or beauty
of street trees.
   MASTER TREE LIST. Those trees as specified in the Street Tree Plan that are
permitted along parkways and planting easements.
   PARKWAY or PLANTING STRIP. That portion of public property available for
planting between the street curb, or curb alignment, and the abutting private
property line.
   PERSON. Individuals, associations, corporations, public agencies, joint
ventures, partnerships, independent contractors and other agents and employees
thereof.
   PLANTING EASEMENT. That portion of land made available as a public easement
for the purpose of planting and maintaining city street trees.
   PRESERVATION. Acts to promote the life, growth, health or beauty of trees,
shrubs or plants, including, but not limited to pruning, trimming, root
pruning, spraying, mulching, watering, fertilizing, cultivating, supporting and
treating for disease or injury.
   STREET TREE. Any tree whose center of trunk at ground level is within the
parkway or planting easement.
   STREET TREE PLAN. A comprehensive plan of policies and objectives regulating
street trees in the city formulated by the Parks and Recreation Commission.
   TREE WELL. A cavity of specific shape, construction and dimension per
standard plans and specifications of the City and designed to facilitate the
planting and maintenance of a street tree.
(1995 Code, § 8.32.020) (Ord. 14-05, passed 10-21-2014; Ord. 08-12, passed 7-
15-2008; Ord. 03-1915, passed - -2003)
§ 8.32.030   Reserved.
§ 8.32.040   Responsibilities of the Director.
   The Director, under the general supervision of the City Manager, shall have
the authority and responsibility to do the following:
   (A)   Carry out the provisions of this chapter;
   (B)   Remove and/or replace, or cause the removal and/or replacement of, any
tree located within a parkway or planting strip, in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter;
   (C)   Enter in or upon any part of a right-of-way or easement or adjacent
property as is reasonably necessary for the purpose of planting and maintaining
street trees; and
   (D)   Oversee the planting, maintenance and removal of street trees in any
public way or place.
(1995 Code, § 8.32.040) (Ord. 08-12, passed 7-15-2008)
§ 8.32.050   Street tree plan.
   The Director is authorized to formulate a street tree plan. Such plan shall
consist of regulations pertaining to the installation, maintenance,
preservation and removal of street trees. Such plan shall include a master tree
list noting the trees permissible in the parkways of the city. The Director is
authorized to amend, modify and add to such plan, from time to time, upon
recommendation of the Parks and Recreation Commission.
(1995 Code, § 8.32.050) (Ord. 14-05, passed 10-21-2014; Ord. 08-12, passed 7-
15-2008)
§ 8.32.060   Street tree and plant maintenance.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of all owners, agents, tenants or other persons
having possession or control of real property within the city to properly
cultivate, care for, and maintain all street trees, shrubs and plants, planted
or set out within any parkway, planting strip or planting easement located
immediately adjacent to the real property under their possession or control.
   (B)   All damage to any owner’s real property, including any improvements
thereon, or to sewer laterals or water service lines or meters, by any parkway
tree shall be the responsibility of the property owner having the duty to
cultivate, care for and maintain the parkway tree as described above.
   (C)   The Director shall have the authority to require a property owner to
take such action as is necessary to control insects, parasites, fungus and
other injurious pests or plant material that would cause serious injury to
street trees or other plant material. The Director shall notify the property
owner in writing describing the conditions and stating the control necessary to
correct the condition establishing a reasonable time in which the corrective
step(s) should be taken.
   (D)   The Director shall have the authority to require property owners to
remove any privately planted tree not in accordance with the street tree plan,
or remove or prune any privately planted tree, shrub, vine or other plant
material if it is determined by the Director to be seriously interfering with
the growth and health of any street tree.
(1995 Code, §8.32.060) (Ord. 08-12, passed 7-15-2008)
§ 8.32.070   Protection of street trees.
   (A)   No person shall remove or cut any street trees in the planting strip
or planting easement without first obtaining permission from the Director.
   (B)   No person shall interfere or cause any person to interfere with any
work being done under the provisions of this chapter by any employee of the
city, or by any person or firm doing work for the city or under a permit
granted by the city.
   (C)   No person shall interfere or cause anyone to interfere with or damage
any overhead wires or underground pipes or conduits while removing, trimming,
pruning, spraying or cutting any street trees in a right-of-way or easement.
The owner of such facilities shall be notified when the work may interfere with
or cause damage to the facilities. The cost of repair of the damage to overhead
wires, underground pipes or conduits shall be the responsibility of the person,
firm or corporation doing or causing the work to be done. The city and its
officers and employees shall be exempt from the provisions of this division.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to injure or destroy by any means
any tree planted or maintained by the city in rights-of-way or easements
including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Constructing a concrete sidewalk or driveway or otherwise filling
up the ground within five feet of the outside of the trunk at ground level of
any street tree so as to shut off air or water from its roots;
      (2)   Piling building materials, equipment or other substances on non-
paved areas within the “crown dripline” of any street tree;
      (3)   Pouring any deleterious material on any tree or on the ground
within the crown dripline of any street tree;
      (4)   Posting any sign, poster, notice or other object on any tree, tree
stake or guard or fastening any guide wire, cable, rope, nails, screws or other
device to any tree, tree stake or guard;
      (5)   Causing or encouraging any fire or burning within the crown
dripline of any street tree;
      (6)   Using any mechanical weeding device against a street tree;
      (7)   Constructing retaining walls, fences or other similar improvements
which prohibit the planting or maintaining of street trees;
      (8)   Operating construction equipment in such a manner as to cause it to
contact the street tree; and
      (9)   Disrupting the anchorage of the tree or changing the grade within
the crown dripline of any tree.
   (E)   No person shall plant a tree or other plant material in a right-of-way
or easement other than lawn or other similar planting materials, unless
approved by the Director.
(1995 Code, § 8.32.070) (Ord. 08-12, passed 7-15-2008)
§ 8.32.080   Duty to trim trees.
   (A)   Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, it
is hereby the duty of the adjacent property owner to keep that portion of every
tree extending over any street or alley trimmed to a height of at least 14
feet, and that portion of every tree extending over the sidewalk shall be
trimmed to a height of at least ten feet. The sidewalk area beneath any tree,
and tree canopy, is to be kept free of all debris.
   (B)   In addition, for properties located on corners, it shall be the duty
of the property owner to keep trees and shrubs trimmed back to provide a clear
line of sight for drivers, bicyclists and pedestrians.
(1995 Code, § 8.32.080) (Ord. 08-12, passed 7-15-2008)
§ 8.32.090   Location and spacing standards.
   The location and spacing of street trees is subject to the approval of the
Director.
   (A)   In the interest of public safety, trees shall be located not less
than:
      (1)   Thirty feet from the end of the curb return at any intersection;
      (2)   Ten feet from any fire hydrant;
      (3)   Ten feet from the edge of any drive approach; and
      (4)   Five feet from any point on the ground which is the surface of any
trench lines for underground utilities servicing private or public property.
   (B)   Spacing standards in residential property shall be as follows:
      (1)   Fifty feet for trees with an eventual height of 40 feet or more;
      (2)   Thirty-five feet for trees with an eventual height of 35 feet or
less;
      (3)   Twenty-five feet from light standards for trees with an eventual
height of 40 feet or more; and
      (4)   Eighteen feet from light standards for trees with an eventual
height of 35 feet or less.
(1995 Code, § 8.32.090) (Ord. 08-12, passed 7-15-2008)
§ 8.32.100   Unauthorized planting.
   (A)   No tree, plant or shrub shall be planted or located in or upon any
public right-of-way without a permit therefor having first been issued by the
Director. The permit shall not require the payment of any application fee or
other cost to the applicant and will only be issued if it is found that the
proposed planting or placing is in accordance with the Street Tree Plan.
   (B)   Any tree, shrub or plant, planted within any parkway or planting
easement without written permit of the Director may be removed by the Director.
The Director shall notify the adjoining and abutting property owner(s) in
writing, listing the unlawfully planted tree(s), shrub(s) or plant(s), ordering
their removal, and establishing a reasonable time within which removal shall be
accomplished. In the event the removal is not accomplished within the time
specified, the Director is authorized to remove the tree(s), shrub(s) or plant
(s) and the cost thereof shall be assessed to the property owner. The charge
assessed the property owner shall be equal to the cost of labor (including
overhead), equipment and materials.
(1995 Code, § 8.32.100) (Ord. 08-12, passed 7-15-2008)
§ 8.32.110   Criteria for granting tree removal permits.
   (A)   The Director may cause street trees or other plant material planted in
a parkway or easement to be removed by the city if they are deemed by the
Director to be unhealthy, hazardous, undesirable or causing excessive damage to
existing public improvements or street trees.
   (B)   Any property owner desiring to remove a tree from the parkway or
easement abutting his or her property shall make application to the Department.
The Director shall determine whether or not the tree is required to be retained
in order to preserve the intent and purpose of the Street Tree Plan. In making
a determination, the Director shall consider the inconvenience or hardship
which retention of the tree would cause the property owner, and consider also
the condition, age, desirability of tree species and location. If the Director
finds that the tree may be removed without violating the intent and spirit of
the Street Tree Plan, the property owner may be authorized to remove such tree
at the property owner’s own expense and liability providing that any trees
removed shall be replaced by street trees in that location or elsewhere in the
city as approved by the Director. Any replacement shall be made based upon
evaluation by the Director of the condition of the site to determine whether
replacement is warranted. If a permit is granted for removal of a street tree,
all removal work shall be completed within 60 days from the date of issuance of
the permit and shall be under the general supervision of, and in accordance
with, rules established by the Director. All tree stumps shall be removed to a
depth specified by the Director. All removal permits shall be null and void
after the expiration of 60 days from the date of issuance, unless extended by
the Director or designee.
   (C)   In determining whether a tree may be removed and replaced, the
Director shall consider, among other things, the following:
      (1)   Whether the tree or trees pose a potential for safety problems
despite a sound maintenance program;
      (2)   Whether the roots from adjacent parkway trees are interfering with
sewer lines
servicing the abutting property to the extent that the property owner requires
frequent repair of said sewer lines;
      (3)   Whether the tree is dead, dying or incurably diseased;
      (4)   Whether the tree is diseased and weakened by age, storm, fire or
other injuries so as to pose a danger to persons, property, improvements or
other trees;
      (5)   Whether the tree is of an undesirable species;
      (6)   Whether the tree poses a hardship to the adjacent property owner
such as, but not limited to, the cracking or raising of a garage floor or, in
the case of a handicapped person, special circumstances exist which cause the
location of the tree to become a hindrance for vehicle, and handicapped access;
and
      (7)   Whether removal is necessary for construction of a street widening
or other public improvement project, or necessary street or public improvement
repair work.
(1995 Code, § 8.32.110) (Ord. 08-12, passed 7-15-2008)
§ 8.32.120   Standards and specifications.
   All tree work in public parkways, whether by the city, abutting property
owner, contractor, nurseryman or individual, shall be done in accordance with
the city improvement standards and standard specifications and standards of
practice as established by resolution of the City Council, from time to time.
(1995 Code, § 8.32.120) (Ord. 08-12, passed 7-15-2008)
§ 8.32.130   Preservation of desirable trees— Heritage trees.
   It is the intent of the City of Tulare that certain desirable street trees,
bearing unique characteristics, and certain designated “heritage trees” be
preserved even if the desirable or heritage trees are damaging adjacent
pavement and property. Efforts to preserve such trees shall be made using one
or more of the following procedures, giving due consideration to the site
conditions of the tree:
   (A)   The use of gravel or packed decomposed granite or rubber sidewalk in
place of concrete or asphalt paving over tree roots;
   (B)   The realignment of the sidewalk and curb around a problem root area;
and
   (C)   Root pruning combined with installation of root control devices, and
pavement restoration, to the extent the city has funds available to undertake
such a project.
   (D)   All heritage trees require a pruning permit or removal permit from the
department before any work may begin.
(1995 Code, § 8.32.130) (Ord. 08-12, passed 7-15-2008)
§ 8.32.140   Tree preservation in construction areas.
   (A)   Any tree growing upon public property which is to be removed for
construction purposes shall be replaced, if site conditions permit, in
accordance with the city’s tree planting policy. If the Director determines
that a tree can be replaced, the person causing its removal shall, at their own
expense, remove and replace such tree with a tree, or trees, at a location and
of a size, number and species to be determined by the Director.
   (B)   Any tree growing upon public property near any excavation,
construction or street work shall be sufficiently guarded and protected by
those responsible for such work so as to prevent any injury to the tree. No
person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels or trenches, or install pavement
within a radius of four feet from any street tree without written permission of
the Director.
   (C)   Whenever any parkway is paved, openings at intervals and sizes
determined jointly by the City Engineer and the Recreation, Parks and Library
Director shall be left unpaved, the openings plumbed for bubblers from the
adjacent development, and trees planted in a manner acceptable to the Director.
(1995 Code, § 8.32.140) (Ord. 08-12, passed 7-15-2008; Ord. 03-1915, passed --
2003)
§ 8.32.150   Tree well installation, planting and maintenance.
   Tree wells in full width sidewalks are desired along major arterials and
collectors. Street trees shall be installed pursuant to the following
guidelines:
   (A)   An improvement agreement between the city and developer or abutting
property owner shall include provisions for the installation of tree wells and
irrigation in sidewalks abutting the affected property and the planting of an
approved street tree;
   (B)   The subdivider, developer or owner shall pay the city a fee per street
tree to be planted in each required tree well. The fee shall be determined on
an annual basis by resolution of the Council and shall cover and include the
cost of the requisite tree or trees, tree stake(s), soil amendment, root
barrier, and irrigation, and will cover, the cost of installation by city
forces or by parties under contract with the city, should that be necessary,
and an administrative processing fee;
   (C)   All fees collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited in the
Street Tree Trust Account as is described in this chapter and, upon completion
of the improvements to the subject parcel or parcels, the unused portion of the
fee paid by the owner, developer or subdivider, shall be returned following a
satisfactory inspection by the department and a request from the owner,
developer, or subdivider. Fees not requested within one year of project
completion shall remain in the Street Tree Trust Account to be used for tree
planting elsewhere in the city at the discretion of the Director;
   (D)   All street trees planted shall be of the species identified in the
approved city street tree list;
   (E)   All trees shall be 15-gallon container size and shall include a root
barrier and two stakes pursuant to city improvement standards;
   (F)   Spacing of the trees shall be determined on a case by case basis, but
generally will be 35 feet apart in accordance with city spacing requirements;
and
   (G)   Developer shall provide ongoing tree maintenance in these designated
tree wells except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 8.32.150) (Ord. 08-12, passed 7-15-2008)
§ 8.32.160   Root barriers.
   (A)   Root barriers shall be required in all street tree planting
installations in tree wells and in new residential subdivisions and individual
residential lots, whether new or existing, when street trees are installed in
their parkways.
   (B)   Root barriers shall be installed pursuant to city improvement
standards.
(1995 Code, § 8.32.160) (Ord. 08-12, passed 7-15-2008)
§ 8.32.170   Tree planting requirements for new residential construction.
   Prior to the approval of a new residential subdivision in the city, the
subdivider or developer shall obtain the approval, by the Director or designee,
as to the number and size of parkway trees inside the new subdivision as well
as outside the subdivision walls. The locations and spacing standards for new
subdivisions shall be approved by the Director or designee and the subdivider’s
or developer's plans shall provide for the planting of a maximum of two street
trees for each residential unit of the subdivision, except for corner
residential units which shall require a maximum of four trees per unit. The
trees planted pursuant to this section shall be taken from fifteen-gallon
containers and be staked according to city standards. Approval of the tree
installation by the Director or designee shall be a condition for occupancy of
the residential unit or units. All trees planted pursuant to this section shall
be of a species approved by the Parks and Recreation Commission.
(1995 Code, § 8.32.170) (Ord. 14-05, passed 10-21-2014; Ord. 08-12, passed 7-
15-2008)
§ 8.32.180   New residential planting—Fee and maintenance requirements.
   (A)   In all cases of street tree planting pursuant to §
8.32.170, and in all cases of street tree planting on individual residential
lots, the subdivider, developer or owner shall pay the city a fee per street
tree. This fee shall be determined on an annual basis by resolution of the
Council. This fee shall include the cost of the requisite tree or trees, tree
stake(s), soil amendment, root barrier and irrigation. The fee will cover, in
part, the cost of installation by city forces or by parties under contract with
the city, a maintenance fee for the interim period from planting until
occupancy of the residential unit, and an administrative processing fee.
   (B)   There is hereby created a “Street Tree Trust Account” within the city
for disbursement of funds necessary for the administration of this chapter, as
well as to plant and maintain trees pursuant to §
8.32.170. All fees collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited in the
Street Tree Trust Account. Upon completion of the subdivision or the individual
residential lot, and following a satisfactory inspection by the department and
a request from the owner, developer, or subdivider, the unused portion of the
fee paid shall be returned. Fees not requested within one year of project
completion shall remain in the Street Tree Trust Account to be used for tree
planting elsewhere in the city at the discretion of the Director.
(1995 Code, § 8.32.180) (Ord. 08-12, passed 7-15-2008)
§ 8.32.190   Departmental cooperation.
   (A)   The Director and various city departments and agencies shall cooperate
in the enforcement and fulfillment of the provisions of this chapter. The
cooperation includes, but is not limited to, the provisions of this section.
   (B)   The Director of Public Works, the City Engineer, and the Planning
Director, or their designee(s), shall notify the Director of any permits issued
for new improvements which might require the removal of, or cause injury to,
any street tree, or interference with the fulfillment of the street tree plan.
(1995 Code, § 8.32.190) (Ord. 08-12, passed 7-15-2008)
§ 8.32.200   Liability.
   Nothing in this chapter shall impose any liability upon the city, or member
of the Council, or any of its officials or employees, nor relieve the owner or
occupant of any private or public property from the duty to keep his or her
property, sidewalks, and rights-of-way abutting such property, in a safe
condition, free from hazards to public use.
(1995 Code, § 8.32.200) (Ord. 08-12, passed 7-15-2008)
§ 8.32.210   Appeals.
   The decision of the Director may be appealed by any person aggrieved by the
decision. The appeal shall be in writing, signed by the applicant with a
statement of reasons supporting the appeal. The appeal shall be filed with the
Parks and Recreation Commission not later than the thirtieth day following the
decision being appealed. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall hear the
appeal and render an opinion within 30 days. Any person excepting to any
decision rendered by the Parks and Recreation Commission may appeal to the
Council, in writing, within 30 days of the date of mailing of the decision to
the appellant.
(1995 Code, § 8.32.210) (Ord. 14-05, passed 10-21-2014; Ord. 08-12, passed 7-
15-2008)
§ 8.32.220   Penalties.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, which are
declared to be unlawful, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to a penalty
of imprisonment in the County Jail not exceeding six months, or by a fine not
to exceed $500 for each violation, or both. Notwithstanding the classification
of a violation of this chapter as a misdemeanor, at the time an action is
commenced to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the trial court, upon
recommendation of the prosecuting attorney, may reduce the charged offense from
a misdemeanor to an infraction.
   (B)   Any person convicted of an infraction under this chapter shall be
punished by:
      (1)   A fine not exceeding $50 for a first violation;
      (2)   A fine not exceeding $100 for the second violation of this chapter
within one year; and
      (3)   A fine not exceeding $250 for each additional violation of this
chapter within one year.
(1995 Code, § 8.32.220) (Ord. 08-12, passed 7-15-2008)
CHAPTER 8.36: CITY PARK AND TRAIL ORDINANCE
Section
   
8.36.010   Definitions.
   
8.36.020   Activities requiring permits for the use of a park.
   
8.36.030   Permit—Application contents.
   
8.36.040   Permit—Standards for issuance.
   
8.36.050   Violation of regulations— Sanctions.
   
8.36.060   Authority to close facilities.
   
8.36.070   Failure to obtain required permit.
   
8.36.080   Priority of use.
   
8.36.090   Exhibiting permit.
   
8.36.100   Selling and advertising.
   
8.36.110   Restrooms.
   
8.36.120   Water pollution.
   
8.36.130   Refuse.
   
8.36.140   No smoking.
   
8.36.150   No fires.
   
8.36.160   No fireworks.
   
8.36.170   No firearms, airguns and other weapons.
   
8.36.180   Animals.
   
8.36.190   Fishing in Del Lago Park.
   
8.36.200   Real property—Appropriation or encumbrance.
   
8.36.210   Property—Use of.
   
8.36.220   Lock and keys.
   
8.36.230   No motorized vehicle use.
   
8.36.240   Use of bicycles and skateboards on pedestrian paths.
   
8.36.250   Requirements for use of skateboard park.
   
8.36.260   Rules and Regulations for use of skateboard park.
   
8.36.270   Posting of rules.
   
8.36.280   Hours of use.
   
8.36.290   Dangerous activities prohibited.
   
8.36.300   No swimming in parks.
   
8.36.310   Alcohol sale and consumption by permission only.
   
8.36.320   Personal gain.
   
8.36.330   Sale of food and beverage by groups and organizations.
   
8.36.340   Regulations.
   
8.36.350   Sound amplification equipment.
   
8.36.360   Severability.
   
8.36.370   Excessive noise.
   
8.36.380   Prohibition of glass beverage containers.
   
8.36.390   Concession operations.
   
8.36.400   Disorderly conduct.
   
8.36.410   Exclusive use permit.
   
8.36.420   Violation—Penalty.
§ 8.36.010 Definitions.
   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the words and phrases used in
this chapter shall have the same meaning as described thereto, unless from the
context hereof it clearly appears that a different meaning is intended.
   AVAILABLE SHELTER. A public or private shelter or similar accommodation,
with an available overnight space, open to an individual or family unit
experiencing homelessness, at no charge. A shelter shall not be considered
available when the individual cannot occupy said space due to overcapacity,
exhaustion of stay limitations, or when religious observance is required as a
condition of gaining shelter. If the individual refuses available shelter or
otherwise cannot utilize the available shelter space due to voluntary actions
including, but not limited to, intoxication, drug use, unruly behavior, or
violation of shelter rules, the overnight shelter space shall be considered
available.
   CAMP.  Placing, setting up or utilizing camping equipment such as tents,
tarpaulins, temporary shelters whether commercially produced or improvised from
random materials, cooking facilities, hammocks, ground cover, bedding, sleeping
bags or other equipment of a similar nature used for living accommodation or
lodging purposes in the outdoors. CAMPING does not include use of umbrellas or
sun shades during the time the park is open to the public or the use of
temporary structures pursuant to a permit issued pursuant to this chapter. An
activity shall constitute CAMPING when it reasonably appears, in light of all
the circumstances, the participants in conducting these activities are in fact
using the area as a sleeping or living accommodation regardless of the intent
of the participants or the nature of any other activities in which they may
also be engaging. CAMPING shall not include merely sitting, lying or sleeping
outside in a public park area or the use of a blanket, towel or mat in a public
park/recreation area during the time the park is open to the public.
   CAMP EQUIPMENT.  Tents, tarpaulins, lean-tos, huts, cardboard boxes, or
similar makeshift temporary shelters constructed from random materials, as well
as cooking facilities, hammocks, ground cover, bedding, sleeping bags, or other
similar equipment used for living in the outdoors.
   CITY.  The City of Tulare.
   DEPARTMENT.  The Parks, Library and Recreation Department.
   DIRECTOR.  The Community Services Director of the city or his or her
authorized representative.
   IN-LINE SKATES.  A common roller skate with wheels in a straight line
resembling the blade of an ice skate.
   PARK.  Any outdoor area owned, leased, or controlled by the city opened to
the public for recreational use, including but not limited to any body of
water, land, campsite, recreation area, building, or structure.
   PARK AND RECREATION COMMISSION.  An advisory board to the City Council to
advise and assist in the development of park and recreation activities in the
city.
   ROLLER BLADES.  A type of roller skate in which the wheels are set in a
single straight line under the boot; a type of in-line skate.
   ROLLER SKATES.  A shoe, boot, or an apparatus worn on a shoe or boot with
wheels attached, whether permanently or temporarily, to such shoe, boot or
apparatus.
   SKATEBOARD.  A four wheeled platform used for the activity of skateboarding
that is propelled by pushing with one foot while the other remains on the
board, or by pumping in structures such as a mega ramp, vert ramp, half-pipe,
mini ramp, quarter pipe or bowl.
   SKATEBOARD PARK.  Any area designated by the city for exclusive public use
of in-line skates, roller blades, or skateboards.
   TULARE CITY COUNCIL.  The elected or appointed legislative body of the City
of Tulare.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.010) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022; Ord. 14-05, passed 10-
21-2014; Ord. 03-1915, passed - -2003)
§ 8.36.020 Activities requiring permits for the use of a park.
   A permit for the use of a park owned by or under the control of the city
shall be required for the uses hereinafter set forth:
   (A)   Reservation of soccer fields, tennis courts and baseball and softball
diamonds for organized play;
   (B)   Use of picnic pavilion for group picnicking activities;
   (C)   Use of all lighted facilities with the exception of coin-operated
light meters for recreation use. Permits required for daytime and evening
tennis tournament use;
   (D)   Group cultural activities; displays of wares and merchandise, fund-
raising projects, exhibitions as part of an open, industrial wide-show;
bandstand use; organized non-city sponsored athletic and nonathletic programs
or projects; tournament play; traditional sports programs not city-sponsored;
   (E)   Nontraditional organized sports activities;
   (F)   Concessionaire, person, group or organization sale of food and/or
nonalcoholic beverages when provided in conjunction with approved non-city-
sponsored activities;
   (G)   Any group of 50 or more persons; and
   (H)   Any group or person that will install and/or use equipment or
facilities which is not owned or operated by the City of Tulare.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.020) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 8.36.030 Permit—Application contents.
   Whenever a permit is required in this chapter, an application shall be filed
with the Director stating:
   (A)   The name and address of the applicant;
   (B)   The name and address of the person, group, organization or corporation
sponsoring the activity;
   (C)   The nature of the proposed activity;
   (D)   The dates, hours and park location for which the permit is desired;
   (E)   An estimate of attendance;
   (F)   The signing of a waiver release holding the city, their officers and
employees harmless against any and all liability; and
   (G)   Any other information which the Director, regarding public health,
safety and welfare, finds reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to
whether a permit should be issued.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.030) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 8.36.040 Permit—Standards for issuance.
   The Director shall issue a permit hereunder when he or she finds:
   (A)   That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the park;
   (B)   That the proposed activity or use will not unreasonably interfere with
or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation;
   (C)   That all conditions, including where applicable, the payment of fees,
approval of the Tulare City Council, and insurance coverage, are met;
   (D)   That the proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to
incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct;
   (E)   That the proposed activity or use will not entail unusual,
extraordinary or burdensome expense or security operation by the Department;
   (F)   That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use;
   (G)   The conduct of the activity or use of the area will not have an
adverse impact on the surrounding neighborhood due to parking, noise or crowds;
   (H)   Insurance coverage shall be required, if in the opinion of the
Director, the conduct of the event or program would potentially constitute a
hazard to public safety. The Director, or his or her designee, may, at his or
her discretion, require an insurance policy as a condition of the issuance of
the permit. If a policy is required, the permittee must obtain, pay for, and
maintain a policy of general liability insurance, approved as to form by City
Attorney which shall insure the city, its officers and employees against any
liability, or claims of liability, brought or made by or on behalf of any
person for personal injury or property damage caused by or arising out of any
negligent act or omission of either the permittee or his or her agents or
employees and occurring during the period and as a result of the activities for
which the permit was issued. The amount of coverage to be provided by the
policy shall be determined by the Director, or his or her designee. The City
Attorney may accept, as compliance with the requirement imposed by this
division, the presentation of a certificate of insurance, for at least the
required amount of coverage, which indicates that, by endorsement thereto, the
city, its officers and employees, have been added as additional insured. The
certificate shall additionally provide that the required insurance will not be
modified, changed or terminated until at least ten days' written notice thereof
has been transmitted to the Director; and
   (I)   It shall be a condition of the issuance of any park facilities permit
that the permittee shall agree to defend and to hold the city, its officers and
employees harmless from any and all claims and liability of any kind whatsoever
resulting from or arising out of the issuance of the permit.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.040) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022; Ord. 14-05, passed 10-
21-2014; Ord. 03-1915, passed - -2003)
§ 8.36.050 Violation of regulations—Sanctions.
   (A)   Any person violating the provision of this chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and subject to the following penalties; a fine of not more than
$500, by imprisonment for not more than six months in the County Jail, or both
the fine and imprisonment. Notwithstanding the classification of a violation of
this chapter as a misdemeanor at the time an action is amended to enforce the
provisions of this chapter, the Trial Court, upon recommendation of the
prosecuting attorney, may reduce the charge of the offense from a misdemeanor
to an infraction pursuant to Cal. Penal Code § 19. Any person convicted of an
infraction of this chapter shall be punished by:
      (1)   A fine not exceeding $50 for the first violation;
      (2)   A fine not exceeding $100 for the second violation of this chapter
within one year; and
      (3)   A fine not exceeding $250 for each additional violation of this
chapter within one year.
   (B)   The Director shall have the authority to revoke a permit upon a
finding of violation of any regulation contained in this chapter or upon a
finding of violation of other city ordinance or laws of this state.
   (C)   The Director shall have the authority to eject from any park, any
person acting in violation of regulations contained in this chapter; and
   (D)   The regulations contained herein shall not prohibit any person
authorized by the Director from the normal exercise of requested, assigned or
contractual duties.
   (E)   Malicious injury or destruction of any real or personal property which
constitutes vandalism under the provision of Cal. Penal Code § 594 shall be
prosecuted as a violation of Cal. Penal Code § 594 and shall be punishable as
either an infraction, misdemeanor, or a felony, as provided in Cal. Penal Code
§ 594. Under Cal. Penal Code § 594, if vandalism results in damage of $1,000 or
more, the vandalism may constitute a felony punishable by a fine of $1,000 or
up to a year in state prison or both.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.050) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 8.36.060 Authority to close facilities.
   The Director shall have the authority to close any park or portion thereof
and require the exit of all persons therein when he or she determines that
conditions exist in the facility or portion thereof which present a hazard to
the facility or to public safety. The Director shall have the authority to
close to the public any park or portion thereof at any time and for any
interval of time, either temporarily or at regular or stated intervals, and
either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the Director shall find
reasonably necessary.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.060) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 8.36.070 Failure to obtain required permit.
   No person shall use, occupy or otherwise remain in any park or portion
thereof for which a permit is required without first having obtained the
permit.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.070) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 8.36.080 Priority of use.
   Any person using a park or portion thereof which may be reserved by
obtaining a permit, but who has not obtained the permit, shall vacate the area
when holders of a valid permit present themselves.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.080) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 8.36.090 Exhibiting permit.
   No person shall fail to produce and exhibit a permit he or she claims to
have upon request of any department employee or any peace officer who desires
to inspect the permit for the purpose of enforcing compliance with any
regulation in this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.090) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 8.36.100 Selling and advertising.
   Within the boundaries of any park or on public property adjacent to a park,
no person shall sell, vend, peddle, expose, offer for sale or distribute after
sale to the public any merchandise, service or property or sell tickets for any
event, nor shall any person distribute, circulate, give away, throw or deposit
in or on any park or on public property adjacent to a park, any handbill,
circulars, pamphlets, papers or advertisements, which material calls the public
attention in any way to any article or service for sale or hire, nor within any
park or on public property adjacent to a park, shall any person solicit or
collect donations of money or other goods from the public, without the express
approval of the Park and Recreation Commission for such activity within the
specific park or on public property adjacent to a park.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.100) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 8.36.110 Restrooms.
   Male persons shall not enter any restroom set apart for females, and female
persons shall not enter any restroom apart for males, except this shall not
apply to children under the age of six years, who are accompanied by a person
who is of the sex designated for that park and who has reason to be responsible
for the child.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.110) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 8.36.120 Water pollution.
   While within the boundaries of any park, no person shall throw, discharge or
otherwise place or cause to be placed in the water or in any tributary, stream
or drain flowing into such waters, any substances, matter or thing, liquid or
solid, including, without limitation to, particles or objects made of paper,
metal, glass, garbage, rubbish, rubber, fuel, food matter, wood, fiber and
plastics.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.120) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 8.36.130 Refuse.
   No person shall dump, deposit or release any bottles, broken glass, ashes,
paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse or trash in or on any
park except that refuse which is incidental to the use of the park may be
deposited in the receptacles provided therefor. For purposes of this section,
an incinerator, stove, fire ring, barbecue or other device used to contain
fires or for cooking is not a proper receptacle for refuse or other waste
material.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.130) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 8.36.140 No smoking.
   No person shall smoke any substance in any area designated as a park.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.140) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 8.36.150 No fires.
   (A)   Without a permit issued by the Director, no person shall ignite,
maintain or use any fire in any place within any park except in a barbecue
cooker or other cooking device authorized by the Director for that purpose.
   (B)   No person shall ignite or maintain a fire or materials deposited in
any can, box, trench, pit or other receptacle maintained for the purpose of
garbage disposal or incineration.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.150) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 8.36.160 No fireworks.
   No person shall possess or ignite in any park firecrackers or fireworks,
including any material for the making of a pyrotechnic display. Nothing
contained in this section, however, shall prohibit any discharge or display of
fireworks defined and classified as "safe and sane fireworks" in Cal. Health
and Safety Code § 12508 at any public gathering or patriotic celebration
provided a permit for the discharge has been obtained from the Director.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.160) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 8.36.170 No firearms, airguns and other weapons.
   No person other than peace officers in the discharge of their duties shall
use, maintain, possess, fire or discharge any firearm, airgun, bow and arrow,
sling shot or any other weapon potentially dangerous to wildlife or human
safety except in areas, at times and under conditions, designated by the
Director for the use. Firearms may be possessed with a valid concealed weapon
permit.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.170) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 8.36.180 Animals.
   No person shall:
   (A)   Hunt, molest, harm, provide a noxious substance to, frighten, kill,
trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal within the boundaries
of any park, nor remove or have in his or her possession the young, eggs or
nest of any such creature;
   (B)   Abandon any animal dead or alive within any park;
   (C)   Remove any animal not his or her own from within any park; exception
is made to the foregoing in that in proper season, fish may be fished and
removed from areas designated for fishing by licensed persons;
   (D)   Bring into or maintain in or upon any park any dog, cat or other
animal unless the animal at all times is kept on a leash and under full control
of its owner or custodian; provided, however, the Director may designate areas
and times within which person may show, demonstrate or train unleashed animals
under full control of their owners or custodians;
   (E)   Permit cattle, sheep, goats, horses or other animals owned by him or
her or in his or her possession, to graze within the boundaries of any park;
   (F)   Ride a horse, pony, mule, burro or other animal onto or over real
property within any park other than at times and upon roads or trails
designated for riding of animals; and
   (G)   Fail to promptly remove from any park to an appropriate receptacle
fecal matter deposited thereon by a dog in the person's charge.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.180) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 8.36.190 Fishing in Del Lago Park.
   (A)   No person, other than a child or disabled person as defined by this
section, shall fish in the lake in Del Lago Park.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, CHILD shall mean any person aged 15
years or younger.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, DISABLED PERSON shall mean any person
with a developmental disability, as defined by Cal. Welfare and Institutions
Code § 4512, as well as any condition that is substantially similar to a
developmental disability but that originates after the age of 18. DISABLED
PERSON shall also include any person having any permanent physical condition
that substantially requires the use of a wheelchair for mobility.
   (D)   Any person violating this section is guilty of an infraction, and upon
conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than $50 for the
first violation; a fine of not more than $100 for the second violation within
one year, and a fine of not more than $250 for each additional violation within
one year.
   (E)   The Director, police officers, and code enforcement officers are
charged with enforcing this section and may issue citations for any violation
of this section.
(Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022; Ord. 09-12, passed 10-6-2009)
§ 8.36.200 Real property—Appropriation or encumbrance.
   No person shall deposit any earth, sand, rock, stone or other substance
within any park, nor shall he or she dig or remove any such material from
within any park, nor shall he erect or attempt to erect any building, wharf or
structure of any kind, by driving or setting up posts or piles, nor in any
manner appropriate or encumber any portion of the real property owned,
operated, controlled or managed by the Department, without a permit from the
Director.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.190) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 8.36.210 Property—Use of.
   No person shall:
   (A)   Dig up, pick, remove, mutilate, injure, cut or destroy any turf, tree,
plant, shrub, bloom, flower, artifact or archeological site, or any portion
thereof;
   (B)   Cut, break, injure, deface or disturb any building, sign, fence,
bench, structure, apparatus, equipment or property, or any portion thereof; or
   (C)   Without authorization from the Director, make or place on any tree,
plant, shrub, bloom, flower, buildings, sign, fence, bench, table, structure,
apparatus, equipment or property, or any portion thereof, any rope, wire, mark,
writing, printing, sign, card, display or similar inscription or device.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.200) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 8.36.220 Lock and keys.
   No person other than one acting under the direction of the Director shall
duplicate or cause to be duplicated a key used by the Department for a padlock
or door lock of any type or description, nor shall any person divulge the
combination of any lock so equipped to any unauthorized person.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.210) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 8.36.230 No motorized vehicle use.
   No motorized vehicle shall be permitted within the boundaries of any park
unless such park has been specifically designed and constructed to permit the
use of motorized vehicles and a notice to this effect has been posted at the
entrance of the park. In cases where the park has been designated and
constructed and posted as aforesaid, the following regulations will apply:
   (A)   While within the boundaries of any park, no person shall drive or
operate any automobile, motorcycle, motorscooter, trail bike, dune buggy, truck
or other motorized vehicle on roads, turf, maintenance service roads and
pathways, or trails other than those designated for that purpose.
   (B)   While within the boundaries of any park, no person shall drive any
automobile, motorcycle, motorscooter, truck or other motorized conveyance,
except an authorized emergency vehicle, at a rate of speed exceeding ten mph
except as may be otherwise posted by the Director or in any case at speeds
exceeding safe conditions dictated by prevailing circumstances.
   (C)   No person shall operate any automobile or other motorized vehicle
within the boundaries of any park unless the vehicle is currently licensed,
except unlicensed vehicles may be operated in areas designated and posted for
the use and in accordance with the rules established for the areas.
   (D)   No person shall park any automobile or other motorized vehicle within
any park except in areas specifically designated as parking areas. In no case
shall any person park a motorized vehicle in a manner that presents a hazard to
the public.
   (E)   No person shall park or otherwise allow automobiles and other
conveyances to remain within the boundaries of any park during the hours the
park is closed without a permit from the Director.
   (F)   No person shall abandon any motorized vehicle within the boundaries of
any park.
   (G)   No person shall wash or repair any automobile or other motorized
vehicle within the boundaries of any park.
   (H)   All motorized vehicles within the boundaries of any park shall be
equipped with a property installed muffler device which is in constant
operation and which prevents excessive or unusual noise. No muffler device or
exhaust system shall be equipped with a cutout, by pass or other similar
device.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.220) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 8.36.240 Use of bicycles and skateboards on pedestrian paths.
   (A)   No person shall ride a bicycle or skateboard on any grassy area,
service roads or pathways, path or pathways designated for pedestrian use. A
bicyclist shall be permitted to push a bicycle by hand over any such grassy
area, path or walkway.
   (B)   No person shall leave a bicycle or skateboard in any place or position
where other persons may trip over or be injured by it. Bicycles shall be left
in a bicycle rack when one is provided and there is space available.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.230) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 8.36.250 Requirements for use of skateboard park.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to utilize the skateboard park unless
that person is wearing proper safety equipment including, but not limited to: a
helmet, elbow pads, knee pads and appropriate footwear (no sandals, open-toed
footwear or bare feet).
   (B)   Any person who fails or refuses to comply with §
8.36.240 or any rules and regulations adopted by the Council covering the
skateboard park or who is injured while using the skateboard park shall be
deemed negligent.
(Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022; Ord. 08-13, passed 7-15-2008)
§ 8.36.260 Rules and Regulations for use of skateboard park.
   The City Council by resolution upon the recommendation of the Director shall
adopt Rules and Regulations for the operation and use of the skateboard park.
(Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022; Ord. 14-05, passed 10-21-2014; Ord. 08-13,
passed 7-15-2008)
§ 8.36.270 Posting of rules.
   The Parks, Library and Recreation Department shall cause a sign or signs to
be posted at all such skateboard parks or facilities providing reasonable
notice stating that any person failing to comply with the skateboard park rules
shall be guilty of an infraction of the skateboard park rules and subject to
citation.
(Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022; Ord. 14-05, passed 10-21-2014; Ord. 08-13,
passed 7-15-2008)
§ 8.36.280 Hours of use.
   The Director is authorized to promulgate responsible opening and closing
hours for park facilities. No person shall enter, remain in or camp in or on
any park during the hours or any part of the hour(s) the park is closed without
a permit from the Director. This policy shall establish a curfew between 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. in all public parks.
   (A)   No person shall remain or camp in any public park between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day.
   (B)   The prohibitions contained in division (A) of this section will not
apply to:
      (1)   Special use facilities, as may be posted by the Department
extending use hours;
      (2)   Any person attending a meeting, entertainment event, recreation
activity, dance, or similar activity in the park, provided the activity is
sponsored or co-sponsored by the Department or a permit therefor, has been
issued by the Department;
      (3)   Any person exiting the park immediately after the conclusion of any
activity set forth in division (B)(2) of this section;
      (4)   Any peace officer or employee of the city while engaged in the
performance of his or her duties.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.240) (Ord. 2025-05, passed 5-6-2025; Ord. 2022-04, passed 5-
17-2022; Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 8.36.290 Dangerous activities prohibited.
   The playing of rough or comparatively dangerous games such as football,
horseshoes, soccer, baseball or any games involving thrown, hit or otherwise
propelled objects such as golf balls, balls of other description, stones,
arrows, javelins or model airplanes is prohibited except in fields, courts or
areas specifically provided therefor, or with express permission of the
Director in areas compatible to that use. Persons desiring to use a park for
the specific purpose for which the park was established shall have the priority
of use over the park for another non-prescribed purpose.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.250) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 8.36.300 No swimming in parks.
   No person shall swim, bathe or wade in any water or waterways within any
park when the activity is prohibited and so posted by the Director upon his or
her finding that use of the water could be dangerous to the user, incompatible
with the function of the park or inimical to public health.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.260) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 8.36.310 Alcohol sale and consumption by permission only.
   Sale and/or possession and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages shall not
be allowed upon the premises of any Tulare City Park, including adjoining
parking lots, except that the sale of beer and wine may be sold and consumed on
premises of Zumwalt Park in the City of Tulare pursuant to the following
regulations and policies.
   (A)   Sale, possession and consumption shall be limited to beer and wine
only.
   (B)   Beer and wine sales shall be limited to public, quasi-public and/or
non-profit organizations.
   (C)   Events must be open to the general public. Closed or private events
will not be issued a permit.
   (D)   Applicant must obtain license from the Department of Alcohol Beverage
Control pertinent to the date(s) of event.
   (E)   A minimum of two security guards shall be required for all events. One
guard shall be stationed at each point of alcohol sale. In the event attendance
is anticipated to exceed 200, one additional guard shall be required for each
additional 100 persons.
   (F)   Cup size for beer sales shall be limited to 12 ounces and cup size for
wine shall be limited to ten ounces. The sale of wine by the bottle is
prohibited.
   (G)   There shall be a two cup limit at each purchase.
   (H)   Beer gardens are not mandatory but may be required by the Director
given the nature/type of event.
   (I)   Applicants shall furnish city with a $1,000,000 Liquor Liability
Insurance Certificate naming the City of Tulare as an additional insured.
   (J)   Bring-on alcohol may be approved at the discretion of the Director.
   (K)   Alcohol sales may not extend beyond 9:00 p.m.
   (L)   The Director may impose additional requirements and/or restrictions as
may be appropriate under the circumstances of the event.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.270) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022; Ord. 05-1978, passed
8-3-2005; Ord. 95-1769, passed - -1995)
§ 8.36.320 Personal gain.
   No person shall operate, conduct or otherwise promote or sponsor activities
that would result in personal gain, either financially or otherwise.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.280) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 8.36.330 Sale of food and beverage by groups and organizations.
   The sale of food and/or nonalcoholic beverages may be permitted at a park
providing the sale of food and/or beverage is not done so for personal gain or
advantage and is done so in conjunction with a bona fide activity for which a
permit has been issued by the Director. All food served, catered or otherwise
presented, must comply with city, county and state health ordinances, codes
and/or regulations.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.290) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 8.36.340 Regulations.
   The Director may establish and post regulations governing the use of park
facilities which are not inconsistent with the regulations contained in this
chapter and which promote public health and safety and the preservation of
property.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.300) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 8.36.350 Sound amplification equipment.
   Within any park, no person shall use sound amplification equipment without a
permit from the Director.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.310) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 8.36.360 Severability.
   If any section, division, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of these
regulations is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, the portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision, and the holdings shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions thereof.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.320) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 8.36.370 Excessive noise.
   No person in a park or on public or private property adjacent to a park
shall produce, suffer or allow to be produced any loud noise from a radio,
stereo, tape deck or other means, which noise disturbs the peaceful quiet
enjoyment of any person in a public park.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.330) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 8.36.380 Prohibition of glass beverage containers.
   This policy shall ban the presence of bottles and glass containers in public
parks, including adjacent parking lots.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to possess any beverage container made
of glass in any city park or playground or to bring, carry or transport any
beverage container made of glass into any city park or playground.
   (B)   A first violation of this section shall constitute an infraction
punishable by a fine not exceeding $25; a fine not exceeding $100 for a second
violation within one year of the first; and a fine not exceeding $250 for each
additional violation within one year of the first.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.340) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 8.36.390 Concession operations.
   The sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages in public parks, by non-profit
community based clubs and organizations and commercial vendors are permitted as
part of an event sponsored by a community based non-profit group. The
commercial vendor must receive prior approval of the department and obtain the
appropriate permits. Conditions of sales shall include:
   (A)   Business license and compliance with applicable health codes;
   (B)   Filing of a department application;
   (C)   Motorized commercial concessionaires must obtain a special permit and
be stationed in areas designated by the Department;
   (D)   In the case of sporting events by non-profit groups, concession areas
will be established for each athletic field in areas designated by the
Department; and
   (E)   All food served, catered or otherwise, must comply with city, county
and state health ordinances, codes and/or regulations.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.350) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 8.36.400 Disorderly conduct.
   No persons shall sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats, or other areas,
or engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent
language, or engage in any disorderly conduct, or behavior tending to breach
the public peace.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.360) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 8.36.410 Exclusive use permit.
   Parks may be made available for the exclusive use of bona fide public and
tax exempt organizations within the Tulare service area and for activities
sponsored by or supported financially or otherwise by the city, subject to the
issuance of a permit by the Director. Organizations and groups may conduct
fundraising activities only for community projects, charitable projects or
educational projects.
(1995 Code, § 8.36.370) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 8.36.420 Violation—Penalty.
   Any person convicted of violating §§
8.36.250 or
8.36.260 is guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished by a fine of $50 for the first offense; a fine of $100 for the second
offense, and a fine of $150 for each additional offense. Upon the third offense
the city shall have the right to seize the subject property of the offending
party and the owner of said property forfeits all rights to recovery or
reimbursement thereto.
(Ord. 2021-06, passed 1-18-2022; Ord. 08-13, passed 7-15-2008)
CHAPTER 8.37: CITY PROPERTY EXCLUSION
Section
   
8.37.010   Purpose.
   
8.37.020   Definitions.
   
8.37.030   Enforcement.
   
8.37.040   Period of exclusion.
   
8.37.050   Effect of exclusion and criminal trespass.
   
8.37.060   Written notice.
   
8.37.070   Request for hearing.
   
8.37.080   Hearing procedures.
   
8.37.090   Temporary waiver.
§ 8.37.010 Purpose.
   The City Council is committed to protecting the rights of individuals
related to their personal property and to treating such property with respect
and consideration. It is the purpose of this chapter to set standards for the
preservation and protection of human life, health, and safety, to further the
preservation and protection of sensitive public lands to prevent destruction of
these assets by excluding any person who violates any provision of the Tulare
Municipal Code, rule or regulation of the city, or any of the laws of the State
of California.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 5-6-2025)
§ 8.37.020 Definitions.
   The following words, phrases and terms as used in this chapter shall have
the following meanings:
   CITY PROPERTY. All real property owned by the city, other than public right-
of-way and utility easement, and all property held in proprietary capacity by
the city.
   HEARING OFFICER. The City Manager or their designee.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 5-6-2025)
§ 8.37.030 Enforcement.
   In addition to other measures provided for violation of this code, or any of
the laws of the State of California, any department head of the City of Tulare
may exclude someone from city property, excluding public rights-of-way, if that
person violates any provision relating to the use, misuse, waste, or
destruction of public property contained in the Tulare Municipal Code, rule or
regulation of the city, or any of the laws of the State of California.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 5-6-2025)
§ 8.37.040 Period of exclusion.
   Exclusion under this chapter may be for a period of not more than 180 days
and may apply to all or a portion of city property. The exclusion period will
not begin until the sixth business day after the issuance of the exclusion or
until the appeal is decided under Tulare Municipal Code §
8.37.070, whichever date is later, to allow for due process.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 5-6-2025)
§ 8.37.050 Effect of exclusion and criminal trespass.
   A person excluded from city property or city parks pursuant to this chapter
may not enter or remain upon that city property or city parks during the
exclusion period, except a person excluded from City Hall may enter upon or
remain at City Hall to the extent necessary to file documents required to be
filed with a city official. A person who knowingly violates an order of
exclusion from city parks or city property may be charged with criminal or
civil trespass.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 5-6-2025)
§ 8.37.060 Written notice.
   (A)   Written notice shall be given to any person excluded from any city
property or city parks.
   (B)   The notice shall specify the dates and places of exclusion. It shall
be signed by the issuing party. The notice shall prominently display the
consequences for failure to comply, including a violation of Cal. Penal Code §
602 and instructions for requesting a hearing to appeal the exclusion.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 5-6-2025)
§ 8.37.070 Request for hearing.
   A person receiving a notice of exclusion may request a hearing before a
hearing officer to have the exclusion rescinded or the period shortened.
Written notice of the appeal must be filed with the City of Tulare within three
business days of receipt of the exclusion notice. Failure to file a written
notice of appeal within three business days will be deemed a waiver of further
action. No particular form shall be required of the appeal and must be filed
with the City Clerk’s Office.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 5-6-2025)
§ 8.37.080 Hearing procedures.
   (A)   When a timely request for a hearing is made, a hearing shall be held
before a hearing officer.
   (B)   The hearing shall be set within three business days. The hearing may
be scheduled for a later date if the person excluded so requests.
   (C)   At the hearing, the person excluded may contest the validity of the
exclusion.
   (D)   The city official shall have the burden of proving the validity of the
exclusion by a preponderance of evidence. The city official may present
evidence either by testimony or written report of the officer. If the city
evidence is presented only by written report and the hearing officer cannot
resolve a question by information contained in the report, the hearing may be
held open for a reasonable time to complete the record.
   (E)   If the hearing officer finds that:
      (1)   The person excluded violated any provision of this code, any law of
the State of California, or any policy, rule or regulation of a city park or
city property, then the hearing officer shall enter an order sustaining the
exclusion; or
      (2)   The person excluded did not violate any provision of this code, any
law of the State of California, or any policy, rule or regulation of a city
park or city property, then the hearing officer shall enter an order rescinding
the exclusion.
      (3)   Once a person has been deemed to be excluded, the 180-day exclusion
will begin on the date of the ruling by the hearing officer.
   (F)   The decision of the hearing officer is final.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 5-6-2025)
§ 8.37.090 Temporary waiver.
   At any time within the period of exclusion, a person receiving such notice
of exclusion may apply in writing to the City Manager for a temporary waiver
from the effects of the notice of exclusion from city property or city parks. A
waiver may be granted if the City Manager determines good cause exists.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 5-6-2025)
CHAPTER 8.38: ENCAMPMENTS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
Section
   
8.38.010   Purpose.
   
8.38.020   Definitions.
   
8.38.030   Protection of waterways.
   
8.38.040   Unauthorized encampments on public property.
   
8.38.050   Enforcement.
   
8.38.060   Penalty.
§ 8.38.010 Purpose.
   The City Council is committed to protecting the life, health, and safety of
all people in the city and finds that certain public lands within the
geographical boundaries of the city pose significant health and safety hazards
to the people who make shelter or stay overnight in these areas. Additionally,
the City Council finds that some of these public lands are environmentally
sensitive and may be significantly damaged by unregulated human activity. The
City Council is committed to protecting the rights of individuals related to
their personal property and to treating such property with respect and
consideration. It is the purpose of this chapter to set standards for the
preservation and protection of human life, health, and safety to further the
preservation and protection of sensitive public lands to prevent destruction of
these assets, and to establish a process for the collection, storage, and
disposal, recycling, or reuse of personal property found in encampments on
public property.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 5-6-2025)
§ 8.38.020 Definitions.
   The following words, phrases and terms as used in this chapter shall have
the following meanings:
   ABATEMENT. The process of documenting and collecting eligible items for
storage, and removing and disposing of, recycling, or reusing of waste at an
encampment according to the process in §
8.38.060 of this chapter.
   CAMP. Placing, setting up, or utilizing camping equipment such as tents,
tarpaulins, temporary shelters whether commercially produced or improvised from
random materials, cooking facilities, hammocks, ground cover, bedding, sleeping
bags, or other equipment of similar nature used for living accommodation or
lodging purposes in the outdoors. Camping does not include the use of umbrellas
or sunshades during the time the park is open to the public or the use of
temporary structures pursuant to a permit issued pursuant to this chapter. An
activity shall constitute camping when it reasonably appears, in light of all
the circumstances, the participants in conducting these activities are in fact
using the area as a sleeping or living accommodation regardless of the intent
of the participants or the nature of any other activities in which they may
also be engaging. Camping shall not include merely sitting, lying, or sleeping
outside in a public park area or the use of a blanket, towel or mat in a public
park/recreation area during the time the park is open to the public.
   CAMP PARAPHERNALIA. Personal property used to facilitate occupancy of an
area and includes personal property typically associated with camping such as
tarps, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks, bedding, camp stoves, cooking
equipment, buckets, and similar equipment, mattresses, couches, dressers, or
other furniture.
   ENCAMPMENT. One or more temporary, makeshift, or hand-built structures not
intended for long-term continuous occupancy, including tents, that are used to
shelter one or more persons or their belongings and that are not authorized by
the property owner. ENCAMPMENT includes any camp paraphernalia and personal
property associated with or located in or around the structures or tents.
   PARK. Any outdoor area owned, leased, or controlled by the city opened to
the public for recreational use, including but not limited to any body of
water, land, campsite, recreation area, building, or structure.
   SHELTER. Any city-funded shelter or shelter provided as part of the city’s
coordinated intake system for shelter placements where individuals or families
experiencing homelessness can access beds and other services or an area
designated by the City Manager or their designee for use by individuals or
families experiencing homelessness.
   WASTE. Material of any nature that constitutes rubbish, solid waste, liquid
waste or medical waste. WASTE also includes abandoned or unidentified personal
property that is left unattended on public sidewalks and rights-of-way or other
public property. WASTE does not include compost piles, composting or Recyclable
material properly contained and disposed of in a timely fashion.
   WATERWAY. All the portions, including embankments and vehicle easements, of
Tulare Irrigation Canal, The People’s Ditch, Oakland Colony Ditch, Hooper
Ditch, Railroad Ditch, Tulare Colony Ditch, Bates Slough Ditch, Elk Bayou
Ditch, Porter Slough Ditch, Kaweah Canal, and any unnamed waterways found
within the boundaries of the City of Tulare.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 5-6-2025)
§ 8.38.030 Protection of waterways.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to do any of the following:
      (1)   Build or erect a structure of any type along the banks or in the
body of any waterway, or drive a nail or other object into any tree or other
natural area vegetation for the purpose of building an encampment or any other
structure, or to affix an object to any tree or other natural vegetation;
      (2)   Move boulders or large rocks, destroy vegetation, paved roads or
paths created by the city, or otherwise reconfigure the natural landscape in
the waters of or along the banks of a waterway;
      (3)   Drive, park, or bring any vehicle along the banks of a waterway,
except in places specifically provided and designated for vehicular use;
      (4)   Dig on the banks of a waterway; or
      (5)   Discharge or store items or waste, including garbage, refuse, or
human or animal waste, along the banks or into the waters of a waterway.
   (B)   Nothing in this section is intended to prohibit the activities of an
owner of private property or other lawful user of private property that are
normally associated with and incidental to the lawful and authorized use of
private property; and nothing is intended to prohibit the activities of a
lawful user if such activities are expressly authorized by the City Manager or
their designee or by any law, regulation, permit, order or other directive from
a regulatory authority.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 5-6-2025)
§ 8.38.040 Unauthorized encampments on public property.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to camp or to maintain an encampment in
or upon any public property, including in any street, sidewalk, parkway,
lighting and landscaping areas, parking lots, park, Community Services
Department buildings, waterway, and banks of a waterway.
   (B)   At all times, regardless of the availability of shelter space or beds,
it is unlawful for any person to camp or to maintain an encampment in the
following locations:
      (1)   Within two blocks of a school that offers instruction on those
courses of study required by the California Education Code or that is
maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education provided
signs are posted prohibiting camping that are clearly visible to pedestrians.
School for purposes of §
8.38.040(B) does not include a vocational or professional institution of higher
education, including a community or junior college, college, or university.
      (2)   Within two blocks of any shelter provided that signs are posted
prohibiting camping that are clearly visible to pedestrians.
      (3)   In any waterway or the banks of a waterway.
      (4)   Within any transit hub or bus stop provided signs are posted
prohibiting camping that are clearly visible to pedestrians.
      (5)   In any location where the City Manager or their designee determines
there is a substantial public health and safety risk and provided signs are
posted prohibiting camping that are clearly visible to pedestrians.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 5-6-2025)
§ 8.38.050 Enforcement.
   (A)   This section is enforceable by any law enforcement officer, code
enforcement officer, park ranger, or city staff as designated by the City
Manager or their designee.
   (B)   Sections
8.38.030 and
8.38.040 of this chapter are enforceable at all times regardless of shelter
availability.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 5-6-2025)
§ 8.38.060 Penalty.
   For a first violation of this chapter, the officer shall issue a written
warning that their conduct is in violation of this chapter and must give the
person an opportunity to comply with the provisions of this chapter of at least
12 hours. A second violation of the provisions of this chapter, within a 12-
month period shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of an infraction. A
third violation under this chapter within a 12-month period, and every
subsequent violation within a 12-month period shall be prosecuted as a
misdemeanor by any office allowed to prosecute such crimes. Each violation of
this chapter shall be a distinct and separate violation.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 5-6-2025)
CHAPTER 8.40: MEFFORD FIELD REGULATIONS
Section
   
8.40.010   Purpose.
   
8.40.020   Definitions.
   
8.40.030   General provisions.
   
8.40.040   Aircraft operation.
   
8.40.050   Fire regulations.
   
8.40.060   Agricultural operations.
   
8.40.070   Glider operations.
   
8.40.080   Operations manual.
   
8.40.090   Fees.
   
8.40.100   Enforcement.
   
8.40.110   Appeals.
§ 8.40.010   Purpose.
   This chapter is enacted for the purpose of adopting rules and regulations
relative to the operation of the Mefford Field. These regulations are not
intended to amend, modify or supersede provisions of federal or state law
applicable to airport operations or any other specific contractual agreement of
the city with which they may conflict.
(1995 Code, § 8.40.010)
§ 8.40.020   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and terms used herein are
defined as follows.
   AGRICULTURAL OPERATOR. A person engaged in the business of supplying,
loading and unloading agricultural and other chemicals used for crop dusting or
other airborne spraying activities.
   AIRPORT. Mefford Field including all property and improvements within the
boundary lines of the airport.
   AIRPORT MANAGER. The Airport Manager, as appointed by the City Manager or
his or her designee.
   CONCESSIONAIRE. Synonymous with FIXED BASE OPERATOR.
   FIXED BASE OPERATOR. A person engaged in any business authorized by permit
or agreement with the city on airport property.
   FLYING CLUB. An association or group of more than three individuals jointly
owning or leasing an aircraft where payment is made to the club for the
operating time of the aircraft.
   GLIDER. Any aircraft designed to operate without an engine or other means of
propellant.
   GROUND VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle other than an aircraft.
   HANGAR. A building intended to house aircraft for storage, maintenance or
other approved purpose.
   ITINERANT OPERATOR. Any person using, on a temporary or intermittent basis,
the airport or airport facilities in the conduct of a business.
   PERMANENT BASED AIRCRAFT. Any aircraft parked or stored on the airport for
30 days or more.
   RUNWAY. An area designated for landing and taking off of aircraft.
   TIE DOWN. An unenclosed space where an aircraft may be tied down with ropes
or devices to prevent unintentional movement.
   TRANSIENT AIRCRAFT. Any aircraft parked or stored on the airport for less
than 30 days.
(1995 Code, § 8.40.020)
§ 8.40.030   General provisions.
   (A)   Liability. The permission granted by the city to use the airport
facilities shall be conditioned upon the assumption of full responsibility by
each user. Each user shall release from, hold harmless of, and indemnify the
city and its officers, agents and employees from any and all responsibility,
liability, loss or damage caused by or on behalf of the person using the
airport facilities.
   (B)   Insurance. Fixed base operators shall secure and maintain throughout
the terms of their lease or agreement with the city public liability and
property damage insurance in amounts to be specified by separate agreement and
shall name the city as coinsured. A certificate of the insurance shall be filed
with the Airport Manager.
   (C)   Accident reports. Every person involved in an accident on the airport
property, including but not limited to pedestrian, aircraft or automotive
occurring on the airport shall make a report to the Airport Manager not later
than 24 hours after the accident occurs.
   (D)   Loitering.
      (1)   No person shall loiter in any building located on the airport or on
airport property nor interfere, tamper with or put into motion any aircraft or
other equipment without permission of the owner, unless directed by the Airport
Manager.
      (2)   Any person refusing to comply with the rules and regulations of the
airport, after proper request by the Airport Manager, shall be considered a
trespasser.
   (E)   Motor vehicles.
      (1)   Operators of motor vehicles on the airport must possess a current
valid driver’s license.
      (2)   Pedestrians and aircraft shall have the right-of-way over other
vehicles. Vehicles shall pass to the rear of taxiing aircraft.
      (3)   When parked adjacent to a runway, vehicles must be placed parallel
to the runway and at least 100 feet from the outside of the runway lights or
from the runway shoulder where there are no lights.
   (F)   Trash disposal.
      (1)   Fixed base operators shall provide metal disposal bins, the
location of which shall be approved by the Airport Manager.
      (2)   Petroleum products and chemicals shall not be placed in drains,
basins or ditches on airport property.
   (G)   Flying clubs. Prior to operation on airport facilities, each flying
club shall receive written permission from the Airport Manager. Each flying
club shall file with the Airport Manager a list of the names and addresses of
its members and a copy of the by-laws and regulations governing the flying
club’s operations.
   (H)   Commercial activity. Persons engaged in commercial activity of any
nature on the airport, including flight instruction, shall be required to enter
into a written contract with the city unless specifically exempted from such
requirement by the Airport Manager; except that an aircraft owner may perform
repairs and inspection upon his or her aircraft provided that the work is
conducted in an area approved by the Airport Manager so that it does not create
a hazard or nuisance to other persons or aircraft. Other persons may assist the
aircraft owner or supervise the maintenance work; however, if a fee for the
service is charged, a city business license must be obtained.
   (I)   Signs. Signs, posters, advertisements, circulars or other written or
printed matter shall not be placed or posted on the airport property or
buildings without prior written permission of the Airport Manager, except that
sale or lease signs may be placed in any aircraft. Each fixed base operator is
requested to maintain a bulletin board on which to post the names and telephone
numbers of the police, fire, Airport Manager, licensed physician and copy of
the rules and regulations of the airport.
   (J)   Equipment or facility damage. Any person damaging any light fixture or
other airport equipment or device by any means whatsoever, shall report the
damage to the Airport Manager and shall be responsible for any costs required
to replace or repair the damaged facility.
(1995 Code, § 8.40.030)
§ 8.40.040   Aircraft operation.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Aircraft permanently based on the airport shall be registered with
the Airport Manager.
      (2)   Permanently based aircraft shall be parked or hangared in specific
areas designated by the Airport Manager.
      (3)   Disabled aircraft and aircraft parts shall be promptly removed from
runways and taxiways to a designated storage area. If the owner or operator
fails to move such disabled aircraft or parts within a reasonable time, the
Airport Manager may require removal and storage at the owner’s expense.
   (B)   Ground operations.
      (1)   Engine warm up, prolonged engine test operations or pre-flight
engine operational checks may not be performed in any area that would result in
a hazard to other aircraft or persons.
      (2)   Aircraft shall be taxied in accordance with the with the prescribed
taxiing procedures established by the Airport Manager. Taxiing is permitted
only on a surfaced area prepared for that purpose or unless otherwise
authorized by the Airport Manager.
   (C)   Flight operations.
      (1)   Mefford Field is an uncontrolled airport operating without a
control tower. Aircraft using the airport shall operate in accordance with
Federal Aviation regulations pertaining to operation at airport without air
traffic control towers.
      (2)   Pilots of aircraft are encouraged to establish radio contract on
the assigned Unicom Frequency prior to landing or take-off. Landings or take-
offs shall be confined only to the designated runways.
      (3)   Aircraft shall not fly directly over the airport at an altitude of
less than 500 feet above designated pattern altitude, 800 feet above ground,
1,100 feet above mean sea level unless in the process of land or taking off.
      (4)   Turns should not be made after take-off until the Airport boundary
has been reached.
      (5)   Aircraft should enter the traffic pattern at a 45-degree angle.
Straight in landing approaches are discouraged.
      (6)   Landing aircraft should maintain not less than the assigned traffic
pattern altitude until turning onto the base leg, prior to commencing final
approach.
      (7)   Three hundred sixty degree overhead tactical approaches are
discouraged.
      (8)   The Airport Manager may delay or restrict any flight or other
operations on the airport or may refuse take-off clearance to any aircraft in
order to safeguard the safety of persons or property.
(1995 Code, § 8.40.040)
§ 8.40.050   Fire regulations.
   Article 33, “Airports, Heliports and Helistops”, of the Uniform Fire Code,
as adopted by the City Council shall be applicable on all airport property and
facilities.
(1995 Code, § 8.40.050)
§ 8.40.060   Agricultural operations.
   Reserved.
(1995 Code, § 8.40.060)
§ 8.40.070   Glider operations.
   Reserved
(1995 Code, § 8.40.070)
§ 8.40.080   Operations manual.
   In addition to the regulations contained herein, the operations at Mefford
Field shall also be governed by an operations manual adopted by resolution of
the City Council.
(1995 Code, § 8.40.080)
§ 8.40.090   Fees.
   Fees shall be established from time to time by the City Council by separate
resolution. Payment for use of airport facilities, storage or other services
shall be made before flight departure. The Airport Manager may impound the
subject aircraft if the payment has not been made or suitable credit arranged.
(1995 Code, § 8.40.090)
§ 8.40.100   Enforcement.
   Any person operating or handling aircraft, operating any vehicle, equipment
or apparatus, or using the airport or any of its facilities in violation of the
rules and regulations contained herein may be removed from the airport by the
direction of the Airport Manager. The person may be refused further use of the
airport facilities for the length of time as the Airport Manager deems
necessary in order to safeguard the public safety and the airport facilities.
Any person violating or aiding in the violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction. The Airport Manager shall be
responsible to enforce the provisions of this chapter. If any portion of this
chapter is declared invalid or unenforceable, all other portions shall remain
in effect.
(1995 Code, § 8.40.100)
§ 8.40.110   Appeals.
   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Airport Manager under the terms of
this chapter may appeal the decision to the City Council in writing. The
Council shall review the decision of the Airport Manager and may affirm,
reverse or modify the decision.
(1995 Code, § 8.40.110)
CHAPTER 8.44: FEES
Section
   
8.44.010   Subdivision and parcel map fees.
§ 8.44.010   Subdivision and parcel map fees.
   The City Council of the city may, by resolution, adopt the fees and impose
the same upon subdividers and applicants for parcel maps as it may determine to
be necessary and convenient to defray the cost of processing subdivision and
parcel map proceedings and to defray the city’s cost in the administration,
engineering and inspection of improvements that may be required of subdividers
and applicants for parcel maps. The fees may be changed from time to time.
(1995 Code, § 8.44.010)
CHAPTER 8.48: PARKING AND BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT AREA
Section
   
8.48.010   Establishment of Area.
   
8.48.020   Area boundaries.
   
8.48.030   Establishment of benefit zones.
   
8.48.040   Benefit Zone “A” boundaries.
   
8.48.050   Benefit Zone “B” boundaries.
   
8.48.060   Assessments and charges.
   
8.48.070   Use of revenues collected.
   
8.48.080   Annual determination of uses of revenues.
   
8.48.090   Advisory board.
   
8.48.100   Collection of assessments and charges.
   
8.48.110   Enforcement of provisions.
   
8.48.120   Criminal penalties.
   
8.48.130   Liberal construction—Partial invalidity.
§ 8.48.010 Establishment of Area.
   There is hereby created and established a Parking and Business Improvement
Area of the City of Tulare, hereinafter for brevity and convenience referred to
as “Area.”
(1995 Code, § 8.48.010) (Ord. 12-07, passed 6-5-2012; Ord. 10-11, passed 4-6-
2010; Ord. 07-12, passed 7-17-2007)
§ 8.48.020 Area boundaries.
   The description of the boundaries of the proposed Area is as follows:
      All that certain area situated in the City of Tulare, County of Tulare,
State of California, more particularly described as follows: Beginning at a
point on the Southern Pacific mainline approximately 600 feet north of
centerline of Cross Avenue; thence southeasterly approximately 2,325 feet to
the centerline of “O” Street; thence southerly along the centerline of “O”
Street approximately 4,800 feet to the centerline of Alpine Avenue; thence
westerly along the centerline of Alpine Avenue approximately 2,150 feet to a
point on the Southern Pacific mainline approximately 1,500 feet south of the
centerline of Inyo Avenue; thence northerly along the Southern Pacific mainline
approximately 5,000 feet to the point of beginning.
(1995 Code, § 8.48.020) (Ord. 12-07, passed 6-5-2012; Ord. 10-11, passed 4-6-
2010; Ord. 07-12, passed 7-17-2007)
§ 8.48.030 Establishment of benefit zones.
   There is hereby created and established within said Area, two benefit zones
designated as Benefit Zone A and Benefit Zone B.
(1995 Code, § 8.48.030) (Ord. 12-07, passed 6-5-2012; Ord. 10-11, passed 4-6-
2010; Ord. 07-12, passed 7-17-2007)
§ 8.48.040 Benefit Zone “A” boundaries.
   The description of the boundaries of proposed Benefit Zone A within said
Area is as follows:
   All that certain area situated in the City of Tulare, County of Tulare,
State of California, more particularly described as follows: Beginning at a
point on the Southern Pacific mainline approximately 600 feet north of the
centerline of Cross Avenue; thence southeasterly approximately 1,560 feet to
the centerline of “M” Street; thence southerly along the centerline of “M”
Street approximately 1,900 feet to the centerline of King Avenue; thence
easterly along the centerline of King Avenue approximately 800 feet to the
centerline of “O” Street; thence southerly along the centerline of “O” Street
approximately 1,000 feet to the centerline of Kern Avenue; thence westerly
along the centerline of Kern Avenue approximately 1,200 feet to the centerline
of “L” Street; thence southerly along the centerline of “L” Street
approximately 480 feet to the centerline of Inyo Avenue; thence westerly along
the centerline of Inyo Avenue approximately 825 feet to the centerline of “J”
Street; thence northerly along the centerline of “J” Street approximately 480
feet to the centerline of Kern Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of
Kern Avenue approximately 280 feet to the Southern Pacific mainline; thence
northerly along the Southern Pacific mainline approximately 3,060 feet to the
point of beginning.
(1995 Code, § 8.48.040) (Ord. 12-07, passed 6-5-2012; Ord. 10-11, passed 4-6-
2010; Ord. 07-12, passed 7-17-2007)
§ 8.48.050 Benefit Zone “B” boundaries.
   The description of the boundaries of proposed Benefit Zone B within said
Area is as follows:
      All that certain area situated in the City of Tulare, County of Tulare,
State of California, more particularly described as follows: All that area
within the Parking and Business Improvement Area not included in Benefit Zone
A.
(1995 Code, § 8.48.050) (Ord. 12-07, passed 6-5-2012; Ord. 10-11, passed 4-6-
2010; Ord. 07-12, passed 7-17-2007)
§ 8.48.060 Assessments and charges.
   There is hereby fixed, levied, determined and established a system of
assessments and charges upon all businesses, located within the Area, which are
required to obtain and maintain Tulare City business licenses, as follows:
   (A)   Within Benefit Zone A, each business shall pay assessments and charges
in an amount equal to 100% of the amount said business entity is required to
pay to the City of Tulare for a business license for said business; effective
January 1, 2008 the assessment shall be 125%, effective July 1, 2008 the
assessment shall be 150%, effective July 1, 2009 the assessment shall be 175%.
   (B)   Within Benefit Zone B, each business shall pay assessments and charges
in an amount equal to 50% of the amount said business entity is required to pay
to the City of Tulare for a business license for said business; effective
January 1, 2008 the assessment shall be 62.5%, effective July 1, 2008 the
assessment shall be 75%, effective July 1, 2009 the assessment shall be 87.5%.
   (C)   For purposes of computing the assessments and charges as set forth in
divisions (A) and (B) hereinabove, the amount a business entity is required to
pay the City of Tulare for a business license for said business shall not
include any fee which is levied because said business owns or operates on the
premises, an arcade and/or one or more music machines, billiard or pool tables,
and/or amusements machines; provided that the operation of such an arcade, and/
or such machines, does not constitute the primary business activity of said
business entity at said location. (Ord. 1534, 09-15-87)
   (D)   There is further hereby fixed, levied, determined and established a
system of assessments and charges upon all those business enterprises located
within the Area, which are not required to obtain and maintain Tulare City
business licenses, as follows:
      (1)   (a)   Within Benefit Zone A, each business shall pay assessments
and charges in an amount based on the number of employees at the rate of $15
per employee, with a minimum semi-annual assessment of $100 and with a maximum
semi-annual assessment of $500.
         (b)   Effective January 1, 2008 each business shall pay assessments
and charges in an amount based on the number of employees at the rate of $18.75
per employee, with a minimum semi-annual assessment of $125 and with a maximum
semiannual assessment of $625.
         (c)   Effective July 1, 2008 each business shall pay assessments and
charges in an amount based on the number of employees at the rate of $22.50 per
employee, with a minimum semi-annual assessment of $150 and with a maximum
semi-annual assessment of $750.
         (d)   Effective July 1, 2009 each business shall pay assessments and
charges in an amount based on the number of employees at the rate of $26.25 per
employee, with a minimum semi-annual assessment of $175 and with a maximum
semi-annual assessment of $875.
         (e)   Effective July 1, 2012 each business shall pay assessments and
charges in an amount based on the number of employees at the rate of $30 per
employee, with a minimum semiannual assessment of $200 and with a maximum semi-
annual assessment of $1,000.
      (2)   (a)   Within Benefit Zone B, each business shall pay assessments
and charges in an amount based on the number of employees at the rate of $7.50
per employee, with a minimum semi-annual assessment of $50 and with a maximum
semi-annual assessment of $250.
         (b)   Effective January 1, 2008: Within Benefit Zone B, each business
shall pay assessments and charges in an amount based on the number of employees
at the rate of $9.37 per employee, with a minimum semi-annual assessment of
$62.50 and with a maximum semi-annual assessment of $312.50.
         (c)   Effective July 1, 2008: Within Benefit Zone B, each business
shall pay assessments and charges in an amount based on the number of employees
at the rate of $11.25 per employee, with a minimum semi-annual assessment of
$78.12 and with a maximum semi-annual assessment of $390.62.
         (d)   Effective July 1, 2009: Within Benefit Zone B, each business
shall pay assessments and charges in an amount based on the number of employees
at the rate of $14.06 per employee, with a minimum semi-annual assessment of
$97.65 and with a maximum semi-annual assessment of $488.27.
         (e)   Effective July 1, 2012: Within Benefit Zone B, each business
shall pay assessments and charges in an amount based on the number of employees
at the rate of $17.57 per employee, with a minimum semi-annual assessment of
$122.06 and with a maximum semi-annual assessment of $610.33.
      (3)   For purposes of computing the assessment and charges as set forth
in divisions (D)(1) and (D)(2) hereinabove, the number of employees shall be
determined as those employees who are employed for at least 20 hours per week.
      (4)   It is expressly found and determined that this assessment
approximately equates said businesses with those businesses within the benefit
zones which do pay business license taxes, for purposes of assessments under
this chapter.
      (5)   Such assessments on business enterprises shall be levied at the
same time as the city levies business license tax.
(1995 Code, § 8.48.060) (Ord. 12-07, passed 6-5-2012; Ord. 10-11, passed 4-6-
2010; Ord. 07-12, passed 7-17-2007; Ord. 1604, passed 7-17-1990)
§ 8.48.070 Use of revenues collected.
   The revenues generated from the collection of the assessments and charges
herein may be utilized within the Area, as determined by the City Council, for
any of the following purposes:
   (A)   Acquisition, construction, installation or maintenance of any tangible
property with an estimated useful life of five years or more including, but not
limited to, the following:
      (1)   Parking facilities.
      (2)   Benches.
      (3)   Trash receptacles.
      (4)   Street lighting.
      (5)   Decorations.
      (6)   Parks.
      (7)   Fountains.
   (B)   Promotion of activities, including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Promotion of public events which benefit businesses in the area and
which take place on or in public places within the Area.
      (2)   Furnishing of music in any public place in the Area.
      (3)   Activities which benefit businesses located and operating in the
Area.
(1995 Code, § 8.48.070) (Ord. 12-07, passed 6-5-2012; Ord. 10-11, passed 4-6-
2010; Ord. 07-12, passed 7-17-2007; Ord. 1604, passed 7-17-1990)
§ 8.48.080 Annual determination of uses of revenues.
   (A)   The Advisory Board shall cause to be prepared a report for each fiscal
year for which assessments are to be levied and collected to pay the cost of
the improvements and activities described in the report. The report may propose
changes, including, but not limited to, the boundaries of the Parking and
Business Improvement Area or any benefit zones within the Area, the basis and
method of levying the assessments, and any changes in the classification of
businesses, if a classification is used.
   (B)   The report shall be filed with the Clerk and shall refer to the
Parking and Business Area by name, specify the fiscal year to which the report
applies, and with respect to that fiscal year shall contain the following:
      (1)   Any proposed changes in the boundaries of the Parking and Business
Improvement Area or in any benefit zones within the Area;
      (2)   The improvements and activities to be provided for that fiscal
year;
      (3)   An estimate of the cost of providing the improvements and
activities for that fiscal year;
      (4)   The method and basis of levying the assessment in sufficient detail
to allow each business owner to estimate the amount of the assessment to be
levied against his or her business for that fiscal year;
      (5)   The amount of any surplus or deficit revenues to be carried over
from a previous fiscal year; and
      (6)   The amount of any contribution to be made from sources other than
assessments levied pursuant to this part.
   (C)   The Council may approve the report as filed by the Advisory Board or
may modify any portion contained therein and approve it as modified. The City
Council shall not approve a change in the basis and method of levying
assessments which would impair an authorized or executed contract to be paid
from the revenues derived from the levy of assessments. After the approval of
the report, the City Council shall adopt a resolution of intention to levy an
annual assessment for that fiscal year. The resolution of intention shall do
all of the following:
      (1)   Declare the intention of the City Council to change the boundaries
of the Parking and Business Improvement Area, or in any benefit zone within the
Area, if the report filed proposes a change;
      (2)   Declare the intention of the City Council to levy and collect
assessments within the Parking and Business Improvement Area for the fiscal
year stated in the resolution;
      (3)   Generally describe the proposed improvements and activities
authorized by the ordinance establishing the Parking and Business Improvement
Area and any substantial changes proposed to be made to the improvements and
activities;
      (4)   Refer to the Parking and Business Improvement Area by name and
indicate the location of the area;
      (5)   Refer to the report on file with the Clerk for a full and detailed
description of the improvements and activities to be provided for that fiscal
year, the boundaries of the Area and any benefit zones within the Area, and the
proposed assessments to be levied upon the businesses within the Area for that
fiscal year;
      (6)   Fix a time and place for a public hearing to be held by the City
Council on the levy of the proposed assessments for that fiscal year. The
public hearing shall be held not less than ten days from the adoption of the
resolution of intention; and
      (7)   State that at the public hearing, a written or oral protest may be
made.
   (D)   The Clerk shall give notice of the public hearing by causing the
resolution of intention to be published once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city not less than seven days before the public hearing.
(1995 Code, § 8.48.080) (Ord. 12-07, passed 6-5-2012; Ord. 10-11, passed 4-6-
2010; Ord. 07-12, passed 7-17-2007; Ord. 1604, passed 7-17-1990)
§ 8.48.090 Advisory board.
   The City Council shall appoint an Advisory Board which shall make a
recommendation to the City Council on the expenditure of revenues derived from
the levy of assessments, on the classification of businesses, as applicable,
and on the method and basis of levying the assessments. The City Council may
designate existing advisory boards or commissions to serve as the Advisory
Board for the Area or may create a new Advisory Board for that purpose. The
City Council may limit the membership of the Advisory Board to persons paying
the assessments.
(1995 Code, § 8.48.090) (Ord. 12-07, passed 6-5-2012; Ord. 10-11, passed 4-6-
2010; Ord. 07-12, passed 7-17-2007; Ord. 1604, passed 7-17-1990)
§ 8.48.100 Collection of assessments and charges.
   The collection, from businesses within the Area, of the assessments and
charges imposed by this chapter shall be made at the same time and in the same
manner as the city collects its business license tax from said businesses
pursuant to the applicable provisions of the Tulare City Code.
(1995 Code, § 8.48.100) (Ord. 12-07, passed 6-5-2012; Ord. 10-11, passed 4-6-
2010; Ord. 07-12, passed 7-17-2007)
§ 8.48.110 Enforcement of provisions.
   It shall be the duty of the Director of Finance and his or her deputies to
collect all assessments and charges levied pursuant to this chapter. All
assessments and charges required to be paid under the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the business to the city. Any business,
and the owners thereof, owing money to the city under the provisions of this
chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the
recovery of such amount.
(1995 Code, § 8.48.110) (Ord. 12-07, passed 6-5-2012; Ord. 10-11, passed 4-6-
2010; Ord. 07-12, passed 7-17-2007)
§ 8.48.120 Criminal penalties.
   It shall be unlawful for any business entity, and all owners thereof, to
violate any of the provisions of this chapter. Any such violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be punished pursuant to the penalty provisions
of
Chapter 1.12 of this code.
(1995 Code, § 8.48.120) (Ord. 12-07, passed 6-5-2012; Ord. 10-11, passed 4-6-
2010; Ord. 07-12, passed 7-17-2007)
§ 8.48.130 Liberal construction—Partial invalidity.
   This chapter is intended to be construed liberally and, in the event any
section or part of any section thereof should be held invalid, the remaining
provisions shall remain in full force and effect.
(1995 Code, § 8.48.130) (Ord. 12-07, passed 6-5-2012; Ord. 10-11, passed 4-6-
2010; Ord. 07-12, passed 7-17-2007)
CHAPTER 8.52: PRESERVATION OF HERITAGE TREES
Section
   
8.52.010   Definitions.
   
8.52.020   Permit required to remove or destroy trees.
   
8.52.030   Permit applications.
   
8.52.040   Appeals.
   
8.52.050   Emergencies—Public utility line clearance.
   
8.52.060   Notice of intent to prune.
   
8.52.070   I.S.A. pruning standards.
   
8.52.080   Copies of standards on file.
   
8.52.090   Public assistance for property owners.
   
8.52.100   Preservation and maintenance of existing heritage tree.
   
8.52.110   Building permits.
   
8.52.120   Wilful destruction of heritage trees.
   
8.52.130   Enforcement.
   
8.52.140   Severability.
   
8.52.150   Penalties.
   
8.52.160   Nuisances.
   
8.52.170   Abatement.
   
8.52.180   Notice of hearing to abate.
   
8.52.190   Form of proper service of notice.
   
8.52.200   Hearing by City Council.
   
8.52.210   Service on owner of resolution to abate.
   
8.52.220   Record of cost for abatement.
   
8.52.230   Hearing and proceedings.
   
8.52.240   Assignment of costs against property—Lien.
   
8.52.250   Authority.
   
8.52.260   Penalty.
§ 8.52.010   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and terms used herein are
defined as follows.
   DIRECTOR. The Recreation, Parks and Library Director of the City of Tulare
or his or her designated representative.
   DRIPLINE. The circumference of a circle drawn around the tree with the
radius being a line beginning at the center of the trunk of the tree and ending
at a point directly below the outermost branch tips of the tree.
   HERITAGE TREE. Any Valley Oak Tree (Quercus lobata), with a trunk diameter
of two inches or greater at a point four and one-half feet above the root crown
(also referred to as two inches D.B.H.), or any living tree designated by
resolution of the Council as a historic tree because of an association of some
event or person of historical significance to the community or because of
special recognition due to the size, condition, or aesthetic qualities.
Qualification as a heritage tree, except a Valley Oak Tree (Quercus lobata),
will require the consent of the persons owning the property as of the date of
the designation, and shall be based upon standards, including, but not limited
to the following:
   (A)   Any tree which is indigenous to the area or which has adapted
exceptionally well to the climatic conditions of the Tulare area, or is one of
a kind;
   (B)   Any stand of trees the native of which makes each of its species
dependent upon others for survival;
   (C)   Any tree which has an exceptional size for its species or is a
representative of a species, or outstanding specimen;
   (D)   Any tree which has an exceptional age or size for its species; and
   (E)   Any tree which has distinctive structural interest or is generally
different.
   PERSON. Individuals, associations, corporations, public agencies, joint
ventures, partnerships, independent contractors and other agents and employees.
   PRESERVATION. Acts to promote the life, growth, health or beauty of trees,
shrubs or plants, including but not limited to, pruning, trimming, topping,
root pruning, spraying, mulching, watering, fertilizing, cultivating,
supporting and treating for disease and injury.
   PRUNING STANDARDS. Those pruning standards established by the Western
Chapter of the International Society of Arboriculture dated May 9, 1998, as
revised by the Organization from time to time, and as amended by this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 8.52.010) (Ord. 14-05, passed 10-21-2014; Ord. 03-1915, passed -
-2003)
§ 8.52.020   Permit required to remove or destroy trees.
   No person shall destroy or remove any heritage tree growing on private or
public property within the city limits without a permit, except as provided in
this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 8.52.020)
§ 8.52.030   Permit applications.
   Any person desiring to destroy or remove a heritage tree on private or
public property must first obtain a removal permit by applying writing to the
Director for such a permit. Within seven days of receipt of the application,
the Director shall inspect the premises whereon the heritage trees are located,
and shall issue an intended decision in writing as to whether or not the
application will be approved, with or without conditions; provided, however,
that failure to render an intended decision within such period shall not be
deemed approval. The intended decision of the Director shall be based upon
reasonable standards, including, but not limited to, the following:
   (A)   The condition of the heritage tree with respect to its general health,
status as a public nuisance, danger of falling, proximity to existing or
proposed structures, interference with utility services and its status as host
for plant, pest or disease endangering other species of trees or plants with
infection or infestations.
   (B)   The necessity of the requested action to allow construction of
improvements or otherwise allow economic or other reasonable enjoyment of
property.
   (C)   The topography of the land and the effect of the requested action on
soil retention, water retention and diversion or increased flow of surface
waters.
   (D)   The number, species, size and location of existing trees in the area
and the effect of the requested action on shade areas, air pollution, historic
values, scenic beauty and the general welfare of the city as a whole.
   (E)   Good forestry practices such as, but not limited to, the number of
healthy trees the subject parcel of land will support. In the intended decision
on an application for a permit, the Director may attach reasonable conditions
to insure compliance with the stated purposes of this chapter, such as, but not
limited to, a condition requiring up to two replacement trees from 15-gallon
containers or larger, in a suitable location as substitutes for the removed
tree or trees, at the sole expense of the applicant. Any such intended decision
shall include a statement for the reasons for the decision.
(1995 Code, § 8.52.030)
§ 8.52.040   Appeals.
   The decision of the Director may be appealed by any person aggrieved or
affected by the decision. The appeal shall be in writing, signed by the
applicant with a statement of reasons supporting the appeal. The appeal shall
be filed with the city’s Parks and Recreation Commission not later than the
tenth day following the decision being appealed. The city’s Parks and
Recreation Commission shall hear the appeal and render an opinion within 45
days. Any person excepting to any decision rendered by the city’s Parks and
Recreation Commission may appeal to the Council in writing, within 30 days of
the date of mailing of the decision to the appellant. If no appeal is filed
within such time, the Director shall promptly implement his or her intended
decision by denying or issuing the permit, with or without conditions. An
appeal shall automatically stay execution of the implementation of the intended
decision until the appeal has been considered and decided by the City Council.
The City Clerk shall place all such appeals on the agenda of the next regular
Council meeting and shall give notice to the applicant and/or appellant. The
City Council shall consider and decide all issues raised in the appeal, and the
decision of the Council shall be final.
(1995 Code, § 8.52.040) (Ord. 14-05, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 8.52.050   Emergencies—Public utility line clearance.
   (A)   In the case of emergency caused by the dangerous condition of a
heritage tree requiring immediate action for the protection of life or
property, a tree may be cut down in whole or in part on the order of the
Director or any on-duty member of the Tulare Police Department.
   (B)   Public utilities subject to the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities
Commission of the State of California may also take such action as may be
necessary to maintain a safe operation or their facilities. Any action so taken
must comply with §§
8.52.060 and
8.52.070 of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 8.52.050)
§ 8.52.060   Notice of intent to prune.
   Except in cases of emergencies as described in §
8.52.050, no person shall prune or cause to be pruned any heritage tree limb of
a diameter of six inches or greater, or any Valley Oak tree limb of a diameter
of two inches or greater, within the city without first submitting a completed
heritage tree Intent to prune notice or oak tree intent to prune notice, with
the Director as provided herein.
   (A)   The notice shall be delivered to the Director prior to the start of
the work to be performed.
   (B)   The notice shall be in a form as provided by the Director and shall
include the following information:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the property owner;
      (2)   The name, address and telephone number of the person’s intending to
prune the tree;
      (3)   The date(s) of the pruning;
      (4)   A description of the tree(s) to be pruned, including the
approximate size and location of the tree with sufficient specificity to enable
the Director to precisely locate and identify the subject tree(s);
      (5)   If the work is to be performed in any public right-of-way, proof of
insurance coverage for general liability, property damage and workers’
compensation in case of injury or damage to person or property; and
      (6)   Proof of the possession of a valid City of Tulare business license.
   (C)   A copy of the notice must be in the possession of the person pruning
the heritage or oak tree at all times during the course of the work being
performed.
(1995 Code, § 8.52.060)
§ 8.52.070   I.S.A. pruning standards.
   That certain document known and designated as Pruning Standards, dated May
9, 1988, as revised dated June 6, 1988, as prepared by the Western Chapter of
the International Society of Arboriculture Certification Commission, is hereby
adopted by the City Council as the standards for pruning heritage trees,
including Valley Oaks located within the city, to all intents and purposes and
to the same effect as if each and every section, paragraph, division, word,
phrase, clause or illustration contained therein were fully set forth herein
except for the deletion of any provisions as provided for in this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 8.52.070)
§ 8.52.080   Copies of standards on file.
   Reference is hereby made to three copies of the standards filed in the
office of the Recreation, Parks and Library Director of the city which are now
so filed for full particulars of the Pruning Standards.
(1995 Code, § 8.52.080) (Ord. 03-1915, passed - -2003)
§ 8.52.090   Public assistance for property owners.
   If the Director determines that a property owner, who has submitted a notice
of intent to prune, pursuant to §
8.52.060 herein, cannot properly prune his or her heritage tree without the
assistance of a professional tree trimmer, and that the property owner cannot
afford to hire a professional tree trimmer because he or she does not have the
financial resources to pay for such services, the city may provide financial
assistance to the property owner for the purpose of pruning the tree or trees,
if the following conditions are met:
   (A)   The property owner either:
      (1)   Uses the property where the tree(s) is located as his or her
principal place of residence; or
      (2)   Is a non-profit group, agency or organization and uses the property
where the tree(s) is located in the conduct of its business or operations as
such an organization;
   (B)   In the case of a property owner described in division (A)(1) above,
the aggregate gross income of all persons 18 years of age or older residing on
the property does not exceed the minimum amount as may be set from time to
time, by resolution of the City Council, pursuant to this division.
   (C)   The Director determines that it is necessary to prune the tree to
remove hazardous conditions, remove disease, rot, pests, other harmful
conditions or promote healthy growth of the tree(s). The financial assistance
shall include, but not be limited to the following: low interest loans; work
performed by the city, or ordered by the city, with the cost borne in part or
in whole by the property owner; work performed by the city, or ordered by the
city, with the cost borne by the city to be repaid by the property owner upon
such terms as the city and property owner shall agree; or any combination
thereof.
(1995 Code, § 8.52.090)
§ 8.52.100   Preservation and maintenance of existing heritage tree.
   (A)   When proposed developments encroach into the dripline area of any
heritage tree, special construction to allow the roots to breathe and obtain
water, as determined by the Director, shall be required with respect to any
application for building or zoning permit.
   (B)   The existing ground surface within six feet (measured horizontally) of
the trunk of any heritage tree shall not be cut, filled, compacted or paved.
Tree wells may be used when advisable. Excavation adjacent to any heritage tree
shall not be permitted where material damage to the root system will result.
   (C)   The City Council shall, by resolution, adopt guidelines for
commercial, industrial and residential development and construction on property
within the city where any heritage tree is located. The guidelines adopted
pursuant to this division shall be made a part of this subdivision and shall be
enforced as hereinafter set forth.
(1995 Code, § 8.52.100)
§ 8.52.110   Building permits.
   When any building permit or zoning permit is applied for pursuant to the
city code and a proposed structure would require the destruction, removal or
pruning of a heritage tree, the official issuing the permit shall take into
consideration the provisions of this chapter and the granting or denying of the
permit; and, the applicant shall be required to either obtain the requisite
permit or file the requisite notice in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. In event a permit to destroy or remove a heritage tree is issued in
order to enable the applicant to carry out some project of development or
improvement of his or her property, the permit shall be valid and effective
only in connection with the actual accomplishment of the project.
(1995 Code, § 8.52.110)
§ 8.52.120   Wilful destruction of heritage trees.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully destroy, mutilate, poison or
attempt to kill a heritage tree in the city. Exceptions to this section are to
be found in §
8.52.050 which provides for emergency destruction, removal or pruning of a
heritage tree.
(1995 Code, § 8.52.120)
§ 8.52.130   Enforcement.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this chapter shall be
administered and enforced by the Director. In the enforcement of this chapter,
the Director and his or her designated representative may enter upon private or
public property to examine any heritage tree after first having obtained
permission from property owner or occupant except the Director and his or her
designated representative in the exercise of the city’s enforcement
responsibility, may enter upon private or public property to inspect and
examine the property in the case of a violation observable from a point located
off the public or private property, and may enter upon private or public
property in the event there exists, in the opinion of the Director or his or
her designated representative, a situation considered an emergency where the
integrity of the heritage tree is threatened, or a situation exists which may
lead to injury to person or property due to the condition of the heritage tree
and/or the property upon which the heritage tree is located. In either case,
the Director or his or her designated representative need not obtain permission
from the property owner or occupant. The Director and his or her designated
representative may issue citations for any violation of this chapter.
Conditions giving rise for entry upon private or public property by the
Director or his or her designated representative to examine any heritage tree,
with the permission of the property owner or occupant, include, but are not
limited to, the following:
   (A)   When the Director or his or her designated representative has
reasonable cause to believe a violation of this chapter exists on the property;
   (B)   Where the property owner or occupant has made application to remove a
heritage tree pursuant to §§
8.52.020 and
8.52.030 of this chapter;
   (C)   To monitor any activities fallen pursuant to §
8.52.060 of this chapter; and
   (D)   In cases of routine inspections, inventory of heritage trees, and the
gathering of survey data which may be initiated by the city.
(1995 Code, § 8.52.130)
§ 8.52.140   Severability.
   (A)   If any section, division, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of
this chapter is held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any
court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this chapter, or any
part thereof.
   (B)   If the application of any provision of this chapter to any person,
property, or circumstance is found to be unconstitutional or invalid or
ineffective in whole or in part by any court or tribunal of competent
jurisdiction, the effect of the decision shall be limited to the person,
property or circumstance immediately involved in the controversy, and the
application of any such provision to other persons, properties or circumstances
shall not be affected.
(1995 Code, § 8.52.140)
§ 8.52.150   Penalties.
   (A)   It shall he unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to remove a
heritage tree without a permit or to fail to have a removal permit in one’s
immediate possession during the course of removing a heritage tree, or for any
person to violate any of the construction guidelines as provided by resolution
as described in §
8.52.100(C). Notwithstanding the classification of a violation of this chapter
as a misdemeanor, at the time an action is commenced to enforce the provisions
of this chapter, the trial court, upon recommendation of the prosecuting
attorney, may reduce the charged offense from a misdemeanor to an infraction
pursuant to Cal. Penal Code § 19c.
   (B)   Any violation of any provision of §§
8.52.060 and
8.52.070 shall be deemed an infraction and be punishable upon conviction as
hereinafter set forth.
   (C)   Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under this chapter shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000 and/or six months in the County Jail.
Each day that a violation continues shall be regarded as a separate offense.
Any person convicted of an infraction of this chapter shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed $500. Each day the violation continues shall be regarded as
a new and separate offense.
(1995 Code, § 8.52.150)
§ 8.52.160   Nuisances.
   It is hereby declared a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing,
occupying or having charge of any premises in the city which has one or more
heritage trees located thereon to intentionally, negligently, accidentally or
otherwise maintain the premises in such a manner so as to cause harm to and of
the heritage trees, by reason of any of the following conditions:
   (A)   Water saturation or deprivation;
   (B)   Nailing, screwing, stapling, bolting or otherwise attaching board,
fences, signs, placards, posters or any other material which might cause injury
to the heritage tree;
   (C)   Neglect in the pruning or trimming of overgrown, diseased, decaying,
dead or rotting limbs, branches and foliage. Whenever any premises or heritage
tree(s) exist, or are permitted to exist, within the city contrary to these
provisions the City Council, by resolution, may declare the same to be a public
nuisance; the resolution shall declare the intention of the City Council to
commence abatement proceedings, as herein provided, and shall refer to the
street and number under which it is officially or commonly known and describe
the property upon which the nuisance exists by giving the legal description of
the land.
(1995 Code, § 8.52.160)
§ 8.52.170   Abatement.
   All premises or heritage trees declared to be the public nuisances and
ordered to be abated may be abated by watering, conditioning the soil,
construction berms, pruning or trimming, or removing offending materials
affixed to the heritage tree which might cause injury to the tree, pursuant to
the procedures set forth in this code.
(1995 Code, § 8.52.170)
§ 8.52.180   Notice of hearing to abate.
   (A)   Within 30 days after the passage of the resolution provided for in §
8.52.170, the City Clerk shall cause to be conspicuously posted on the
premises, where the heritage tree(s) is located, a certified copy of the
resolution of the City Council declaring the same to be a public nuisance; the
resolution shall declare the intention of the City Council to commence
abatement proceedings, as herein provided, it shall refer to the street and
number under which it is officially or commonly known to describe the premises
upon which the nuisances exist by giving the legal description of the land, and
shall be substantially in the following form:
 
NOTICE OF HEARING TO ABATE NUISANCE
Notice is hereby given that on the                     day of                           ,                  , the City
Council of the City of Tulare passed a resolution declaring that certain heritage tree(s) located or standing upon that
certain lot, piece or parcel of land, situated in the City of Tulare, State of California, known and designated as
                                            , in the city, and more particularly described as Lot No.             ,
Tract No.             in the city, constitutes a public nuisance and must be abated by the rehabilitation of such
premiss by the watering, pruning, trimming or other methods; otherwise the nuisance will be abated by the municipal
authorities of the city, in which case the cost of the rehabilitation, watering, pruning or trimming will be assessed
upon the land on which the heritage tree(s) is or are located and the cost will constitute a lien upon the land until
paid. (Reference is hereby made to the resolution for further particulars.)
 
   (B)   The City Clerk shall cause to be served upon the owner of each of the
heritage tree(s) declared to be a public nuisance and sought to be
rehabilitated by watering, pruning or trimming one copy of the notice and a
certified copy of the resolution of the City Council, in accordance with these
provisions. The notices and resolutions must be posted and served as aforesaid,
at least 30 days before the time fixed for the hearing before the City Council
and proof of posting and service of the notices and resolutions shall be made
by affidavit which shall be filed with the City Council.
(1995 Code, § 8.52.180)
§ 8.52.190   Form of proper service of notice.
   Proper service of the notice and resolution shall be by personal service
upon the person owning the property as such person’s name and address appears
on the last equalized assessment roll, if he or she is found within the city
limits, or if he or she is not to be found within the city limits, by
depositing a copy of the notice and resolution in the U.S. Post Office properly
enclosed in a sealed envelope and with the posting thereon fully prepaid. The
mail shall be registered or certified and addressed to the owner at the last
known address of the owner. The service is complete at the time of deposit.
(1995 Code, § 8.52.190)
§ 8.52.200   Hearing by City Council.
   At the time stated in the notices, the City Council shall hear and consider
all objections or protests, shall receive testimony and other evidence from
owners, witnesses and parties interested relative to the alleged public
nuisance and as to rehabilitation of the premises by the watering, pruning or
trimming, or by other abatement thereof, and may continue the hearing from time
to time. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall allow or
overrule any or all of the protests. If the City Council finds that good and
sufficient cause does exist why the premises should be rehabilitated heritage
tree(s) should be watered, pruned, trimmed or treated, the City Council shall
prepare and file a report of such findings with the City Clerk. Following the
public hearing, the City Council may by resolution order the Director to abate
the nuisance, after a period of 30 days, by having the heritage tree(s)
watered, pruned, trimmed, treated or the nuisance otherwise spared, and he or
she and his or her authorized representatives are hereby expressly authorized
to enter upon private property for that purpose.
(1995 Code, § 8.52.200)
§ 8.52.210   Service on owner of resolution to abate.
   A copy of the resolution ordering the Director to abate the nuisance shall
be served upon the owner of the property in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter and shall contain a detailed list of needed corrections. Any
property owner shall have the right to have any such heritage tree(s) watered,
pruned, trimmed, treated or the nuisance otherwise abated at his or her own
expense, provided the same is completed prior to the expiration of the time set
forth in the resolution.
(1995 Code, § 8.52.210)
§ 8.52.220   Record of cost for abatement.
   The Director shall keep an account of the cost (including incidental
expenses) of abating the nuisance on each separate lot, or parcel of land where
the work has been done and shall render an itemized report in writing to the
City Council showing the cost of watering, pruning, trimming or treating the
heritage tree(s), and incidental expenses, on each separate lot or parcel of
land; provided, that before the report is submitted to the City Council, a copy
of the same shall be posted for at least five days upon the premises or
property upon which the heritage tree(s) are situated, or the nuisance
committed, together with a notice of the time when the report shall be
submitted to the City Council for confirmation. A copy of the report and notice
shall be served upon the owner of the property, in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, at least five days prior to submitting the same to
the Council. Proof of the posting and service shall be made by affidavit and
filed with the City Clerk. The term INCIDENTAL EXPENSES shall include, but not
be limited to the expenses and costs of the city in the preparation of notices,
specifications and contacts, and in inspecting the work, and the costs of
printing and mailing required hereunder.
(1995 Code, § 8.52.220)
§ 8.52.230   Hearing and proceedings.
   At the date and time fixed for receiving and considering the report the City
Council shall hear and pass upon the report of the Director, together with any
objections or protests which may be raised by any of the owners of property
liable to be assessed for the work of sharing the nuisance, or by any other
interested persons. Thereupon, the City Council may make the revision,
correction or modification in the report as it may deem just, after which by
resolution the report, as submitted, or as revised, corrected or modified,
shall be confirmed; provided, that the hearing or consideration may be
continued from time to time. The decision of the City Council on all protests
and objections which may be made, shall be final and conclusive.
(1995 Code, § 8.52.230)
§ 8.52.240   Assignment of costs against property—Lien.
   The amount of the costs of abating the nuisance upon any lot or parcel of
land, as confirmed by the City Council, shall constitute a special assessment
against the respective lot or parcel of land, and as thus keep a lien on the
property for the amount of the assessment. After the confirmation of the
report, a copy shall be turned over, to the Assessor and the Tax Collector of
the county, acting on behalf of the city, whereupon it shall be the duty of the
Assessor and Tax Collector to add the amounts of the respective assessments to
the next regular bills of taxes levied against the respective lots and parcels
for land for municipal purposes, and thereafter the amounts shall be collected
at the same time and in the same manner as other municipal taxes are collected,
and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure under
foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for other municipal
taxes.
(1995 Code, § 8.52.240)
§ 8.52.250   Authority.
   Any and all nuisances declared and abated hereunder shall be processed
pursuant to the authority set forth in Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 38771 et seq., in the
manner described in this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 8.52.250)
§ 8.52.260   Penalty.
   Any person violating any abatement order provided in this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable
by a fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment in the City Jail or County
Jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both the fine and
imprisonment.
(1995 Code, § 8.52.260)
CHAPTER 8.56: DEVELOPMENT IMPACT MITIGATION FEES
Section
   
8.56.010   Legislative findings.
   
8.56.020   Definitions.
   
8.56.030   Establishment of development fees and providing for their adoption
by resolution.
   
8.56.040   Imposition of development impact fee.
   
8.56.050   Annual adjustment.
   
8.56.060   Creation of special funds.
   
8.56.070   Computation of fees.
   
8.56.080   Payment of fees.
   
8.56.090   Fee adjustments.
   
8.56.100   Use of funds.
   
8.56.110   Refund of fees paid.
   
8.56.120   Exemptions.
   
8.56.130   Credits.
   
8.56.140   Developer construction of facilities.
   
8.56.150   Review.
   
8.56.160   Controlling state law.
   
8.56.170   Superseding provisions.
   
8.56.180   Severability.
§ 8.56.010 Legislative findings.
   The City Council of the City of Tulare hereby finds and declares as follows.
   (A)   The State of California, through the enactment of Cal. Gov't Code §§
66001 through 66009 has, among other things, determined the nexus that must be
established in the enactment of development impact fees.
   (B)   The imposition of development impact fees is one of the preferred
methods of ensuring that development bears a proportionate share of the cost of
public facilities and service improvements necessary to accommodate new
development. This must be done in order to promote and protect the public
health, safety and welfare.
   (C)   This chapter recognizes that all new development within the city will
result in additional growth and that the growth will place additional burdens
on various city facilities, infrastructure and services. This chapter further
recognizes the types of land development that will generate impacts
necessitating the acquisition of land and construction of public facilities and
expansion of services and infrastructure in order to meet and accommodate them.
   (D)   All land uses within the city should bear a proportionate financial
burden in the construction and improvement of public facilities and services
necessary to serve them.
   (E)   The cost of providing public facilities and service improvements
occasioned by development projects within the City of Tulare exceeds the
revenue generated by fees exacted from the development projects.
   (F)   The City of Tulare hereby adopts the Impact Fee report from
TischlerBise dated October 22, 2019 which establishes the costs for providing
public facilities and service improvements occasioned by development projects
within the City of Tulare.
   (G)   The development impact fees established by this chapter are based upon
the costs which are generated through the need for new facilities and other
capital acquisition costs required, incrementally by new development within the
City of Tulare.
   (H)   The fees established by this chapter do not exceed the reasonable cost
of providing public facilities occasioned by development projects within the
City of Tulare.
   (I)   The fees established by this chapter relate rationally to the
reasonable cost of providing public facilities occasioned by development
projects within the City of Tulare, which public facilities are consistent with
the General Plan and the various Elements of the General Plan of the City of
Tulare.
   (J)   The public facilities and anticipated future development herein
referenced are based upon an analysis of existing land use and zoning.
   (K)   The fees established by this chapter are consistent with the goals and
objectives of the city's General Plan and are designed to mitigate the impacts
caused by new development throughout the city. Development impact fees are
necessary in order to finance the required public facilities and service
improvements and to pay for new development's fair share of their construction
costs.
   (L)   Imposition of fees to finance public facilities and service
improvements is necessary in order to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
(Ord. 19-08, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 8.56.020 Definitions.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
section.
   CITY COUNCIL. In addition to the City Council of the City of Tulare, the
Tulare Board of Public Utilities Commissioners whenever the Board is the
appropriate decision making body as established by the City Charter.
   DEVELOPMENT PROJECT. Any project undertaken for the purpose of development.
DEVELOPMENT PROJECT shall include a project involving the issuance of a permit
for construction or reconstruction, remodeling, or any work requiring any
permit under the ordinances of the City of Tulare, as the same presently exist
or may be amended from time to time hereafter. The term DEVELOPMENT PROJECT
shall also include permits for erection of manufactured housing or structures,
and structures moved into the city.
   FEE. A monetary exaction, other than a tax or special assessment, which is
charged by the city to an applicant in connection with approval of a
development project for the purpose of defraying all or a portion of the cost
of public facilities related to the development project, but does not include
fees specified in Cal. Gov't Code § 66477, fees for processing applications for
governmental regulatory actions or approvals, or fees collected under
development agreements adopted pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code Article 2.5
(commencing with § 65864) of Chapter 4, Division 1, Title 7.
   LOW-DENSITY. Property located in City of Tulare zoning classifications A, UR
and RA.
   PUBLIC FACILITIES. Includes public improvements, public services and
community amenities.
(Ord. 19-08, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 8.56.030 Establishment of development fees and providing for their adoption
by resolution.
   The following development impact fees are hereby established and imposed on
the issuance of all building permits for development within the city to finance
the cost of the following categories of public facilities and improvements
required by new development. The development impact fees consist of the
following fees that are hereby established:
   (A)   Fire. A development impact fee is hereby established for fire that
includes components for facilities, apparatus and a proportionate share of the
cost of the city's development impact fee study.
   (B)   General government. A development impact fee is hereby established for
general government that includes components for facilities, corporation yard
improvements, and a proportionate share of the cost of the city's development
impact fee study.
   (C)   Library. A development impact fee is hereby established for the Tulare
City Library that includes components for materials, facilities, and a
proportionate share of the cost of the city's development impact fee study.
   (D)   Parks. A development impact fee is hereby established for parks that
includes components for community parks, recreation facilities, trails, and a
proportionate share of the cost of the city's development impact fee study.
   (E)   Police. A development impact fee is hereby established for police that
includes components for facilities, vehicles, and a proportionate share of the
cost of the city's development impact fee study.
   (F)   Transportation. A development impact fee is hereby established for
transportation that includes components for local streets, grade separations,
bridges, state highways, and a proportionate share of the cost of the city's
development impact fee study.
   (G)   Storm drainage. A development impact fee is hereby established for
storm drainage that includes components for pipelines, basins, pump stations
and a master plan.
   (H)   Wastewater. A development impact fee is hereby established for
wastewater that includes components for collection system improvements,
treatment plant improvements, the wastewater master plan, and a proportionate
share of the cost of the city's development impact fee study.
   (I)   Water. A development impact fee is hereby established for water that
includes components for pipelines, wells, storage, the water master plan, and a
proportionate share of the cost of the city's development impact fee study.
   (J)   Groundwater recharge. A development impact fee is hereby established
for groundwater recharge that includes components for recharge facilities and
surface water.
(Ord. 19-08, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 8.56.040 Imposition of development impact fee.
   (A)   Any person who, after the effective date of the ordinance codified in
this chapter, seeks to develop land within the city by applying for a building
permit or applying for any discretionary land use permit, is hereby required to
pay the appropriate development impact fees established pursuant to this
chapter as the same may be applicable, in the manner, amount and for the
purposes therein referenced.
   (B)   No permits or extension of permits for the activities referenced in
division (A) of this section shall be granted unless and until the appropriate
development impact fees hereby required have been paid to the city.
   (C)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in division (A) of
this section or in any other provision of this chapter, the development impact
fees as established pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any development
project which has heretofore received a tentative map approval or other
discretionary land use approval from the city, prior to the effective date of
the ordinance codified in this chapter, nor to any application for approval
which was submitted in completed form to the city prior to October 22, 2019;
provided that:
      (1)   Any portion of a development project which has already received
discretionary approval, or for which a completed application has been submitted
prior to October 22, 2019, which requires future discretionary approvals, shall
be subject to the fees in effect at the time of such further approvals. For
purposes of this division (C)(1) only, a design review application requirement
is not deemed to be an additional discretionary land use permit with reference
to existing lots of 20,000 square feet or less zoned multiple family,
commercial or industrial;
      (2)   Any portion of an existing development project, or an existing lot
zoned multi-family, commercial or industrial, consisting of 20,000 square feet
or less, which requires no further discretionary land use approvals, other than
design review application approval, not completed within two years of the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be subject to
the development impact fees in effect as of the time that building permits are
issued. For purposes of this division (C)(2) only, completion within two years
of the effective date hereof, shall mean the existence of a lot created by an
approved map which requires no additional discretionary land use permit or
approval; and
      (3)   Provided further that any existing approvals, which expire after
October 22, 2020, shall be required to pay the development impact fees in
existence at the time of issuance of a building permit, as a condition of the
granting of any extension of time for the approval.
   (D)   Any person who, after the effective date of this chapter, installs a
second dwelling unit on a single family parcel, in accordance with
Chapter 10.144 of the Municipal Code, is hereby required to pay development
impact fee equal to 50% of the appropriate fees for single-family residences
otherwise established pursuant to this chapter.
Editor's note:
   Ord. 1723 was adopted as an emergency measure on January 4, 1994, to clarify
the City Council's intent, when § 8.56.040 was originally adopted. As an
emergency measure Ord. 1723 went into effect immediately.
(Ord. 19-08, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 8.56.050 Annual adjustment.
   Each fee imposed by this chapter shall be adjusted on July 1 of each fiscal
year, beginning on July 1, 2020, by resolution of the City Council, or as soon
thereafter as practical. In the alternative, the Council may elect, by
resolution, to automatically adjust fees by a percentage equal to the
Engineering Cost Index as published by Engineering News Record for the
preceding 12 months or any other index, which the Council adopts by resolution.
Any such automatic adjustments shall not apply to fees which are based on
variable factors which themselves result in an automatic adjustment or those
which are specifically indicated otherwise.
(Ord. 19-08, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 8.56.060 Creation of special funds.
   Each fee collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in a special
fund created to hold the revenue generated by each such fee. Monies within each
such fund may be expended only by appropriation by the City Council for
specific projects which are of the same category as that for which the money
was collected. In this regard, the following special funds are hereby created
and established for the purposes indicated.
   (A)   A Fire DIF Fund is hereby established. The Fire DIF Fund is a fund for
the deposit of fees collected for, and the payment of, the actual or estimated
cost of fire stations and apparatus, including any required acquisition of
land, and a proportionate share of the costs of the city's development impact
fee study.
   (B)   A General Government DIF Fund is hereby established. The General
Government DIF Fund is a fund for the deposit of fees collected for, and the
payment of, the actual or estimated costs of constructing and improving the
general municipal facilities within the city, including the corporation yard
and related facility planning studies, including any required acquisition of
land, and a proportionate share of the costs of the city's development impact
fee study.
   (C)   A Library DIF Fund is hereby established. The Library DIF Fund is a
fund for the deposit of fees collected for, and the payment of, the actual or
estimated costs of materials and facilities within the city, including any
required acquisition of land, and a proportionate share of the costs of the
city's development impact fee study.
   (D)   A Parks DIF Fund is hereby established. The Parks DIF Fund is a fund
for the deposit of fees collected for, and the payment of, the actual or
estimated costs of constructing and improving community parks and recreation
facilities, community centers, and trails that serve the entire city, not just
a specific neighborhood, including any required acquisition of land, and a
proportionate share of the costs of the city's development impact fee study.
   (E)   A Police DIF Fund is hereby established. The Police DIF Fund is a fund
for the deposit of fees collected for, and the payment of, the actual or
estimated costs of law enforcement buildings and vehicles, including any
required acquisition of land, and a proportionate share of the costs of the
city's development impact fee study.
   (F)   A Transportation DIF Fund is hereby established. The Transportation
DIF Fund is a fund for the deposit of fees collected for, and the payment of,
the actual or estimated costs of the design, upgrading or improvement of city
arterials, intersections, traffic signals, railroad grade separations, bridges
and state highway improvements, including any required acquisition of land, and
a proportionate share of the costs of the city's development impact fee study.
   (G)   A Storm Drainage DIF Fund is hereby established. The Storm Drainage
DIF Fund is a fund for the deposit of fees collected for, and the payment of,
the actual or estimated costs of constructing and improving the storm drain
facilities within the city, including any required acquisition of land,
preparation of the Storm Drain Master Plan, and a proportionate share of the
costs of the city's development impact fee study.
   (H)   A Wastewater DIF Fund is hereby established. The Wastewater DIF Fund
is a fund for the deposit of fees collected for, and the payment of, the actual
or estimated costs of constructing and improving the sewer collection system
and wastewater treatment facilities within the city, including any required
acquisition of land, preparation of Wastewater Master Plans, and a
proportionate share of the costs of the city's development impact fee study.
   (I)   A Water DIF Fund is hereby established. The Water DIF Fund is a fund
for the deposit of fees collected for, and the payment of, the actual or
estimated cost of constructing and improving the potable water supply, water
distribution, and holding facilities within the city, including any required
acquisition of land and/or the purchase of any required water rights, and a
proportionate share of the costs of the city's development impact fee study.
   (J)   A Groundwater Recharge DIF Fund is hereby established. The Groundwater
Recharge DIF Fund is a fund for the deposit of fees collected for, and the
payment of, the actual or estimated costs of land acquisition, construction,
and equipment to develop groundwater recharge facilities, the capital cost of
diverting seasonal surface water to recharge basins, and a proportionate share
of the costs of the city's development impact fee study.
(Ord. 19-08, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 8.56.070 Computation of fees.
   Residential projects shall pay a development impact fee based on a per unit
basis, excepting that Storm Drainage and Groundwater Recharge fees will be
calculated on a per acre basis. Non-residential projects shall pay development
impact fees based on a per square foot of building area basis, excepting that
Wastewater and Water fees will be based upon water meter size, and Storm
Drainage and Groundwater Recharge fees will be calculated on a per acre basis.
Public properties shall be classified into either the residential, commercial
or industrial land use category, and shall pay fees pursuant to that
classification, as determined by the Director of Planning of the city (herein
"Planning Director") or his or her duly authorized designee. All fees due
hereunder shall be determined and calculated by the City Engineer (herein "City
Engineer") or his or her duly authorized designee. The City Engineer or his or
her designee shall have the further authority to determine the specific amount
of development impact fees to be assessed against a use which is not
specifically or typically associated with the various land use zone districts
for which the development impact fees are established. In the determination and
calculation, the City Engineer shall establish a written record of the
calculation and nexus to infrastructure impacts for the projects identified
above.
(Ord. 19-08, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 8.56.080 Payment of fees.
   The fees established pursuant to this chapter shall be paid for the property
on which a development project is proposed at the time of the issuance of any
required building permit, except as otherwise provided below.
   (A)   Fees imposed on residential development shall be collected in
accordance with the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code § 66007, as the same
presently exists or may hereafter be amended from time to time. An applicant
for a residential building permit may request that payment be deferred until
the date of final inspection. The request shall be approved when the property
owner posts proper security in the form of cash deposit, letter of credit or
other similar instrument retrievable at the time a request is made for final
inspection and fees paid, or executes a contract to pay the fee at the time a
request is made for final inspection. The form and manner of the security or
contract shall be approved by the City Manager.
   (B)   Fees imposed on industrial and commercial development may be deferred
by action of the City Council. The action shall consist of the adoption of a
resolution consistent with the following terms and conditions:
      (1)   A determination is made that such action will promote and stimulate
economic development within the city. The City Council shall make specific
findings setting forth how the subject project accomplishes this goal;
      (2)   Establish a specific timetable for payment in full of the deferred
fees. The City Council may also require a percentage to be paid with the
issuance of a building permit. In no event shall deferral of payment in full be
permitted for more than five years;
      (3)   Interest on the unpaid portion of deferred impact fees shall accrue
at a rate equal to the Local Agency Investment Fund (LAIF) interest rate in
effect at the time the resolution is adopted and shall be articulated in the
resolution. Interest shall be due and payable, in full, with the final payment,
although interest may be paid earlier at the election of the party developing
the project;
      (4)   A written guarantee of payment in full of the impact fees, in the
form of a surety bond or some other form of surety instrument as may be
acceptable to the City Engineer and the City Attorney, shall be executed and
delivered to the city prior to the issuance of a building permit for the
project. Interest in real property may be deemed an appropriate form of surety;
and
      (5)   A determination is made that the deferral of the fees shall not
materially affect the financial ability of the city to satisfy its then current
five-year capital improvement program.
   (C)   Development impact fees shall be paid prior to map recordation or deed
recordation on parcels intended for water well sites, storm drainage basins,
park, police, fire or other government facilities.
   (D)   The term "building permit" as used herein includes any permits
required for construction, reconstruction, remodeling, moving structures into
the city, and the like, such as electrical and plumbing permits, moving permits
and the like.
   (E)   The fees created pursuant to this chapter shall be calculated on the
basis of building area, or number of units, as set forth in the resolution
referenced in §
8.56.030 of this chapter. All fees collected shall be promptly deposited in the
appropriate fund referenced in §
8.56.060 of this chapter. All fees paid pursuant to this chapter shall be the
fees in effect at the time of collection; provided that fees collected pursuant
to division (B) hereinabove shall be those in effect at the time the City
Council adopts the required resolution.
(Ord. 19-08, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 8.56.090 Fee adjustments.
   (A)   A developer of any project subject to the fees described herein may
apply to the City Council for a reduction, adjustment, or waiver of any one or
more of the fees, based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or
nexus between the impacts of that development and either the amount of the fee
(s) charged or the type of facilities to be financed. The application shall be
made in writing and filed with the City Clerk not later than:
      (1)   Ten days prior to the public hearing on the development permit
application for the project; or
      (2)   If no development permit is required, at the time of the filing of
the request for a building permit.
   (B)   The application shall state in .detail the factual basis for the claim
of waiver, reduction or adjustment.
   (C)   The City Council shall consider the application at the public hearing
on the permit application or at a separate public hearing held within 60 days
after the filing of the fee adjustment application, whichever is later. The
hearing shall be noticed and conducted in the same fashion and manner as
prescribed by the laws of the city for hearing on development permits. The
decision of the City Council shall be final.
      (1)   If a reduction, adjustment or waiver is granted, any change in use
within the project shall invalidate the waiver, adjustment or reduction of the
fee if the change in use would render the same inappropriate.
      (2)   The City Council may, from time to time, and as the need may arise,
set forth, by resolution, specific limitations which will apply to reductions,
adjustments or waivers of development impact fees which may be made pursuant to
this section. In this regard, this chapter shall be considered enabling and
directory.
(Ord. 19-08, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 8.56.100 Use of funds.
   (A)   Funds collected from development impact fees shall be used for the
purpose of:
      (1)   Paying the actual or estimated costs of constructing and/or
improving the public facilities within the city to which the specific fee or
fees relate, including any required acquisition of land or rights-of-way
therefor;
      (2)   Reimbursing the city for the development's share of those public
facilities already constructed by the city or to reimburse the city for costs
advanced, including, without limitation, administrative costs incurred with
respect to a specific public facilities project; or
      (3)   To reimburse other developers who have constructed public
facilities described in the resolution adopted pursuant to § 8.56.030 of this
chapter, where those facilities were beyond that needed to mitigate the impact
of the developer's project or projects.
   (B)   In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are issued for
advanced provision of public facilities for which development impact fees may
be expended, impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or
similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities provided are of the
type to which the fees involved relate.
   (C)   At least once each fiscal period, the City Manager of the City of
Tulare (herein "City Manager"), or his or her duly authorized designee, shall
present to the City Council a proposed five-year capital improvement program
for the various public facilities referenced in the resolution adopted pursuant
to §
8.56.030 of this chapter assigning monies (including any accrued interest) from
the funds referenced in §
8.56.060 of this chapter to specific improvement projects and related expenses.
Monies, including any accrued interest, not assigned in any fiscal period shall
be retained in the same fund until the next fiscal period except as provided by
the refund provisions of §
8.56.110 of this chapter.
   (D)   Funds may be used to provide refunds as described in §
8.56.110.
   (E)   The city shall be entitled to make loans of funds collected from one
fund to another, provided that the loans are properly recorded in the records
of the Finance Department and repaid with interest equal to the interest earned
by the city on its funds invested with the Local Agency Investment Fund (LAIF)
through the state.
(Ord. 19-08, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 8.56.110 Refund of fees paid.
   (A)   If a building permit expires without commencement of construction,
then the fee payer shall be entitled to a refund, without interest, of the
impact fee paid as a condition for its issuance, except that the city shall
retain 1% of the fee to offset a portion of the costs of collection and refund.
The fee payer must submit an application for such a refund to the City Manager
within 30 calendar days of the expiration of the permit. Failure to timely
submit the required application for refund shall constitute a waiver of any
right to the refund.
   (B)   In the event any fee collected pursuant to this chapter remains
unexpended or uncommitted in any fund established pursuant to § 8.56.060 five
or more years after deposit of the fee, the city shall make findings once each
fiscal year to identify the purpose to which the fee is to be put and to
demonstrate a reasonable relationship between the fee and the purpose for which
it was charged.
   (C)   The unexpended or uncommitted portion of the fee, and any interest
accrued thereon, for which need cannot be demonstrated pursuant to division (B)
of this section shall be refunded to the then-current record owner or owners of
lots or units of the development project or projects on a prorated basis.
   (D)   The provisions of Cal. Gov't Code § 66001 (d), (e) and (f) shall apply
fully to any refund of fees remaining unexpended or uncommitted in any such
city fund for five or more years after deposit, and the provisions of divisions
(B) and (C) of this section shall be subordinate to the section and shall be
applied consistent therewith.
(Ord. 19-08, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 8.56.120 Exemptions.
   (A)   Any claim of exemption with respect to any one or more of the fees
referenced in §
8.56.030 of this chapter must be made no later than the time of application for
a building permit.
   (B)   The following shall be exempted from payment of the development impact
fees of this chapter:
      (1)   Alterations or renovations of an existing building or structure
where no additional dwelling units are created, water meter size is not
increased, and/or the use is not changed; and
      (2)   The replacement of a destroyed or partially destroyed or damaged
building or structure with a new building or structure of the same size and
use.
      (3)   Effective January 1, 2020, accessory dwelling units are subject to
the fee exemptions and/or fee restrictions provided for within Cal. Gov't Code
§ 65852.2.
(Ord. 19-08, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 8.56.130 Credits.
   (A)   New development that, through demolition or conversion, will eliminate
existing development is entitled to a fee credit if the existing development is
a lawful use under the Zoning Ordinance, including a nonconforming use.
   (B)   New development that will replace development that was partially or
totally destroyed by fire, flood, earthquake, mudslide or other casualty or Act
of God, is entitled to a fee credit if the development that was partially or
totally destroyed was a lawful use under the Zoning Ordinance, including a
nonconforming use, at the time thereof.
   (C)   Credit for the eliminated development or development that was
partially or totally destroyed (as above specified) shall be calculated by the
City Engineer in accordance with the fee schedule set forth in the resolution
adopted pursuant to § 8.56.030 of this chapter and shall be applied to new
development on the same site.
(Ord. 19-08, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 8.56.140 Developer construction of facilities.
   (A)   In-lieu fee credits for construction of improvements.
      (1)   A developer that has been required by the city to construct any
facilities or improvements (or a portion thereof) described in the resolution
adopted pursuant to §
8.56.030 of this chapter as a condition of approval of a development permit may
request an in-lieu credit of the specific development impact fee(s) involved
for the same development. Upon request, an in-lieu credit of fees shall be
granted for facilities or improvements that mitigate all or a portion of the
need therefor that is attributable to and reasonably related to the given
development. To be eligible for in-lieu fee credits, the facilities or
improvements must be constructed at prevailing wage rates.
      (2)   Only costs proportional to the amount of the improvement or
facility that mitigates the need therefor attributable to and reasonably
related to the given development shall be eligible for in-lieu credit, and then
only against the specific, relevant fee(s) involved to which the facility or
improvement relates.
      (3)   Fees required under this chapter shall be reduced by the actual
construction costs of the facilities or improvements that relate to the fees,
as demonstrated by the applicant and reviewed and approved by the City
Engineer, all consistent with the provisions of divisions (A)(1) and (2) above.
Subject to the applicable provisions of division (B) of this section, if the
cost of the facilities or improvements is greater than required relevant fees,
this chapter does not create an obligation on the city to pay the applicant the
excess amount.
      (4)   An amount of in-lieu credit that is greater than the specific fee
(s) required under this chapter may be reserved and credited toward the fee of
any subsequent phases of the same development, if determined appropriate by the
City Engineer. The City Engineer may set a time limit for reservation of the
credit.
      (5)   Credits shall be calculated by the City Engineer in accordance with
the fee schedule set forth in the resolution adopted pursuant to §
8.56.030 of this chapter.
   (B)   Developer construction of facilities exceeding needs related to
development project. Whenever an applicant is required, as a condition of
approval of a development permit, to construct any facility or improvement (or
a portion thereof) described in the resolution adopted pursuant to §
8.56.030 , which facility or improvement is determined by the city to exceed
the need therefor attributable to and reasonably related to the given
development project, a reimbursement agreement with the applicant and a credit
against the specific relevant fee which would otherwise be charged pursuant to
this chapter on the development project, shall be offered. The credit shall be
applied with respect to that portion of the improvement or facility which is
attributable to and reasonably related to the need therefor caused by the
development, and shall be determined, administered and processed in accordance
with and subject to the provisions of this section. The amount to be reimbursed
shall be that portion of the cost of the improvement or facility which exceeds
the need therefor attributable to and reasonably related to the given
development. The reimbursement agreement shall contain terms and conditions
mutually agreeable to the developer and the city, and shall be approved by the
City Council. To be eligible for reimbursement by the city, the facilities or
improvements must be constructed at prevailing wage rates.
   (C)   Site-related improvements. Credit shall not be given for site-related
improvements, including, but not limited to, traffic signals, right-of-way
dedications or providing paved access to the property, which are specifically
required by the project in order to serve it and do not constitute facilities
or improvements specified in the resolution referenced in §
8.56.030  of this chapter.
   (D)   Determination of credit. The developer seeking credit and/or
reimbursement for construction of improvements or facilities, or dedication of
land or rights-of-way, shall submit the documentation, including without
limitation, engineering drawings, specifications and construction cost
estimates based upon prevailing wage rates, and utilize such methods as may be
appropriate and acceptable to the City Engineer to support the request for
credit or reimbursement. The City Engineer shall determine credit for
construction of improvements or facilities based upon either these cost
estimates or upon alternative engineering criteria and construction cost
estimates if he or she determines that such estimates submitted by the
developer are either unreliable or inaccurate. Prior to city approval of a
Notice of Completion and subsequent execution of an Oversized Construction
Reimbursement Agreement per
Chapter 8.64: Oversized Construction Reimbursement, in which final
reimbursement costs are defined, the maximum credit given for construction of
improvements shall not exceed 80% of their estimated cost. The City Engineer
shall determine whether facilities or improvements are eligible for credit or
reimbursement.
   (E)   Time for making claim for credit. Any claim for credit must be made no
later than the application for a building permit, or within 60 days of
completion of the construction dedication, whichever occurs first. Any claim
not so made shall be deemed waived.
   (F)   Transferability of credit; City Council approval. Credits shall not be
transferable from one project or development to another without the approval of
the City Council.
   (G)   Appeal of determinations of City Engineer. Determinations made by the
City Engineer pursuant to the provisions of this section may be appealed to the
City Council by filing a written request with the City Manager, together with a
fee established by resolution of the City Council, within ten calendar days of
the determination of the City Engineer.
(Ord. 19-08, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 8.56.150 Review.
   (A)   Except for the first year the ordinance codified in this chapter is in
effect, no later than six months following the end of each fiscal year, the
City Manager shall prepare a report for the City Council identifying the
balancing of fees in the various funds established pursuant to §
8.56.060 of this chapter, the facilities constructed, and the facilities to be
constructed. In preparing the report, the City Manager shall adjust the
estimated costs of the public improvements in accordance with the approved cost
adjustment criteria established pursuant to §
8.56.050 of this chapter.
   (B)   At a noticed public hearing, the City Council shall review the report
and the development impact fees to determine whether the fee amounts continue
to be reasonably related to the impact of development and whether the described
public facilities are still needed. The Council may revise the development
impact fees to include additional projects not previously foreseen as being
needed.
   (C)   The report prepared by the City Manager and its review by the City
Council, as well as any findings thereon, shall be subject to the provisions of
Cal. Gov't Code § 66001(d), to the extent applicable (which shall be
controlling in the event of any conflict).
(Ord. 19-08, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 8.56.160 Controlling state law.
   The provisions of this chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant hereto,
shall at all times be subject and subordinate to the provisions of Cal. Gov't
Code Chapter 5 (commencing with § 66000), Division 1, of Title 7, as the same
presently exist or may hereafter be amended from time to time, to the extent
the same are applicable. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of
this chapter and the state law, the latter shall control.
(Ord. 19-08, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 8.56.170 Superseding provisions.
   The provisions of this chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant hereto,
shall supersede any previous ordinance or resolution to the extent the same is
in conflict herewith.
(Ord. 19-08, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 8.56.180 Severability.
   If any section, phrase, sentence or portion of this chapter is for any
reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction,
the portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision; and
the holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
(Ord. 19-08, passed 12-17-2019)
CHAPTER 8.60: BENEFIT DISTRICTS
Section
   
8.60.010   Benefit district refunding agreements.
   
8.60.020   Delineation of district boundaries.
   
8.60.030   Costs.
   
8.60.040   Interest.
   
8.60.070   Surplus.
   
8.60.080   Severability.
   
8.60.090   Street and storm drainage in-lieu fees.
§ 8.60.010   Benefit district refunding agreements.
   (A)   In the event that storm drain facilities or street improvements
approved by the city are installed by the city, or by an applicant, which serve
properties other than theirs and for which benefit districts are to be
established by provisions of this code, the City Engineer shall establish a
benefit district to collect appropriate fees from those other benefiting
properties, and refund the fees to the city or applicant as may be applicable.
   (B)   However, if an applicant installed the improvements, the establishment
of the benefit district shall subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   Within 90 days following the notice of completion of the main, the
applicant shall file with the City Engineer a financial statement, in the form
specified by the City Engineer, stating the cost (excluding any anticipated
city reimbursement) of the installation of the improvements.
      (2)   Actual costs shall be limited to engineering, applicable fees paid
to the city, county, state, contractor, surety bonding company, and for
staking, compaction tests and interest as defined in §
8.60.040 below.
      (3)   If the financial statement is not filed within this time period,
the applicant shall not be eligible for any reimbursements under this chapter.
The benefit district shall remain active for 20 years from the notice of
completion of the improvements, or until the applicant has been fully
reimbursed, whichever comes first. Payments shall be made annually in July, or
as soon thereafter as practical
(1995 Code, § 8.60.010) (Ord. 06-2026, passed - -2006)
§ 8.60.020   Delineation of district boundaries.
   When the applicable authority finds it necessary to install storm drain or
street improvements for which a benefit district is to be created, the
authority shall delineate the area which may be served by the facility or
improvement and thereby be benefited. The area to exclude existing streets,
highways and public ways and shall be based solely on property frontage at the
time of the installation of the aforesaid improvement. The authority may
designate such area as a benefit district where other refunding procedures are
not economically feasible for an applicant and the administration of such
benefit district will not result in overlapping of benefit districts or areas
served by the same type of facility or improvement.
(1995 Code, § 8.60.020) (Ord. 06-2026, passed - -2006)
§ 8.60.030   Costs.
   (A)   Benefit districts shall be based on the actual cost of installation,
which shall be submitted to the City Engineer for review and approval. Actual
costs shall be limited to engineering, applicable fees paid to the city,
county, state, contractor, surety bonding company, and for staking, compaction
tests and interest as defined in §
8.60.040 of this chapter.
   (B)   The installing applicant shall submit to the appropriate authority the
actual costs of installation within 90 calendar days of acceptance of the
installation by the city. All costs are subject to review and approval by the
city. Where costs are not available, the fee rate shall be established by
resolution based on current costs of similar improvements.
(1995 Code, § 8.60.030) (Ord. 06-2026, passed - -2006)
§ 8.60.040   Interest.
   Costs shall be adjusted by annual compounding with a variable interest rate
until the tenth year anniversary from the date on the city's notice of
completion. The interest rate used for each calendar year until the tenth
anniversary shall not exceed the average annual Local Agency Investment Fund
(LAIF) rate of return on City of Tulare investments from the previous calendar
year. Interest for a portion of a year shall be prorated to the nearest month.
Beginning with the tenth anniversary, the cost shall be fixed at its value on
the tenth anniversary.
(1995 Code, § 8.60.060) (Ord. 06-2026, passed - -2006)
§ 8.60.070   Surplus.
   Any surplus of monies remaining after the applicant has been reimbursed in
accordance with the applicable provisions of this code may be expended for
construction or reconstruction of the facilities including raising of,
facilities to grade or work for which the funds were collected.
(1995 Code, § 8.60.070)
§ 8.60.080   Severability.
   If any section, division, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this
chapter is held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any Court
or tribunal of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this chapter, or any
part thereof.
(1995 Code, § 8.60.080)
§ 8.60.090   Street and storm drainage in-lieu fees.
   Whenever the City Engineer determines it is impractical or unreasonable for
an applicant to install street improvements and/or storm drainage facilities on
a street frontage for which such installation would otherwise be required, the
applicant shall pay to the city an in-lieu fee for their fair share of the
future installation of the improvements. The fee shall be based on an estimate
of the applicant's fair share of the cost of the improvements, as approved by
the City Engineer.
(1995 Code, § 8.60.090) (Ord. 06-2026, passed - -2006)
CHAPTER 8.64: OVERSIZED CONSTRUCTION REIMBURSEMENT
Section
   
8.64.010   Oversize.
   
8.64.020   Reimbursement agreements.
   
8.64.030   Costs.
   
8.64.040   Interest.
   
8.64.050   Severability.
§ 8.64.010   Oversize.
   OVERSIZE shall mean improvements installed by a subdivider or developer,
hereinafter referred to as “applicant”, as a condition of project approval that
are of a supplemental size, capacity, number or length for the benefit of
property not within the subdivision or development, and are dedicated to the
public. If such condition is imposed, provision for reimbursement to the
applicant, in the manner provided by the Subdivision Map Act, shall be
contained in the subdivision improvement agreement entered into pursuant to
these regulations, or in a separate development agreement, prior to any work
being undertaken. Determination of oversize shall be in accordance with the
applicable provisions of this code.
(1995 Code, § 8.64.010) (Ord. 12-08, passed 8-21-2012)
§ 8.64.020   Reimbursement agreements.
   (A)   Whenever improvements are required to be installed adjacent to
property other than that being developed or in greater size or capacity than
that required for the development of the property under consideration, the
applicant installing the improvements may be eligible to enter into a
reimbursement agreement with the city if the following conditions are
satisfied:
      (1)   The city and applicant agree that the improvements significantly
benefit and serve property that is not within the subdivision or site
development area;
      (2)   All anticipated oversize improvement costs have been reviewed and
approved by the City Engineer, and included in the subdivision improvement
agreement or separate development agreement, prior to the start of their
construction;
      (3)   The improvements are included in the city’s development impact fee
program as a fee generating component, unless otherwise authorized by City
Council;
      (4)   The city and applicant enter into a reimbursement agreement in a
form approved by the City Attorney; and
      (5)   The applicant submits evidence of the actual costs of the
improvements described in the reimbursement agreement as follows:
         (a)   Evidence shall be provided in the form of receipted bills,
canceled checks, or contracts, and shall be subject to the review and approval
of the City Engineer.
         (b)   Evidence shall be submitted within 90 days of the city’s
acceptance of the improvements by notice of completion. If the required
evidence is not submitted within this time period, the applicant shall not be
eligible for any reimbursements under this ordinance.
   (B)   The reimbursement agreement shall generally include the following:
      (1)   All oversize costs which are to be reimbursed to the applicant;
      (2)   The circumstances surrounding the installation of the improvements;
      (3)   The party or parties to which reimbursement is to be made;
      (4)   That transfer of reimbursement rights requires an amendment to the
agreement, and is subject to City Council approval;
      (5)   The method of calculating interest;
      (6)   The effective date of the agreement; and
      (7)   Other provisions appropriate for the execution of the intent of
reimbursement for oversize.
   (C)   Reimbursement shall be made from a fund established by the city
pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 66487 and in accordance with any of the
provisions provided for therein. Reimbursements shall be made subject to the
availability of funds, and in accordance with the following:
      (1)   For improvements funded through the city’s development impact fee
program, the city shall not be required to reimburse more money than is
identified and collected through the development impact fee program as
improvement costs attributable to new development.
      (2)   Reimbursements shall be made only when the city collects sufficient
funds from the developers of new projects, notwithstanding any provision of any
law, this code or the reimbursement agreement. Failure or error by the city
resulting in funds not being collected will not subject the city to any
liability, obligation or debt owed the original developer.
(1995 Code, § 8.64.020) (Ord. 12-08, passed 8-21-2012; Ord. 06-2026, passed - -
2006)
§ 8.64.030   Costs.
   Oversize costs eligible for reimbursement, subject to the limitations set
forth in §
8.64.020(C), shall be as follows:
   (A)   For improvements that are of a supplemental size, capacity or number,
eligible costs shall be based on the actual cost of materials and equipment
installed for the benefit of property not within the subdivision or
development. Where a difference in pipe size is involved, eligible oversize
costs shall be limited to the additional material and equipment costs.
   (B)   Eligible costs for excessive right-of-way dedications shall be the
fair market value based on the property’s zoning and state of improvement at
the time the right-of-way is first specified as a condition of development
approval.
   (C)   The costs of engineering, staking, compaction tests and all fees paid
to the city, county or state shall be excluded from eligible oversize cost
calculations, except for that portion of the inspection fees that can be
directly attributed to the oversized portion of the improvements.
(1995 Code, § 8.64.030) (Ord. 12-08, passed 8-21-2012)
§ 8.64.040   Interest.
   Interest shall be paid on the remaining principal and shall be at a variable
rate compounded annually. The interest rate used for each calendar year shall
not exceed the average annual Local Agency Investment Fund (LAIF) rate of
return on City of Tulare investments from the previous calendar year. Interest
for a portion of a year shall be prorated to the nearest month.
(1995 Code, § 8.64.040)
§ 8.64.050   Severability.
   If any section, division, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this
chapter is held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court
or tribunal of competent jurisdiction, the decision shall not affect the
validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this chapter, or any
part thereof.
(1995 Code, § 8.64.050)
CHAPTER 8.68: CABLE TELEVISION
Section
   
8.68.010   Purpose and application.
   
8.68.020   State video franchise fees.
   
8.68.030   Audit authority.
   
8.68.040   Customer service penalties under state video franchises.
   
8.68.050   City response to state video franchise applications.
§ 8.68.010   Purpose and application.
   This chapter is designed to regulate video service providers holding state
video franchises and operating within the city.
   On January 1, 2007, the State of California became the sole authority with
power to grant state video franchise pursuant to the Digital Infrastructure and
Video Competition Act of 2006 (“DIVCA”). Pursuant to DIVCA, the City of Tulare
shall receive a franchise fee from all state franchises. Additionally, each
state franchisee must remit to the city its pro rata share of any cash payments
for the ongoing costs of public, education, and governmental access channel
facilities or institutional networks, as long as there are such payment
obligations imposed by a city issued franchise. DIVCA confirmed that the city
may establish and enforce penalties, consistent with state law, against all
state video franchise holders operating within the city for violations of
customer service standards. DIVCA precludes the city from adopting its own
standards and grants all authority to adopt customer service standards to the
state. DIVCA leaves unchanged the city’s authority to regulate the city’s
current cable franchises and any city franchise(s) issue on or before January
1, 2008, until the expiration of any such franchise(s).
(Ord. 16-07, passed 6-21-2016)
§ 8.68.020   State video franchise fees.
   (A)   Any state video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of
the city shall pay a fee to the city equal to 5% of the gross revenue of that
state video franchise holder.
   (B)   Gross revenue, for the purposes of this section, shall have the
definition set forth in Cal. Public Utilities Code § 5860.
(Ord. 16-07, passed 6-21-2016)
§ 8.68.030   Audit authority.
   Not more than once annually, the City Manager or his/her designee may
examine and perform an audit of the business records of a holder of a state
video franchise to ensure compliance with §
8.68.020.
(Ord. 16-07, passed 6-21-2016)
§ 8.68.040   Customer service penalties under state video franchises.
   (A)   The holder of a state video franchise shall comply with all applicable
state and federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the
provision of video service.
   (B)   The City Manager or his designee shall monitor the compliance of state
video franchise holders with respect to state and federal customer service and
protection standards. The City Manager or his/her designee will provide the
state video franchise holder written notice of any material breaches of
applicable customer service standards, and will allow the state video franchise
holder 30 days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specific material
breach. Material breaches not remedied within the 30 day time period will be
subject to the following penalties to be imposed by the city:
      (1)   For the first occurrence of a violation, a fine of up to $500 may
be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $1,500
for each violation.
      (2)   For a second violation of the same nature within 12 months, a fine
of up to $1,000 may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect,
not to exceed $3,000 for each violation.
      (3)   For a third or further violation of the same nature within 12
months, a fine of up to $2,500 may be imposed for each day the violation
remains in effect, not to exceed $7,500 for each violation.
   (C)   A state video franchise holder may appeal a penalty assessed by the
City Manager to the City Council within 60 days of the initial assessment. The
City Council shall hear all evidence and relevant testimony and may uphold,
modify or vacate the penalty. The City Council’s decision on the imposition of
a penalty shall be final.
(Ord. 16-07, passed 6-21-2016)
§ 8.68.050   City response to state video franchise applications.
   (A)   Applicants for state video franchises within the boundaries of the
city must concurrently provide complete copies to the city of any application
or amendments to applications filed with the California Public Utilities
Commission (PUC). One complete copy must be provided to the City Manager.
   (B)   Within 30 days of receipt, the City Manager will provide any
appropriate comments to the PUC regarding an application or an amendment to an
application for a state video franchise.
(Ord. 16-07, passed 6-21-2016)
CHAPTER 8.70: PARADES AND EVENTS
Section
   
8.70.010   Purpose.
   
8.70.020   Definitions.
   
8.70.030   Persons obstructing streets.
   
8.70.040   Obstructing entrances to public assemblages.
   
8.70.050   Permit required—Parades and events.
   
8.70.060   Enforcement officer designated.
   
8.70.070   Permit—Application.
   
8.70.080   Permit—Issuance.
   
8.70.090   Amplified sound.
   
8.70.100   Police Department fees.
   
8.70.110   Demonstration equipment prohibited.
   
8.70.120   Indemnification and insurance.
   
8.70.130   Permit—Use.
   
8.70.140   Transfer of permit.
   
8.70.150   Revocation of permit.
   
8.70.160   Public conduct.
§ 8.70.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate parades occurring on, upon, or
along any city street, sidewalk, alley, or other public way to ensure the
safety of parade participants and observers, promote the free flow of vehicular
and pedestrian traffic, and facilitate multiple uses of such property.
(Ord. 09-17, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 8.70.020 Definitions.
   The following words and terms when used in this chapter shall have the
meanings herein ascribed to them.
   EXPRESSIVE ACTIVITY. The sole or principal object of which is the
expression, dissemination, or communication of opinion, views, or ideas by
verbal, visual, literary, or auditory means.
   PARADE. Any parade, march, rally, protest, picketing, assembly, vigil,
ceremony, show, review, exhibition, pageant, motorcade, athletic event or
procession of any kind, or any similar display, which is to assemble or travel
in unison on, upon, or along any portion of any public street, sidewalk, alley
or other public way and which:
      (1)   Does not comply with the normal and usual traffic regulations or
controls, or
      (2)   Is likely to impede, obstruct, impair or interfere with the free
use of such public street, sidewalk, alley, or other public way.
   PARADE ORGANIZER. Any person who conducts, manages, promotes, organizes,
aids or solicits attendance at a parade.
   STREET, SIDEWALK, ALLEY, OR OTHER PUBLIC WAY. Includes all streets,
highways, avenues, lanes, sidewalks, alleys, and other public ways in the city
open to public use for purposes of vehicular or pedestrian travel.
(Ord. 09-17, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 8.70.030 Persons obstructing streets.
   No person shall loiter or stand or sit in or upon any public street,
highway, lane, alley, sidewalk or crosswalk in the city so as to, in any
manner, hinder or obstruct the free passage therein of persons or vehicles
passing along the same, or so as, in any manner, to annoy or molest persons
passing along the same.
(Ord. 09-17, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 8.70.040 Obstructing entrances to public assemblage.
   No person shall loiter or stand or sit in or at the entrance to any church,
hall, theater or any place of public assemblage in the city so as to, in any
manner, obstruct the entrance.
(Ord. 09-17, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 8.70.050 Permit required—Parades and events.
   No person shall hold, manage, conduct, carry on or cause or permit to be
held, conducted or carried on, any parade, march or procession of any kind; or
hold, conduct or address any assemblage, meeting or gathering of persons or
make or deliver any public speech, lecture or discourse or conduct or take part
in any public debate or discussion; or make any display of or use, beat or
operate any wind instrument, stringed instrument or musical instrument in or
upon any public street, sidewalk, public park or public place in the city
without having first obtained from the City Manager a written permit so to do.
Funeral processions are exempt from obtaining permits.
(Ord. 09-17, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 8.70.060 Enforcement officer designated.
   It shall be the duty of the City Manager, or his or her designee, to enforce
the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 09-17, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 8.70.070 Permit—Application.
   Every person desiring to carry on, engage in or do any acts set forth or
regulated by this chapter shall first make a written application to and secure
from the City Manager a written permit therefore and which permit shall be
signed by the applicant if he or she be an individual, or by the managing agent
thereof if the applicant be a firm, corporation or association.
   (A)   Place and time for filing. Applications shall be filed with the City
Clerk's Office and shall be filed not less than ten calendar days before the
proposed date of the parade.
   (B)   Application fee. All applications, except for events that qualify as
an expressive activity, shall be submitted with payment of a nonrefundable fee.
(Ord. 09-17, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 8.70.080 Permit—Issuance.
   (A)   Review by City Manager. Upon the filing of complete application for a
parade permit, the City Manager, or his or her designee, shall review for
compliance with this section.
   (B)   Action on permit application.
      (1)   The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall approve any
application for a permit if the following criteria have been met:
         (a)   The proposed parade will not substantially disrupt vehicular
traffic, public transportation, or pedestrian traffic within the city;
         (b)   The proposed parade will not unreasonably interfere with access
to police or fire stations, or other public safety facilities;
         (c)   The proposed parade would not present unreasonable danger to the
health, safety, or welfare of the applicant, spectators, city employees, or
members of the public;
         (d)   The parade is not proposed for a time and place for which
another parade permit has been or will be issued to a prior applicant;
         (e)   There is sufficient on-street and/or off-street parking to
accommodate parade participants;
         (f)   The proposed area for the assembly or route of the parade will
physically accommodate the number of participants expected to participate in
the parade;
         (g)   The application is complete and does not contain fraud,
misrepresentation or false statement;
         (h)   The applicant has not violated any provision of this chapter;
         (i)   The applicant's permit has not been previously revoked as
provided in this chapter.
      (2)   The City Manager, or his or her designee, may condition any permit
approved pursuant to division (B)(1) of this section with reasonable time,
place and manner regulations to protect the public health, safety and welfare,
to facilitate multiple uses of public property, to prevent dangerous, unlawful
or impermissible uses of public property, and to regulate vehicular and
pedestrian traffic; provided, that such conditions shall not be imposed in a
manner that will unreasonably restrict expressive activity or other conduct
protected by the California or United States Constitutions. Conditions that may
be imposed on a parade permit include, but are not limited to:
         (a)   The accommodation of the parade's pedestrian and vehicular
traffic, including the restriction of parade participants to city sidewalks, or
portions of city streets or other public ways;
         (b)   Conditions designed to lessen interference with public safety
and emergency service access;
         (c)   The provision and use of barricades and/or police escort;
         (d)   Noise restrictions.
      (3)   The City Manager and the Chief of Police, or their designees, shall
review for approval any applications for expressive activity.
(Ord. 09-17, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 8.70.090 Amplified sound.
   Any event proposing the amplification of sound must comply with §
6.40.050 of
Chapter 6.40 of Title 6 of this Code. A separate administrative fee will be
applied for processing an amplified sound permit.
(Ord. 09-17, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 8.70.100 Police Department fees.
   Additional fees may be imposed by the Police Department, if it is requested
by the applicant or determined by the Chief of Police that police escorts are
needed for the event.
(Ord. 09-17, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 8.70.110 Demonstration equipment prohibited.
   (A)   No person shall carry or possess while participating in any
demonstration, rally, picket line or public assembly, any length of lumber,
wood, or wood lath unless that object is one-quarter inch or less in thickness
and two inches or less in width, or if not generally rectangular in shape, such
objects shall not exceed one-half inch in its thickest dimension.
   (B)   No person shall carry or possess while participating in any
demonstration, rally, picket line or public assembly, any metal standards or
poles, or objects with sharpened, pointed or jagged surfaces.
(Ord. 09-17, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 8.70.120 Indemnification and insurance.
   (A)   Indemnification agreement.  Each applicant shall execute a hold
harmless agreement in a form approved by the City Attorney agreeing to defend,
protect, indemnify and hold the city, its officers, employees, agents, and
volunteers free and harmless from and against any and all claims, damages,
expenses, loss or liability of any kind or nature whatsoever arising out of, or
resulting from, the alleged acts or omissions of permittee, its officers,
agents or employees in connection with the permitted parade.
   (B)   Insurance.
      (1)   Prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall obtain
general liability insurance from an insurance company licensed to do business
in the state of California and having a rating in Best's Insurance Guide of at
least "B." Such insurance shall be in an amount of at least $1,000,000 combined
single limit. If the applicant intends to use vehicles in activities associated
with the permit, the applicant shall obtain automobile liability insurance from
an insurance company licensed to do business in the state of California and
having a rating in Best's Insurance Guide of at least "B" in an amount of at
least $1,000,000 per accident. Proof of insurance shall be filed with Human
Resources/Risk Management and such insurance shall remain in full force and
effect for the duration of the permitted parade.
      (2)   Applicants who intend to engage in expressive activity are exempt
from providing insurance, unless there is a specific demonstrable history of
personal injury or property damage claims being awarded against the applicant
attributable to the applicant's conduct of previous parades in the city that
are similar to the proposed parade.
(Ord. 09-17, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 8.70.130 Permit—Use.
   A permittee shall comply with all permit conditions, and with all applicable
laws and ordinances. The parade organizer or other person heading or leading
the parade shall carry the parade permit upon his or her person during the
conduct of the parade and shall exhibit the permit upon the request of any city
official.
(Ord. 09-17, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 8.70.140 Transfer of permit.
   All permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be nontransferable and
nonassignable and shall be for one act or action and for but one place or
course.
(Ord. 09-17, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 8.70.150 Revocation of permit.
   The City Manager or Chief of Police shall have the authority to revoke any
permit granted by it, without notice, for any violations of these regulations
or if deemed for the best interests of the public peace, health and safety of
the city and the inhabitants thereof.
(Ord. 09-17, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 8.70.160 Public conduct.
   (A)   No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere
with any parade or with any person, vehicle, or animal participating or used in
a parade.
   (B)   Except for emergency vehicles, no driver of a vehicle shall drive
between the vehicles, animals, or persons comprising a parade when such
vehicles, animals or persons are conspicuously designated as a parade.
   (C)   The city shall, when necessary for the safety and protection of parade
participants and observers, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles
along the street or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade.
(Ord. 09-17, passed 12-15-2009)
CHAPTER 8.74: ADMINISTRATIVE FINES
Section
   
8.74.010   Administrative Fine Schedule.
§ 8.74.010 Administrative Fine Schedule.
   The City Council of the City of Tulare in an effort to more efficiently
administer all fines, as referenced within each chapter of the Tulare Municipal
Code and associated with its administrative citation process hereby sets forth
an Administrative Fine Schedule to be established and adopted by resolution.
(Ord. 10-15, passed 4-20-2010)
TITLE 9: TRAFFIC
Chapter
   
9.04.   DEFINITIONS
   
9.08.   OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
   
9.12.   PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMITS
   
9.16.   TRAFFIC SIGNALS
   
9.20.   PEDESTRIANS
   
9.24.   ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
   
9.28.   THROUGH AND STOP STREETS
   
9.32.   TRUCK ROUTES
   
9.36.   PROTECTION OF STREETS
   
9.40.   TRAINS
   
9.44.   MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC RULES
   
9.48.   STANDING, STOPPING, PARKING
   
9.52.   BICYCLES
   
9.56.   CITY PARKING LOTS
   
9.60.   PASSENGER OR FREIGHT LOADING ZONE
   
9.64.   TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT PLAN
   
9.68.   ADMINISTRATIVE FINES
CHAPTER 9.04: DEFINITIONS
Section
   
9.04.010   Definitions.
§ 9.04.010   Definitions.
   As used in this title, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
herein ascribed to them unless the context makes the meanings repugnant
thereto.
   ANIMAL. Any horse, pony, donkey, mule, burro or other animals which may be
ridden or driven.
   CURB. The lateral boundaries of the road-bed of a street.
   DRIVE. To ride, to drive, propel or operate.
   DRIVER. Any person, as herein defined, who drives, operates or propels a
vehicle, as herein defined.
   PARK or PARKING. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading passengers or merchandise.
   RIDER. The rider, driver or person in charge of any vehicle or animal.
   STREET. Every street, avenue, boulevard, highway, roadway, lane, alley,
strip, path, square or place laid out for the use of vehicles.
   VEHICLE. Any device in, upon or by which any person or property may be
transported upon a street or highway, except those operated upon rails or
tracks.
   VEHICLE CODE DEFINITIONS. The definition of any term not otherwise herein
defined shall be the same as such term is defined and described in the Vehicle
Code of the state and amendments thereto.
(1995 Code, § 9.04.010)
CHAPTER 9.08: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
9.08.010   Obedience to police.
   
9.08.020   Obedience to signs.
   
9.08.030   Injury to signs.
   
9.08.040   Authority to prohibit U-turns.
§ 9.08.010   Obedience to police.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully fail or refuse to comply
with any lawful order, signal or direction of any officer of the Police
Department when on duty and directing traffic.
(1995 Code, § 9.08.010)
§ 9.08.020   Obedience to signs.
   No person shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any instruction or
direction displayed upon any past standard, sign or device for the regulation
of traffic in public streets.
(1995 Code, § 9.08.020)
§ 9.08.030   Injury to signs.
   No person shall wilfully deface, injure, move or interfere with any sign,
standard, post, rope or other device installed or placed for the purpose of
directing or regulating traffic.
(1995 Code, § 9.08.030)
§ 9.08.040   Authority to prohibit U-turns.
   The Chief of Police, subject to the approval of the Manager, is hereby
authorized and directed to indicate intersections at which operators of motor
vehicle shall not, at any time of day or night, turn the vehicles in a complete
circle, or so as to proceed in the opposite direction.
(1995 Code, § 9.08.040)
CHAPTER 9.12: PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMITS
Section
   
9.12.010   Prima facie speed limits.
§ 9.12.010   Prima facie speed limits.
   The prima facie speed limit hereinafter set forth as to the streets
hereinafter designated are as follows and shall be applicable when signs have
been erected giving notice thereof.
   (A)   Twenty-five mph.
 
Street        Location
F Street      Tulare Avenue to Cross Avenue
Sonora Avenue O Street to Blackstone Street
Tulare Avenue J Street to M Street
 
   (B)   Thirty mph.
 
Street             Location
E Street           Inyo Avenue to Tulare Avenue
Kern Avenue        West Street to J Street
Pleasant Avenue    M Street to Gem Street
San Joaquin Avenue West Street to J Street
 
   (C)   Thirty-five mph.
Street Location
Street                                 Location
Albers Place (a.k.a. Cartmill/J Street Cartmill Avenue to J Street
Connector Road)
Alpine Avenue                          Mooney Boulevard to Morrison Street
B Street                               Inyo Avenue to Cross Avenue
Bella Oaks Avenue                      De La Vina Street to end e/o Paseo Del
                                       Lago
Blackstone Street                      Lyndale Avenue to Prosperity Avenue
Brentwood Street                       Cross Avenue to Prosperity Avenue
Corvina Avenue                         Hillman Street to Laspina Street
Cross Avenue                           J Street to Blackstone Street
                                       Laspina Street to Mooney Boulevard
E Street                               Tulare Avenue to Pleasant Avenue
Gail Avenue                            Northridge Street to E Street
Hillcrest Avenue                       Brentwood Street to Laspina Street
La Dawna Street                        Pleasant Avenue to Berryhill Avenue
Laspina Street                         Prosperity Avenue to Bella Oaks Avenue
Leland Avenue                          300 feet n/o Outlet Entrance to Hillman
                                       Street
Lincoln Street                         Cross Avenue to Prosperity
M Street                               Tulare Avenue to Cross Avenue
Milner Street                          Capistrano Avenue to Prosperity Avenue
Nelder Grove Street                    Bardsley Avenue to Alpine Avenue
O Street                               Tulare Avenue to Cross Avenue
Pratt Street                           Bardsley Avenue to Inyo Avenue
Prosperity Avenue                      Blackstone Street to Hillman Street
Sacramento Street                      Cross Avenue to Prosperity Avenue
Seminole Avenue                        Mooney Boulevard to Spyglass Street
Sunrise Street                         Commercial Avenue to Foster Drive
 
   (D)   Forty mph.
Street Location
Street                        Location
Bardsley Avenue               West Street to E Street
                              Blackstone Street to Laspina Street
Blackstone Street             Tulare Avenue to Prosperity Avenue
Continental Avenue            K Street to Blackstone Street
Cross Avenue                  Blackstone Street to Laspina Street
De La Vina                    Corvina Avenue to Cartmill Avenue
E Street                      South end to Inyo Avenue
                              Pleasant Avenue to north city limits
H Street                      Cross Avenue to Pleasant Avenue
                              Pleasant Avenue to Prosperity Avenue
Hillman Street                State Highway 99 to Leland Avenue
J Street                      Owens Avenue to Cross Avenue
K Street                      Bardsley Avenue to Owens Avenue
Laspina Street                Paige Avenue to Bardsley Avenue
M Street                      Cross Avenue to Prosperity Avenue
                              Sandra Avenue to Cartmill Avenue
Martin Luther King Jr. Avenue K Street to Blackstone Street
Morrison Street               Bardsley Avenue to Alpine Avenue
O Street                      Continental Avenue to Bardsley Avenue
Oaks Street                   Pleasant Avenue to M Street
Paige Avenue                  Blackstone Street to Laspina Street
Paseo Del Lago                Laspina Street westerly to Bella Oaks Avenue
Pleasant Avenue               La Dawna Street to H Street
Pratt Street                  Bardsley Avenue to Inyo Avenue
Prosperity Avenue             West Street to Blackstone Street
                              Hillman Street to Laspina Street
Retherford Street             Leland Avenue to 2,000 feet s/o Cartmill Avenue
Tulare Avenue                 West Street to J Street
West Street                   Inyo Avenue to Cross Avenue
 
   (E)   Forty-five mph.
Street Location
Street            Location
                  E Street to K Street
Bardsley Avenue   O Street to Blackstone Street
                  Laspina Street to Mooney Boulevard
Blackstone Street South end to Paige Avenue
                  Bardsley Avenue to Tulare Avenue
Cross Avenue      West Street to B Street
De La Vina        Cartmill Avenue to Pacific Avenue
Hillman Street    Leland Avenue to Corvina Avenue
J Street          Cross Avenue to Pleasant Avenue
Laspina Street    Bardsley Avenue to Prosperity Avenue
M Street          Prosperity Avenue to Sandra Avenue
O Street          Continental Avenue to Tulare Avenue
Pleasant Avenue   Enterprise Street to La Dawna Street
Prosperity Avenue Milner Street to West Street
                  Laspina Street to Mooney Boulevard
Retherford Street 300 feet n/o Outlet Entrance to 2,000 feet s/o Cartmill
                  Avenue
West Street       Bardsley Avenue to Inyo Avenue
                  Cross Avenue to Prosperity Avenue
 
   (F)   Fifty mph.
Street Location
Street            Location
Akers Street      Cartmill Avenue to north city limits
Bardsley Avenue   Mooney Boulevard to Morrison Street
Blackstone Street Paige Avenue to Bardsley Avenue
                  Albers Place (a.k.a., Cartmill/J Street Connector Road) to M
Cartmill Avenue   Street
                  Hillman Street to Mooney Boulevard
Foster Drive      Laspina Street to Mooney Boulevard
Hillman Street    Corvina Avenue to Cartmill Avenue
J Street          Pleasant Avenue to Sandra Avenue
K Street          Industrial Avenue to Bardsley Avenue
Oakmore Street    Bardsley Avenue to Tulare Avenue
Paige Avenue      I Street to Blackstone Street
Prosperity Avenue West city limits to Milner Street
Retherford Street 2,000 feet s/o Cartmill Avenue to Cartmill Avenue
Tulare Drive      West city limits to West Street
 
   (G)   Fifty-five mph (posted).
Street Location
Street            Location
Bardsley Avenue   Morrison Street to Road 132
Cartmill Avenue   w/o Albers Place (a.k.a., Cartmill/J Street Connector Road)
                  M Street to Hillman Street
J Street          Sandra Avenue to Albers Place (a.k.a., Cartmill/J Street
                  Connector Road)
K Street          Rankin Avenue (Avenue 200) to Industrial Avenue
Laspina Street    Hosfield Drive (Avenue 200) to Tex Drive
Mooney Boulevard  Foster Drive to Bardsley Avenue
Morrison Street   Tulare Avenue to Prosperity Avenue
Pratt Street      Paige Avenue to Bardsley Avenue
Prosperity Avenue Mooney Boulevard to Morrison Street
Turner Drive      Commercial Avenue to Foster Drive
West Street       Paige Avenue to Bardsley Avenue
 
   (H)   Sixty mph.
 
Street           Location
Hillman Street   Cartmill Avenue to north city limits
J Street         Albers Place (a.k.a., Cartmill/J Street Connector Road) to
                 north city limits
Laspina Street   Tex Drive to Paige Avenue
Mooney Boulevard Bardsley Avenue to Tulare Avenue
 
(1995 Code, § 9.12.010) (Ord. 2021-01, passed 3-2-2021; Ord. 19-01, passed 6-4-
2019; Ord. 17-04, passed 5-16-2017; Ord. 15-01, passed 2-3-2015; Ord. 09-06,
passed - -2009; Ord. 09-03, passed - - 2009; Ord. 01-1890, passed - -2001; Ord.
96-1795, passed - -1996)
CHAPTER 9.16: TRAFFIC SIGNALS
Section
   
9.16.010   Traffic signals.
§ 9.16.010   Traffic signals.
   The City Engineer is authorized to install, and Public Works Director
authorized to maintain, official traffic signals at those intersections and at
other places where conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic
be alternatively interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve
traffic congestion, or to protect life or property from exceptional hazard in
accordance with engineering studies.
(Ord. 15-03, passed 5-19-2015)
CHAPTER 9.20: PEDESTRIANS
Section
   
9.20.010   Jaywalking downtown.
   
9.20.020   Residence district—Right-of-way.
   
9.20.030   Standing, walking in street.
   
9.20.040   Crosswalks at other than intersections.
§ 9.20.010   Jaywalking downtown.
   When within a business district, no pedestrian shall cross a roadway other
than by crosswalk.
(1995 Code, § 9.20.010)
§ 9.20.020   Residence district—Right-of-way.
   Outside of the business district, no pedestrian shall cross a roadway other
than by a route at right angles to the curb.
(1995 Code, § 9.20.020)
§ 9.20.030   Standing, walking in street.
   No pedestrian shall stand or walk in any roadway other than within a safety
zone or crosswalk. This provision shall not be construed to prevent the
necessary use of a roadway by a pedestrian.
(1995 Code, § 9.20.030)
§ 9.20.040   Crosswalks at other than intersections.
   Pedestrians’ crosswalks, other than at intersections, are hereby established
and the same shall be painted and identified, in the hereinafter designated,
streets and locations:
   (A)   From the easterly line of K Street to the westerly line of K Street at
the intersection of K and Elm Street;
   (B)   From the easterly line of K Street to the westerly line of K Street,
midway between the intersection of Elm and K Streets, and the intersection of
Alpine and K Streets;
   (C)   From the easterly line of K Street to the westerly line of K Street,
midway between the intersection of K and Inyo Streets, and the intersection of
K and Kern Streets;
   (D)   From the easterly line of K Street to the westerly line of K Street,
midway between the intersection of Kern and K Streets and Tulare and K Streets;
   (E)   From the easterly line of K Street to the westerly line of K Street,
midway between the intersection of K and Tulare Streets, and the intersection
of K and King Streets;
   (F)   From the easterly line of L Street to the westerly line of L Street,
midway between the intersection of Tulare and L Streets and the intersection of
King and L Streets;
   (G)   From the northerly line of Kern Street to the southerly line of Kern
Street adjacent to and westerly of the alley between J and K Streets; and
   (H)   From the northerly line of Kern Street to the southerly line of Kern
Street, adjacent to and westerly of the alley between K and L Streets.
(1995 Code, § 9.20.040)
CHAPTER 9.24: ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
Section
   
9.24.010   City Council to designate one-way streets and alleys.
   
9.24.020   Public Works Director to post one-way streets and alleys.
   
9.24.030   Violation of one-way street and alley designations.
§ 9.24.010   City Council to designate one-way streets and alleys.
   The City Council may by resolution describe and designate streets, alleys,
or portions thereof as one-way streets or alleys whenever it determines that
the restriction of the movement of traffic to a single direction at all times,
or at certain times only, would reduce congestion, control hazards, or improve
the movement of traffic.
(Ord. 10-19, passed 11-16-2010)
§ 9.24.020 Public Works Director to post one-way streets and alleys.
   The Public Works Director shall place or cause to be placed in a conspicuous
location on such one-way streets and alleys at the intersection of each street
or highway intersecting such one-way street or alley, adequate signage
designating the direction of lawful traffic movement and prohibition of access
as applicable.
(Ord. 10-19, passed 11-16-2010)
§ 9.24.030 Violation of one-way street and alley designations.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle traversing any portion
of any one-way street or alley as designated or established by resolution of
the City Council, to operate such vehicle thereon in violation of the one-way
street signs placed by the Public Works Director pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 10-19, passed 11-16-2010)
CHAPTER 9.28: THROUGH AND STOP STREETS
Section
   
9.28.010   Through streets designated.
   
9.28.020   Designation of streets by Police Chief.
   
9.28.030   Erection of signs.
   
9.28.040   Stop intersections.
   
9.28.050   Boulevard stops enumerated.
   
9.28.060   Yield right-of-way—Designation.
§ 9.28.010   Through streets designated.
   M Street, from the north line of Tulare Street to the north city limits, is
hereby declared to constitute a through highway as the same is defined in the
Vehicle Code of the State of California.
(1995 Code, § 9.28.010)
§ 9.28.020   Designation of streets by Police Chief.
   The Chief of Police, subject to the approval of the Manager, is hereby
authorized and directed to designate streets as arterial highways or
boulevards, in addition to those in this chapter enumerated, whenever the
public safety may require.
(1995 Code, § 9.28.020)
§ 9.28.030   Erection of signs.
   The intersection of every arterial highway or boulevard, established
pursuant to this chapter with every other street, shall be plainly marked with
a sign visible to persons traveling along the intersecting streets upon which
sign there shall be printed in legible characters the word “stop.”
(1995 Code, § 9.28.030)
§ 9.28.040   Stop intersections.
   At points of intersection of two boulevards or arterial highways, as herein
described, the Chief of Police shall have power to determine that stops may be
required on only one thereof; and, in that event, it shall be the duty of the
Chief of Police to determine and indicate, by appropriate signs, upon which
thereof the stops shall be required.
(1995 Code, § 9.28.040)
§ 9.28.050   Boulevard stops enumerated.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following described streets or portions
thereof are boulevard or arterial highways:
   (A)   Alpine Street: at east line of K Street;
   (B)   Blackstone Avenue: at north line of Tulare Street;
   (C)   Cherry Avenue: at north line of Tulare Street;
   (D)   Cross Avenue: east and west line at J Street;
   (E)   East Avenue: at south line of Tulare Street;
   (F)   Hospital Road: at east line of K Street;
   (G)   Inyo Street:
      (1)   South line of A Street;
      (2)   North and south line of B Street;
      (3)   North and south line of C Street;
      (4)   South line of California Street;
      (5)   North and south line of D Street;
      (6)   North and south line of E Street;
      (7)   North and south line of F Street;
      (8)   North and south line of G Street;
      (9)   North and south line of H Street;
      (10)   North line of Howard Street;
      (11)   North and south line of I Street;
      (12)   East and west line at J Street;
      (13)   East and west line at K Street;
      (14)   North line of Larkin Street;
      (15)   South line of Los Angeles Street;
      (16)   East and west line at O Street;
      (17)   North line of Road on west city limits;
      (18)   South line of Sacramento Street; and
      (19)   South line of Santa Clara Street.
   (H)   East line of K at Cross Avenue;
   (I)   Kern Street:
      (1)   East and west line at J Street;
      (2)   East and west line of K Street; and
      (3)   East and west line at O Street.
   (J)   King Street:
      (1)   East line at J Street; and
      (2)   East and west line at K Street.
   (K)   L Street: north and south line at Inyo Street;
   (L)   M Street: north and south line at Inyo Street;
   (M)   Madden Lane: at north line of Tulare Street;
   (N)   N Street: north and south line at Inyo Street;
   (O)   Owens Street:
      (1)   At east line of K Street; and
      (2)   At west line of O Street.
   (P)   Park Avenue: at north line of Tulare Street;
   (Q)   Solida Place: at south line of Tulare Street;
   (R)   San Joaquin Street:
      (1)   At east line of Cherry Avenue;
      (2)   East and west line at J Street; and
      (3)   East and west line at K Street.
   (S)   Sonora Street: at east line of K Street;
   (T)   Tulare Street:
      (1)   North and south line of A Street;
      (2)   North and south line of B Street;
      (3)   North and south line of C Street;
      (4)   North and south line of California Street;
      (5)   North and south line of D Street;
      (6)   North and south line of E Street;
      (7)   North and south line of F Street;
      (8)   North and south line of G Street;
      (9)   North and south line of H Street;
      (10)   North and south line of I Street;
      (11)   East and west line of J Street;
      (12)   East and west line of K Street;
      (13)   North and south line of L Street;
      (14)   North and south line of M Street;
      (15)   North and south line of N Street;
      (16)   North and south line of O Street;
      (17)   North and south line of Sacramento Street; and
      (18)   North and south line of Santa Clara Street.
   (U)   Ventura Street: at east line of O Street.
(1995 Code, § 9.28.050)
§ 9.28.060   Yield right-of-way—Designation.
   The Chief of Police, subject to the approval of the Manager, is hereby
authorized and directed to designate intersections of streets and highways at
which a yield right-of-way sign will be erected in accordance with the
provisions of Cal. Vehicle Code § 471.1.
(1995 Code, § 9.28.060)
CHAPTER 9.32: TRUCK ROUTES
Section
   
9.32.010   Truck routes designated.
   
9.32.020   Authority to establish truck routes.
   
9.32.030   Use of established routes.
§ 9.32.010   Truck routes designated.
   The following designated streets are declared to constitute truck routes
within the City of Tulare.
   (A)   Avenue 200 (Rankin Avenue), the entire length within the city limits;
   (B)   Bardsley Avenue, the entire length within the city limits;
   (C)   Blackstone Drive, the entire length within the city limits;
   (D)   Blackstone Street, the entire length within the city limits;
   (E)    Cartmill Avenue, the entire length within the city limits;
   (F)   Cross Avenue, from the intersection of J Street to the intersection of
M Street;
   (G)   H Street, from the intersection of Bardsley Avenue to the intersection
of Cedar Avenue;
   (H)   Hillman Street, the entire length within the city limits;
   (I)   I Street, from the intersection of Inyo Avenue to the intersection of
Alpine Avenue;
   (J)   I Street, from the intersection of Bardsley Avenue to the south city
limits;
   (K)   J Street, from the intersection of K Street to the north city limits;
   (L)    K Street, from the intersection of Tulare Avenue to the intersection
of Cross Avenue;
   (M)   Laspina Street, from the intersection of Paige Avenue to the south
city limits;
   (N)   Martin Luther King, Jr. Avenue, from the intersection of K Street to
State Route 99;
   (O)   M Street, from the intersection of Tulare Avenue to the intersection
of Cross Avenue;
   (P)   M Street, from the intersection of Inyo Avenue to the intersection of
Owens Avenue;
   (Q)   Mooney Boulevard, from the intersection of Tulare Avenue to the south
city limits;
   (R)   O Street, from the intersection of Owens Avenue to the intersection of
Continental Avenue;
   (S)   Paige Avenue, the entire length within the city limits;
   (T)   Prosperity Avenue, the entire length within the city limits;
   (U)   State Route 63, the entire length within the city limits;
   (V)   State Route 137, the entire length within the city limits;
   (W)   Tulare Drive, the entire length within the city limits;
   (X)   Turner Drive, the entire length within the city limits; and
   (Y)   West Street, the entire length within the city limits.
(1995 Code, § 9.32.010) (Ord. 95-1753, passed - -1995)
§ 9.32.020   Authority to establish truck routes.
   The City Council, by ordinance, shall establish appropriate streets to be
designated as a truck route, to be consistent with the circulation element of
the General Plan. The Police Chief and the City Engineer shall identify, by
signs, through traffic routes for the movement of vehicles of two or more tons
capacity involved in the carrying of merchandise, freight or materials.
(1995 Code, § 9.32.020)
§ 9.32.030   Use of established routes.
   When any such through traffic routes are established and designated by
appropriate signs, it shall be unlawful for any operator of any vehicle
mentioned in §
9.32.020 to drive on any other route in the city except when it is impractical
to do otherwise, or except when it is necessary for such vehicles to traverse
another street to a destination for the purpose of loading or unloading, but in
such case only by such deviation from the nearest truck route as is reasonably
necessary.
(1995 Code, § 9.32.030)
CHAPTER 9.36: PROTECTION OF STREETS
Section
   
9.36.010   Injuring pavement.
   
9.36.020   Heavy traffic prohibited.
   
9.36.030   Authority to designate streets.
§ 9.36.010   Injuring pavement.
   No person shall drive or permit to be driven along or upon any paved street
any vehicle or traction engine any tire of which is worn or is not smooth or
that has a sharp or uneven surface, or any vehicle or traction engine to any
tire or wheel of which is attached cleats or spikes or uneven surfaces or any
device that will cause drainage to the pavement in the street. Nothing
contained in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the use of anti-skid
chains, or pneumatic tires attached to the wheels of motor vehicles.
(1995 Code, § 9.36.010)
§ 9.36.020   Heavy traffic prohibited.
   No person shall drive or operate a heavy-laden vehicle or any vehicle
employed in carrying heavy freight, natural oil, crude petroleum, gasoline or
regularly employed in carrying goods or merchandise on any street or parts of
streets as follows:
   (A)   K Street from the north line of Inyo Street to the south line of King
Street;
   (B)   Tulare Street from the east line of J Street to the west line of L
Street;
   (C)   Kern Street from the east line of J Street to the west line of L
Street; and
   (D)   Deliveries; trailers: Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to
prohibit trucks making deliveries within the described boundaries; but no truck
making any such delivery shall have a trailer attached.
(1995 Code, § 9.36.020)
§ 9.36.030   Authority to designate streets.
   The Chief of Police, subject to the approval of the Manager, is hereby
authorized and directed to designate streets in addition to those herein
enumerated whenever the public safety may require.
(1995 Code, § 9.36.030)
CHAPTER 9.40: TRAINS
Section
   
9.40.010   Daytime speed limit.
   
9.40.020   Nighttime speed limit.
   
9.40.030   Duty to maintain crossing lights.
   
9.40.040   Location of lights.
§ 9.40.010   Daytime speed limit.
   Between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., the speed of freight and
passenger trains operating through the city limits shall not be greater than 35
mph.
(1995 Code, § 9.40.010)
§ 9.40.020   Nighttime speed limit.
   Between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., the speed of any trail shall
not be greater than 60 mph) while operating through the city limits.
(1995 Code, § 9.40.020)
§ 9.40.030   Duty to maintain crossing lights.
   All persons owning, operating or controlling any steam railway, engines or
cars propelled by steam and whose tracks cross Tulare, Kern, K and L Streets in
the city are hereby required to maintain each of the crossings of Tulare, Kern,
K and L Streets, at least a six ampere incandescent arc light.
(1995 Code, § 9.40.030)
§ 9.40.040   Location of lights.
   The required lights shall be suspended directly above each of the crossings.
(1995 Code, § 9.40.040)
CHAPTER 9.44: MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC RULES
Section
   
9.44.010   Riding or driving on sidewalks.
   
9.44.020   Funeral processions.
   
9.44.030   Clinging to vehicles.
   
9.44.040   Impounding of vehicle.
   
9.44.050   Emerging from alley or driveway.
§ 9.44.010   Riding or driving on sidewalks.
   No person shall ride or drive any vehicle, bicycle or motorcycle along or
upon the sidewalks in the city. The word VEHICLE, as used in this section,
shall not be construed to include invalids’ chairs, baby carriages or small
vehicles commonly used for small children; provided, that coasters are hereby
declared to be street vehicles and are hereby excluded from sidewalks within
the Fire District as established by this code.
(1995 Code, § 9.44.010)
§ 9.44.020   Funeral processions.
   No person shall obstruct the free and uninterrupted passage in, upon, along
or through any public street of any funeral cortege or procession, or obstruct,
impede or prevent the passage of any person attending the conveyance of the
body of any deceased person to place for holding services thereover, or to a
place of interment or cremation. All corteges or processions as herein
described shall be properly equipped with small stickers designating the same
as a funeral cortege or procession.
(1995 Code, § 9.44.020)
§ 9.44.030   Clinging to vehicles.
   No person riding upon any coaster, bicycle, motorcycle or similar vehicle,
or while wearing roller skates shall take hold of or attach himself or herself
to any vehicle, or anything attached to the vehicle when the vehicle is in
motion; provided, that this section shall not be construed to prohibit the
towing of disabled vehicles.
(1995 Code, § 9.44.030)
§ 9.44.040   Impounding of vehicle.
   In addition to, or in lieu of any fine and imprisonment, the vehicle used in
the violation of §
9.44.030 may be impounded by the Police Department for a period of not more
than 50 days.
(1995 Code, § 9.44.040)
§ 9.44.050   Emerging from alley or driveway.
   The operator of any vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or garage
within the fire limits of this city shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to
driving onto a sidewalk.
(1995 Code, § 9.44.050)
CHAPTER 9.48: STANDING, STOPPING, PARKING
Section
   
9.48.010   Parking behind parked cars.
   
9.48.020   Trailers in business district.
   
9.48.030   Parking vehicles for sale.
   
9.48.040   Repairing car on street.
   
9.48.050   [Reserved.]
   
9.48.060   Exceptions—Emergency vehicles.
   
9.48.070   Congested district defined.
   
9.48.080   Twenty-minute parking.
   
9.48.090   Parking near post office.
   
9.48.100   Moving of vehicles.
   
9.48.110   Parking lots—Early morning parking restricted.
   
9.48.120   Commercial vehicle parking restrictions.
   
9.48.130   Stopping in alleys.
   
9.48.140   One-hour, two-hour, three- hour and four-hour parking.
   
9.48.150   Parking restrictions on state highways.
   
9.48.160   Removal of parked vehicles.
   
9.48.170   Authority to establish zones.
   
9.48.180   Parking position.
   
9.48.190   School zones—Preferential resident parking.
   
9.48.200   Unlawful parking.
   
9.48.210   Commercial zones—Preferential parking.
§ 9.48.010   Parking behind parked cars.
   It shall be unlawful to park or permit to stand, parallel with the curb line
and behind parked cars, any vehicle on:
   (A)   K Street, from the north line of Inyo Street to the south line of King
Street;
   (B)   J Street, from the north line of Inyo Street to the south line of King
Street;
   (C)   Tulare Street, from the east line of J Street to the west line of M
Street;
   (D)   Kern Street, from the east line of J Street to the west line of M
Street;
   (E)   Inyo Street, from the west line of J Street to the west line of M
Street; and
   (F)   Such other streets as the Chief of Police, with the approval of the
Manager may, from time to time, designate.
(1995 Code, § 9.48.010)
§ 9.48.020   Trailers in business district.
   No person shall park any vehicle with trailer attached within the congested
business district in the city.
(1995 Code, § 9.48.020)
§ 9.48.030   Parking vehicles for sale.
   No person shall park any vehicle for displaying it for sale on any street
inside the fire limits of the city, as described by this code.
(1995 Code, § 9.48.030)
§ 9.48.040   Repairing car on street.
   No person shall repair or perform mechanical work upon any vehicle on any
street within the city.
(1995 Code, § 9.48.040)
§ 9.48.050   [Reserved.]
§ 9.48.060   Exceptions—Emergency vehicles.
   This chapter shall not apply to any vehicle of the Tulare Police or Fire
Department, large commercial vehicles under contract with the Tulare Police
Department's Tow Service Agreement or Tow Service Agreement with any other
public agency, or to vehicles of any regularly licensed physician when actually
engaged in making professional calls. Large commercial vehicles under contract
with the Tulare Police Department's Tow Service or Tow Service Agreement with
any other agency shall be allowed to park in residential areas from 6:00 p.m.
to 6:00 a.m. only and shall be parked in a matter so to not impede traffic line
of sight or parked so as to not create a traffic hazard as determined by the
Chief of Police or their designee in consultation with the City Engineer.
(1995 Code, § 9.48.060) (Ord. 2022-12, passed 9-20-2022)
§ 9.48.070   Congested district defined.
   The “congested district” is hereby described as follows:
   (A)   North-south streets. The east and west sides of J, K, and L Streets
from the north line of Inyo Street to the south line of King Street; and
   (B)   East-west streets. The north and south sides of Tulare, Kern and Inyo
Streets from the east line of J Street to the west line of L Street.
(1995 Code, § 9.48.070)
§ 9.48.080   Twenty-minute parking.
   (A)   Green curb marking shall mean no standing or parking for a period of
time longer than 20 minutes at any time between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on any
day except Sunday and legal holidays.
   (B)   When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the
Chief of Police to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no
operator of vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle adjacent to any such
legible curb marking or sign in violation thereof.
(Ord. 19-13, passed 1-7-2020)
§ 9.48.090   Parking near post office.
   It shall be unlawful to park, stand or leave any vehicle for any period of
time whatever in excess of ten minutes upon the north side of Tulare Street in
front of the United States Post Office, located on the street.
(1995 Code, § 9.48.090)
§ 9.48.100   Moving of vehicles.
   (A)   At the end of the periods of time allowed in this chapter for parking,
the vehicles shall be moved; and, for the period of one hour after the moving,
it shall be unlawful for the person in charge of the vehicle to allow the same
to stand within 20 feet of the position occupied by the vehicle immediately
prior to the moving.
   (B)   The prohibitions of §§
9.48.070 through
9.48.090 shall not apply to any licensed physician, Fire Department vehicle or
police vehicle in active use.
(1995 Code, § 9.48.100)
§ 9.48.110   Parking lots—Early morning parking restricted.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or driver of any vehicle to allow a
vehicle to remain standing longer than 30 minutes between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 6:00 a.m. upon any public parking lot owned or operated by the city.
(1995 Code, § 9.48.110)
§ 9.48.120   Commercial vehicle parking restrictions.
   (A)   Definitions.
      (1)   This section shall apply to commercial vehicles of more than two-
ton capacity commonly described as a truck, truck trailer, trailer, semi or
tractor.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, a RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT shall be any
such district as established and identified pursuant to Tulare City zoning, set
forth in Title 10 of this city code.
   (B)   Parking requirements in general.
      (1)   No commercial vehicle shall be left to idle for longer than five
minutes, nor blow air horns.
      (2)   No commercial vehicle shall have cargo transferred from such
commercial vehicle to another within a residential district or on any public
street, highway, alley or other public right-of-way.
      (3)   No refrigeration unit shall be operated on any commercial vehicle
parked or left standing within 300 feet of any residence.
      (4)   Commercial vehicles used for the transportation of hazardous waste,
materials, or garbage, or which harbor vermin or pestilence, or which emit
noxious or noisome odors, shall not be parked or stored within 300 feet of a
residential district.
   (C)   Street parking.
      (1)   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, park or allow
to be parked any commercial vehicle, whether attended or unattended, within any
residential district. This prohibition shall apply regardless of whether the
commercial vehicle is located on the public street, highway or alley, or on
private property within the residential district.
         (b)   Exceptions.
            1.   During the first 24 hours during which the vehicle is
mechanically disabled;
            2.   While a commercial vehicle is making a pick-up or delivery of
materials or goods to or from any building or site.
      (2)   No commercial vehicle shall be parked or left standing on any
public street or right-of-way unless it is a minimum of 12 feet from the
centerline of the street, or such that a minimum of 12 feet is provided per
lane if more than one lane, and under no circumstances shall be parked in any
travel lanes.
      (3)   No commercial vehicle shall be parked or left standing on any
street or right-of-way in such a manner that obstructs a designated bike lane
or pedestrian path of travel.
      (4)   No commercial vehicle shall be parked or left standing within 100
feet of any street intersection, or in a manner that obstructs the visibility
of an official traffic control device to such a degree that the Police Chief or
his or her designee determines that it constitutes a traffic safety hazard.
(1995 Code, § 9.48.120) (Ord. 2020-06, passed 7-7-2020; Ord. 96-1779, passed -
-1996)
Editor’s note:
   For the most recent fee, please see the Rates and Fees Resolution passed by
the city and on file in the city offices.
§ 9.48.130   Stopping in alleys.
   No person shall park or stop any vehicle for any purpose other than the
loading or unloading of passengers or materials in any alley. No stop for the
loading of passengers shall be for more than three minutes, nor for the loading
or unloading of materials for more than 30 minutes in any alley. All vehicles
so parked or stopped in any alley shall be parked or stopped facing in the
proper direction for legal traffic in any such alley, and on the right side
thereof. No vehicle shall be parked or stopped in such a manner as to obstruct
the passage of any vehicle.
(1995 Code, § 9.48.130)
§ 9.48.140   One-hour, two-hour, three-hour and four-hour parking.
   (A)   When authorized signs have been determined by the Chief of Police to
be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle
shall stop, stand or park said vehicle between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m. of any day except Sundays and legal holidays for a period of time longer
than one hour.
   (B)   When authorized signs have been determined by the Chief of Police to
be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle
shall stop, stand or park said vehicle between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m. of any day except Saturday(s), Sunday(s), and legal holidays for a period
of time longer than two hours.
   (C)   When authorized signs have been determined by the Chief of Police to
be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle
shall stop, stand or park said vehicle between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m. of any day except Saturday(s), Sunday(s), and legal holidays for a period
of time longer than three hours.
   (D)   When authorized signs have been determined by the Chief of Police to
be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle
shall stop, stand or park said vehicle between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m. of any day except Saturday(s), Sunday(s), and legal holidays for a period
of time longer than four hours.
(Ord. 19-13, passed 1-7-2020)
§ 9.48.150   Parking restrictions on state highways.
   All restricted parking adopted under the provisions of this chapter, or
designated by the Chief of Police, with the approval of the Manager, insofar as
the same are intended to be effective on streets within the city which are also
highways within the state and subject to the jurisdiction of the Division of
the Highways of the state, shall become effective only after the approval of
the Department of Public Works of the state. All of the restrictions shall
cease to be effective six months after the approval though once given has been
withdrawn and notice of the withdrawal has been given to the Manager.
(1995 Code, § 9.48.150)
§ 9.48.160   Removal of parked vehicles.
   Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the Police Department may
remove or cause to be removed:
   (A)   Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a street or
highway for 72 or more consecutive hours; and
   (B)   Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway
where the use of the street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for
the cleaning, repairing or construction of the street or highway or for the
installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway
or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow
of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is
necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual
size, and the parking of the vehicle would prohibit or interfere with the use
or movement; provided that signs giving notice that the vehicle may be removed
are erected or placed at least 24 hours prior to the removal.
(1995 Code, § 9.48.160)
§ 9.48.170   Authority to establish zones.
   In exercise of his or her power to regulate and control traffic upon, and
the movement and standing of vehicles upon the streets of the city, the Chief
of Police, following consultation with the City Engineer and subject to the
approval of the City Manager, is hereby authorized to establish and enforce the
following parking zones and spaces, and to designate the zones and spaces by
proper markings:
   (A)   Red Zone: no parking.
   (B)   Green Zone: parking restricted to a specified length of time.
   (C)   Yellow Zone: parking restricted to the loading and unloading of
passengers or freight.
   (D)   White Zone: parking restricted to loading and unloading of passengers.
   (E)   Blue Zone: parking limited to the use of handicapped drivers and/or
passengers.
   (F)   Restricted Time Zone: prohibition of parking during a specified time
period.
   (G)   Restricted Use Zone: prohibition of the parking of designated types of
vehicles.
   (H)   Temporary Restriction Zone: prohibition or limitation of parking
during emergencies, special events or unusual circumstances.
(1995 Code, § 9.48.170)
§ 9.48.180   Parking position.
   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across any line or marking, placed
upon the curb or street adjacent to the curb designating a parking space, or to
park a vehicle in such position that the same shall not be entirely within the
space designated by the lines or markings.
(1995 Code, § 9.48.180)
§ 9.48.190   School zones—Preferential resident parking.
   (A)   No parking in school zones. It shall be unlawful and constitute an
infraction to park any vehicle upon any street, avenue or lane, from 8:00 a.m.
to 2:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, on days when school is in session, within
any area in the city that has been designated a school zone parking area and
has been posted with a sign with the words “NO PARKING WHILE SCHOOL IN SESSION”
pursuant to a resolution of the City Council.
   (B)   Permit parking exemption. A motor vehicle on which is displayed a
valid parking permit as provided for in this section, shall be permitted to
stand or be parked in the school zone parking area for which the permit has
been issued. The motor vehicle shall not be exempt from parking restrictions or
prohibitions established pursuant to authority other than this section. All
other motor vehicles parked within a school zone parking area shall be subject
to the no parking restriction set forth in this section. A parking permit shall
not guarantee or reserve to the holder thereof an on-street parking space
within the designated school zone parking area.
   (C)   Parking permits.
      (1)   Parking permits shall be issued by the Finance Director/City Clerk.
Each such permit shall state the address and license number of the motor
vehicle for which it is issued. No more than one parking permit shall be issued
for each motor vehicle for which application is made. Parking permits shall be
valid for the duration of the residency of the permittee and while the
permittee retains ownership of the vehicle for which the parking permit was
issued. The City Manager is authorized to issue such rules and regulations, not
inconsistent with this section, governing the manner in which persons shall
qualify for parking permits.
      (2)   Parking permits may be issued for motor vehicles only upon
application of the following persons:
         (a)   A resident of a school zone parking area who has a motor vehicle
registered in his or her name, or who has a motor vehicle for his or her
exclusive use and under his or her control;
         (b)   A person who owns or leases commercial property and actively
engages in business activity within a school zone parking area. However, no
more than one parking permit may be issued for each business establishment for
a motor vehicle registered to or under the control of such a person;
         (c)   A resident of the school zone parking area for display upon a
rented motor vehicle; provided that no such permit shall be valid for more than
seven days from date of issuance or renewal thereof; and
         (d)   A resident of a school zone parking area for use by bona fide
transient visitors therein. Such a visitor permit shall provide all the rights
and privileges of a regular permit. A visitor permit shall be valid for one
calendar month and shall expire on the last day of each month. No resident of a
school zone parking area shall be issued more than one visitor permit at any
one time.
   (D)   Additional parking permits.
      (1)   The Finance Director/City Clerk is authorized upon application to
issue additional parking permits to resident of a school zone parking area for
use of persons who, on a regular basis, provide health care or other related
services essential to the well being of the resident applicant, upon the
certification under penalty of perjury by a licensed physician that such
services are required. No resident of a school zone parking area shall be
authorized to possess more than three additional parking permits at any one
time. The City Manager may issue rules and regulations, not inconsistent with
this section, governing the manner in which persons shall qualify for this
permit.
      (2)   The fee for a parking permit shall be $5. A parking permit shall be
valid for the duration of the residency of the permittee and while the
permittee retains ownership of the vehicle for which the parking permit was
issued. There shall be a $1 transfer charge for those applicants with permits
in one school zone parking area who move to another school zone parking area
and apply for a permit in the new area of residence. The fee for a rental car
permit shall be $1. The fee for a visitor permit shall be $2.
      (3)   The Finance Director/City Clerk is authorized to revoke the parking
permit of any person found to be in violation of this section and, upon written
notification thereof, the person shall surrender the permit to the Finance
Director/City Clerk.
   (E)   Posting. Upon the adoption by the City Council of a resolution
designating a school parking area, the Director of Public Works/City Engineer
shall cause appropriate signs to be erected in the area, reading as follows:
“NO PARKING WHILE SCHOOL IN SESSION”.
   (F)   Display of permits. Permits shall be displayed in a manner determined
by the Chief of Police.
(1995 Code, § 9.48.190)
Editor’s note:
   For the most recent fee, please see the Rates and Fees Resolution passed by
the city and on file in the city offices.
§ 9.48.200   Unlawful parking.
   It shall be unlawful to park or leave standing any vehicle in parking zones
or spaces, in violation of the restrictions, established pursuant to §
9.48.170.
(1995 Code, § 9.48.200)
§ 9.48.210   Commercial zones—Preferential parking.
   (A)   Title. It is unlawful and constitutes an infraction to park any
vehicle upon any street, avenue, lane or alley, from time to time, day to day,
within any area in the city that has been designated a commercial limited
parking area and has been posted with a sign with the words “Limited Parking
Except By Permit” pursuant to a resolution of the City Council, unless the non-
permit parking conforms with the non-permit parking restrictions posted in the
area.
   (B)   Permit parking exemption. A motor vehicle on which is displayed a
valid parking permit as provided for in this section, shall be permitted to
stand or be parked in the commercial limited parking area for which the permit
has been issued. The motor vehicle shall not be exempt from parking
restrictions or prohibitions established pursuant to authority other than this
section. All other motor vehicles parked within the commercial limited parking
area shall be subject to the non-permit parking restriction posted in the area.
A parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve to the holder thereof an on-
street parking space within the designated commercial limited parking area.
   (C)   Parking permits.
      (1)   Parking permits shall be issued by the Finance Director/City Clerk.
Each such permit shall state the address and license number of the motor
vehicle for which it is issued. No more than one parking permit shall be issued
for each motor vehicle for which application is made. Parking permits shall be
valid only so long as the permittee works at a commercial establishment located
within the designated commercial limited parking area and while the permittee
retains ownership of the vehicle for which the parking permit was issued. The
City Manager is authorized to issue such rules and regulations, not
inconsistent with this section, governing the manner in which persons shall
qualify for parking permits.
      (2)   Parking permits may be issued for motor vehicles only upon
application of the following persons:
         (a)   One who is employed by a commercial establishment located within
a designated commercial limited parking area who has a motor vehicle registered
in his or her name, or who has a motor vehicle for his or her exclusive use and
under his or her control;
         (b)   A person who owns or leases commercial property and actively
engages in business activity within a commercial limited parking area; and
         (c)   No more than one parking permit may be issued for each
commercial establishment for a motor vehicle registered to or under the control
of such a person, provided that any religious facility located in such an area
may be entitled to two permits.
      (3)   The fee for a parking shall be $5. A parking permit shall be valid
for the duration of the time a permittee is employed by or owns an interest in
a commercial establishment located within the designated commercial limited
parking area.
      (4)   The Finance Director/City Clerk is authorized to revoke the parking
permit of any person found to be in violation of this section and, upon written
notification thereof, the person shall surrender the permit to the Finance
Director/City Clerk.
   (D)   Posting. Upon the adoption by the City Council of a resolution
designating a commercial limited parking area, the Director of Public Works/
City Engineer shall cause appropriate signs to be erected in the area, reading
as follows: “Limited Parking Except by Permit”.
   (E)   Display of permits. Permits shall be displayed in a manner determined
by the Chief of Police.
(1995 Code, § 9.48.210) (Ord. 96-1778, passed - -1996)
Editor’s note:
   For the most recent fee, please see the Rates and Fees Resolution passed by
the city and on file in the city offices.
CHAPTER 9.52: BICYCLES
Section
   
9.52.010   License required—Exception.
   
9.52.020   Issuance—Expiration of license.
   
9.52.030   Effect of license.
   
9.52.040   License plate.
   
9.52.050   Attaching license.
   
9.52.060   Records.
   
9.52.070   License fee.
   
9.52.080   Transfer of license.
   
9.52.090   Report of transfer.
   
9.52.100   Altering frame numbers.
   
9.52.110   Tampering with license.
   
9.52.120   Impounding of bicycles.
   
9.52.130   Report of dealer, secondhand purchase.
   
9.52.140   Report of dealer, sales.
§ 9.52.010   License required—Exception.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use a bicycle propelled
wholly or in part by muscle power upon any street, alley, school ground or area
open to the public use within the city without first obtaining a bicycle
license from the Licensing Agency. Persons living outside of the city shall be
exempt from the purchase of a license when visiting within the city.
(1995 Code, § 9.52.010)
§ 9.52.020   Issuance—Expiration of license.
   The Licensing Agency is hereby authorized to issue, on request, and upon
payment of the prescribed fee, a permanent bicycle license. All licenses issued
shall be for a three-year period. The fee shall be established by resolution of
the City Council.
(1995 Code, § 9.52.020)
§ 9.52.030   Effect of license.
   The license, when issued, shall entitle the licensee to operate the bicycle
for which the license has been issued within the city.
(1995 Code, § 9.52.030)
§ 9.52.040   License plate.
   The city shall provide a standard statewide bicycle plate and registration
card. A number shall be issued to the bicycle. The number shall be entered on
the registration card.
(1995 Code, § 9.52.040)
§ 9.52.050   Attaching license.
   The license plate shall be affixed on the forward side of the vertical frame
member, extending from the crank sprocket housing to the seat post. The
registration card shall be completed in its entirety and issued to the
licensee. The number shall be the same as that issued to the bicycle and
entered on the registration card.
(1995 Code, § 9.52.050)
§ 9.52.060   Records.
   The License Agency shall maintain adequate records of issuance and transfer.
The records shall include fees received and the dates involved.
(1995 Code, § 9.52.060)
§ 9.52.070   License fee.
   The license fee shall be fixed by resolution of the City Council. The fee
shall be collected at the time of issuance of the license. All bicycle licenses
will be transferable upon the payment of a fee. All license and transfer fees
shall be paid into the general fund of the City of Tulare.
(1995 Code, § 9.52.070)
§ 9.52.080   Transfer of license.
   The license shall be transferred to a new owner. A transfer fee shall be
assessed. The transfer fee shall be established by resolution of the City
Council.
(1995 Code, § 9.52.080)
§ 9.52.090   Report of transfer.
   It shall be the duty of every person who sells or transfers ownership of any
bicycle to report the sale or transfer to the Licensing Agency within ten days
of the sale or transfer. The original registration card shall be presented to
the Licensing Agency for verification of ownership. The new owner information
shall be entered on the registration card and the card returned to the new
owner upon payment of the transfer fee. All records pertaining to the bicycle
involved shall be updated to show new owner information.
(1995 Code, § 9.52.090)
§ 9.52.100   Altering frame numbers.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously remove,
destroy, mutilate or otherwise attempt to change or alter any frame number of
any bicycle licensed under the provisions of this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 9.52.100)
§ 9.52.110   Tampering with license.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter in
any way any bicycle license, registration card, or frame number which has been
assigned to any bicycle by the city’s Licensing Agency.
(1995 Code, § 9.52.110)
§ 9.52.120   Impounding of bicycles.
   The Police Department, or any members thereof, may impound and retain
possession of any bicycle operated in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter. The impound may take effect as long as or until such violations
have been corrected or fees satisfied. In the event of an impounded or found
bicycle not being claimed by its lawful owner within the period of one year,
the ownership shall revert to the city. The bicycle shall then be sold at the
next scheduled public auction. A new owner shall then be responsible for
transfer fees. A new registration card shall be issued in lieu of no available
card. All funds received from public auction shall be paid into the general
fund of the city.
(1995 Code, § 9.52.120)
§ 9.52.130   Report of dealer, secondhand purchase.
   All persons engaged in the business of buying secondhand vehicles are hereby
required to make a daily report to the Police Department, giving the name and
address of the person from whom the bicycle was purchased and any frame and
license numbers available.
(1995 Code, § 9.52.130)
§ 9.52.140   Report of dealer, sales.
   All persons engaged in the business of selling new or used bicycles are
hereby required to make a daily report to the Police Department, giving the
name and address of the purchaser and all frame or serial numbers of the
bicycle. All dealers shall be required to maintain a record of sales for a
period of not less than five years.
(1995 Code, § 9.52.140)
CHAPTER 9.56: CITY PARKING LOTS
Section
   
9.56.010   Acquisition of parking facilities authorized.
§ 9.56.010   Acquisition of parking facilities authorized.
   Under the provisions of § 52(c) of the City Charter, the Board of Public
Utilities Commissioners is hereby granted the power to acquire, construct,
operate, maintain, extend, manage and control works and property for the
purpose of supplying the city and its inhabitants with revenue producing off-
street automobile parking facilities, including off-street parking lots,
parking garages, and all other type of off street parking facilities now, or
hereafter developed; and to acquire and take by purchase, lease, condemnation
or otherwise, and to hold in the name of the city any property situated within
or without the city or within or without the state that may be necessary or
convenient for such purposes; to borrow money for any or all such purposes of
such terms and conditions prescribed by the Board, the indebtedness to be
payable only out of the revenue funds pertaining to the off-street parking
facilities operated by the Board.
(1995 Code, § 9.56.010)
CHAPTER 9.60: PASSENGER OR FREIGHT LOADING ZONE
Section
   
9.60.010   Passenger and freight loading and unloading zone.
   
9.60.020   Authority to establish zones.
   
9.60.030   Passenger loading and unloading zone.
§ 9.60.010   Passenger and freight loading and unloading zone.
   No person shall leave standing or parked upon any street, avenue or lane
within the city for a time longer than it takes to load or unload passengers or
freight or for any time longer than 15 minutes between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m. of each and every day of the week, excepting Sundays and
holidays, in any parking area which shall be designated by yellow paint or
other yellow material upon the entire curb surface.
(1995 Code, § 9.60.010)
§ 9.60.020   Authority to establish zones.
   In the exercise of his or her power to regulate and control traffic upon,
and the movement of standing of vehicles upon, the streets or the city, the
Chief of Police, subject to the approval of the Manager, is hereby authorized
to establish loading and unloading zones in which vehicles will not be
permitted to stand longer than 15 minutes or the time necessary to load or
unload passengers or freight.
(1995 Code, § 9.60.020)
§ 9.60.030   Passenger loading and unloading zone.
   No person shall leave standing or parked upon any street, avenue or lane
within the city for a time longer than it takes to load or unload passengers or
for any time longer than 15 minutes between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. of each and every day of the week, excepting Sundays and legal holidays,
in any parking area which shall be designated by white paint or other white
material upon the entire curb surface.
(1995 Code, § 9.60.030)
CHAPTER 9.64: TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT PLAN
Section
   
9.64.010   Plan adopted.
§ 9.64.010   Plan adopted.
   The City of Tulare hereby adopts Rule 9410 of the San Joaquin Valley Unified
Air Pollution Control District, as administered by, and as amended from time to
time by, the District, as the Transportation Demand Management Plan within the
city.
(1995 Code, § 9.64.010) (Ord. 2023-05, passed 4-4-2023)
CHAPTER 9.68: ADMINISTRATIVE FINES
Section
   
9.68.010   Administrative Fine Schedule.
§ 9.68.010 Administrative Fine Schedule.
   The City Council of the City of Tulare in an effort to more efficiently
administer all fines, as referenced within each chapter of the Tulare Municipal
Code and associated with its administrative citation process hereby sets forth
an Administrative Fine Schedule to be established and adopted by resolution.
(Ord. 10-15, passed 4-20-2010)
TITLE 10: ZONING
Chapter
   
10.02.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
10.04.   CONSTRUCTION AND TERMINOLOGY
   
10.06.   ZONE DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP
   
10.08.   LAND USE TABLES
   
10.10.   RURAL RESIDENTIAL ZONE
   
10.12.   RESIDENTIAL ESTATE ZONE
   
10.14.   LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ZONE
   
10.16.   MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ZONE
   
10.18.   HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ZONE
   
10.20.   NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL ZONE
   
10.22.   OFFICE COMMERCIAL ZONE
   
10.24.   RETAIL COMMERCIAL ZONE
   
10.26.   SERVICE COMMERCIAL ZONE
   
10.28.   LIGHT INDUSTRIAL ZONE
   
10.30.   HEAVY INDUSTRIAL ZONE
   
10.32.   PUBLIC LANDS ZONE
   
10.34.   PARKS AND RECREATION ZONE
   
10.36.   AGRICULTURE/OPEN SPACE ZONE
   
10.38.   HISTORIC SITE AND HISTORIC NEIGHBORHOOD OVERLAY ZONE
   
10.40.   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONE
   
10.42.   DOWNTOWN OVERLAY ZONE
   
10.44.   AIRPORT OVERLAY ZONE
   
10.46.   MIXED-USE OVERLAY ZONE
   
10.48.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
   
10.50.   DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
   
10.52.   LANDSCAPE STANDARDS
   
10.54.   PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS
   
10.56.   SIGNS AND OUTDOOR ADVERTISING STRUCTURES
   
10.58.   SIDEWALK VENDING AND STATIONARY MOBILE VENDORS
   
10.60.   SPECIFIC LAND USE STANDARDS
   
10.62.   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
   
10.64.   RIGHT TO FARM
   
10.66.   FARMLAND MITIGATION
   
10.68.   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES AND TOWERS
   
10.70.   PERMITS AND APPLICATIONS
   
10.72.   SITE PLAN REVIEW
   
10.74.   ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMITS
   
10.76.   TEMPORARY USE PERMITS
   
10.78.   HOME OCCUPATION PERMITS
   
10.80.   CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
   
10.82.   DENSITY BONUS
   
10.84.   VARIANCES AND MINOR DEVIATIONS
   
10.86.   ZONING ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS
   
10.88.   GENERAL PLAN AND SPECIFIC PLAN AMENDMENTS
   
10.89.   DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
   
10.90.   NON-CONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES, AND LOTS
   
10.92.   REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION
   
10.94.   ANNEXATIONS
   
10.96.   DEFINITION OF LAND USES
   
10.98.   DEFINITION OF TERMS
CHAPTER 10.02: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.02.010   Adoption.
   
10.02.020   Purposes and objectives.
   
10.02.030   Short title.
   
10.02.040   Components.
   
10.02.050   Authority.
   
10.02.060   Relationship to the General Plan.
   
10.02.070   Relationship to specific plans.
   
10.02.080   Relationship to design guidelines.
   
10.02.090   Relationship to other titles of the Municipal Code.
   
10.02.100   Conflict between other regulations.
   
10.02.110   Application.
   
10.02.120   Enforcement.
   
10.02.130   Issuance of permits, certificates, and licenses.
§ 10.02.010 Adoption.
   A zoning ordinance for the City of Tulare, State of California, which is a
part of the Tulare Municipal Code, has been adopted, as provided in this title.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.02.020 Purposes and objectives.
   The zoning ordinance is adopted to preserve, protect, and promote the public
health, safety, peace, comfort, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare of
the citizens of Tulare. More specifically, the zoning ordinance is adopted to
achieve the following objectives:
   (A)   Provide a Zoning Map and associated regulations to guide the physical
development of the city in such a manner as to progressively achieve the
general arrangement of the land uses described and depicted in the Tulare
General Plan.
   (B)   Ensure that new development is logical, desirable, and in conformance
with the objectives and policies of the General Plan.
   (C)   Provide standards for the orderly development of Tulare; conserve
natural resources.
   (D)   Maintain and protect the value of property.
   (E)   Promote a safe and effective traffic circulation system.
   (F)   Ensure the provision of adequate open space for light, air, and
recreation.
   (G)   Promote the economic stability of existing land uses that conform to
the General Plan and protect them from intrusions by inharmonious or harmful
land uses.
   (H)   Permit the development of residential, office, commercial, and
industrial land uses in accordance with the General Plan to strengthen Tulare's
economic base.
   (I)   Protect the character of Tulare's downtown and its residential
neighborhoods.
   (J)   Provide the private sector with a document upon which it can base
investment decisions.
   (K)   Inform the public where certain types of development will occur in the
community as well as the development standards to which they will develop.
   (L)   Coordinate with the County of Tulare in regard to the use of land
within Tulare's General Plan planning area, and the standards to which
development will conform if it occurs outside the city limits.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.02.030 Short title.
   This title shall be known as the "zoning ordinance." The words "code" and
"ordinance," as used in this title, shall have the same meaning.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.02.040 Components.
   The zoning ordinance shall consist of a Zoning Map designating certain
districts and a set of regulations controlling land uses, population density,
structures' uses and locations, and the height and bulk of structures. It shall
also consist of the open spaces about structures; the appearance of certain
uses and structures; the areas and dimensions of sites; the location, size, and
illumination of signs; the number and design of off-street parking and off-
street loading facilities; and the process for approving discretionary land use
actions. The Zoning Map will delineate Tulare's zone districts.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.02.050 Authority.
   This title is adopted pursuant to the provisions of the Planning and Zoning
Law, Cal. Gov’t Code Title 7, § 65000 of the State of California.
   (A)   The Community Development Director (Director) shall resolve any
questions that involve the interpretation or application of this title. The
Director may seek the advice of the City Attorney before deciding on any
interpretation. The Director's opinion on any provision of this title may be
appealed to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall review the
provision of this title in question and shall set forth its findings as a
resolution. This finding shall govern unless appealed to the City Council.
   (B)   From time to time, persons may wish to use the property for purposes
that, while consistent with provisions of the district in which the property is
located, may, in the findings of the Director, violate the purpose and
objectives of this title. When such findings are made, the Director may inform
the person that the proposed use of the property is not permitted and shall
subsequently report the findings to the Planning Commission for their review,
findings, and recommendation.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.02.060 Relationship to the General Plan.
   The zoning ordinance is the primary tool used to implement the goals and
policies contained within the General Plan. All matters governed by this title
shall substantially conform to the purposes, intent, or provisions of the
General Plan. Any recommendations for zone changes, if found to be not in
conformance with the General Plan and its phrasing, shall not be permitted
unless it is also found that the General Plan is in error or need of change. In
this situation, the General Plan must also be amended to maintain consistency
between the General Plan and the zoning ordinance.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.02.070 Relationship to specific plans.
   Specific plans are designed to meet the requirements of the State Government
Code and the General Plan. All uses, buildings, or structures located within a
specific plan area shall comply with the provisions of the applicable specific
plan. Where such provisions conflict with the zoning ordinance, the
requirements of the adopted specific plan shall take precedence over the zoning
ordinance. In instances where the specific plan is silent, the provisions of
the zoning ordinance shall prevail.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.02.080 Relationship to design guidelines.
   Design guidelines, which can be adopted by the City Council, are intended to
supplement the general design and development regulations located in the zoning
ordinance. Design guidelines represent the city's preferences and provide
examples of appropriate, quality design that positively contribute to the
character of the community, but they are not intended to preclude alternatives
or restrict imagination. In the event there is a conflict between the zoning
ordinance and the design guidelines, the regulations in the zoning ordinance
shall prevail.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.02.090 Relationship to other titles of the Municipal Code.
   No provision of this title is intended to abrogate, repeal, annul, impair,
or interfere with any existing ordinance of the city. Where this title imposes
greater restrictions or regulations than are imposed or required by an existing
ordinance, deed restriction, covenant, easement, or agreement between parties,
this title shall control.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.02.100 Conflict between other regulations.
   Any conflicts between the requirements of this title, or between this title
and other regulations, shall be resolved as follows:
   (A)   In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this title, the
most restrictive requirement shall control.
   (B)   In the event of any conflict between the requirements of this title
and standards adopted as part of any development agreement or specific plan,
the requirements of the development agreement or specific plan shall control.
   (C)   In the event of any conflict between the requirements of this title
and other regulations of the city, the most restrictive requirement shall
control, as determined by the city.
   (D)   It is not intended that the requirements of this title shall interfere
with, repeal, abrogate, or annul any easement, covenant, or other development
agreement that existed when this zoning ordinance became effective. This zoning
ordinance applies to all land uses and development regardless of whether it
imposes a greater or lesser restriction on the development or use of structures
or land than an applicable private agreement or restriction, without affecting
the applicability of any agreement or restriction. The city will not enforce
any private covenant or agreement unless the city is a party to the covenant or
agreement. Where a requirement of a private covenant or agreement directly
conflicts with a requirement in this title, the city will enforce the
requirements of this title.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.02.110 Application.
   To the extent permitted by applicable law, this title shall apply to all
property, whether owned by private persons, firms, corporations, or
organizations; by the United States of America or any of its agencies; by the
state or any of its agencies or political subdivisions; by any county or city,
including the City of Tulare, or any of its agencies; or by any authority or
district organized under the laws of the state, except for exemptions
specifically allowed by state and federal law or amendments thereto. Lands that
are exempt from these regulations are:
   (A)   Public streets and alleys.
   (B)   Railroad rights-of-way.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.02.120 Enforcement.
   (A)   The Director of the Community Development Department shall be
responsible for enforcing the provisions of this title, including objectives,
conditions, development standards, and processing procedures, issuing
citations, and making arrests pursuant to Cal. Penal Code § 836.5.
   (B)   All or any part of any real property, structure, or use which is
established, operated, erected, moved, altered, enlarged, or maintained,
contrary to the provisions of this title, is hereby declared to be unlawful and
a public nuisance and shall be subject to the remedies and penalties set forth
in this chapter and/or revocation procedures contained in other chapters of
this title.
   (C)   Any permit, certificate, or license issued subsequent to the effective
date of and in conflict with this title shall be null and void.
   (D)   In the discharge of enforcement duties, authorized persons shall have
the right to enter any site or structure for the purpose of investigation and
inspection. The right of entry shall be exercised only at reasonable hours and
only with the consent of the owner or tenant unless a written order from the
court has been issued.
   (E)   Any person violating any provisions of this title shall be guilty of
an infraction pursuant to Cal. Penal Code § 19(c) and upon conviction thereof
shall be subject to the general penalty provisions of this chapter. A person
shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of
which a violation of this title is committed, continued, or permitted by the
person, and shall be punishable by the person as herein provided.
   (F)   Any structure or part of a structure erected, moved, altered,
enlarged, or maintained, and any use of a site contrary to the provisions of
this title is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and the
City Attorney shall immediately institute necessary legal proceedings for the
abatement, removal, and enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law and
shall take such other steps as may be necessary to accomplish these ends, and
shall apply to a court of competent jurisdiction to grant the relief as will
remove or abate the structure or use and restrain or enjoin the person from
erecting, moving, altering or enlarging the structure or using the site
contrary to the provisions of this title.
   (G)   All remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not
exclusive.
   (H)   Any person, partnership, organization, firm, or corporation, whether
as principal, agent, employee, or otherwise, violating any provision(s) of this
title or any condition imposed on an entitlement, permit, or license, or
violating or failing to comply with any order made hereunder, shall be guilty
of an infraction or a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by:
      (1)   A fine not exceeding $50 for a first violation.
      (2)   A fine not exceeding $100 for the second violation of the same
provision of this title within one year.
      (3)   A fine not exceeding $250 for each subsequent violation of the same
provision of this title within one year.
      (4)   The phrase "violation of the same provision," as used in this
section, means and refers to a violation of the same numbered section of the
Tulare zoning ordinance. In addition, each day such violation continues shall
be regarded as a new and separate offense.
   (I)   The city may impose fees on applicants to cover the full costs
incurred by the city for the monitoring and enforcement of the requirements of
this title as well as those conditions and mitigation measures imposed on an
approved permit or license.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.02.130 Issuance of permits, certificates, and licenses.
   (A)   All officials, departments, and employees of the city vested with the
authority or duty to issue permits, certificates, or licenses shall comply with
the provisions of this title and the rest of the Tulare Municipal Code and
shall issue no permit, certificate, or license that conflicts with the
provisions of this title. Any permit, certificate, or license issued in error
that is in conflict with the provisions of this title shall, upon its issuance,
be void.
   (B)   A business license for any new business or for a new location for any
existing business activity shall not be issued until the Director or designee
has determined that the conduct of the business activity is not in violation of
any provision of this title.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.04: CONSTRUCTION AND TERMINOLOGY
Section
   
10.04.010   Construction.
   
10.04.020   General terminology of persons and entities.
   
10.04.030   Rules of interpretation.
   
10.04.040   Rules of measurement.
§ 10.04.010 Construction.
   The following rules shall apply in this title, unless inconsistent with the
plain meaning of the context of this chapter:
   (A)   The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future
tense includes the present.
   (B)   Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and words used in
the plural shall include the singular.
   (C)   In the event there is any conflict or inconsistency between the
heading of a chapter, section, or division of this title and the context
thereof, such heading shall not be deemed to affect the scope, meaning, or
intent of such context.
   (D)   The words "shall," "will," "is to," and "are to" are always mandatory.
"Should" is not mandatory but is strongly recommended. "May" is permissive.
"Shall not" and "may not" are always restrictive.
   (E)   The words "zone district," "zoning district," and "zone" shall have
the same meaning.
   (F)   Whenever the number of days is specified in this title or in any
permit, condition of approval, or notice issued or given as provided in this
title, the number of days shall be construed as calendar days unless business
days are specified. Time limits will extend to the following business day where
the last of the specified number of days falls on a day that the city is not
open for business, except as otherwise provided for by other state and federal
laws, regulations, and agencies.
   (G)   Whenever a time limit in this title is specified in months, the number
of months shall be deemed to be consecutive months.
   (H)   When a provision of this title refers to a requirement elsewhere, the
subject of the cross-reference is assumed to be another chapter, section, or
division of this title or another provision within the same section or chapter
unless the title of another document is provided.
   (I)   The provisions of this title are held to be minimum requirements,
except where they are expressly stated to be otherwise.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.04.020General terminology of persons and entities.
   (A)   "Applicant" means the property owner or their authorized agent or
contractor who is requesting approval of a project.
   (B)   "Building Official" means the Building Official of the City of Tulare
or his/her designee.
   (C)   "City" means the City of Tulare, California.
   (D)   "City Council" and "Council" mean the City Council of the City of
Tulare.
   (E)   "City Engineer" means the City Engineer of the City of Tulare or his/
her designee.
   (F)   "Director" means the Community Development Director of the City of
Tulare or his/her designee.
   (G)   "Planning Commission" means the Planning Commission of the City of
Tulare.
   (H)   "Person" means person, firm, corporation, or organization.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.04.030 Rules of interpretation.
   (A)   The Director shall have the responsibility and authority to interpret
the meaning and applicability of all provisions and requirements of this title.
   (B)   A request for an interpretation or determination shall be filed with
the Director and shall include all information required by the city.
   (C)   The Director has the option of forwarding any determination of the
meaning or applicability of any provision of this title to the Planning
Commission for consideration and decision.
   (D)   Any affected person may appeal the interpretation of the Director or
the Planning Commission to the City Council. If appealed, the City Council
shall then make the final interpretation.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.04.040 Rules of measurement.
   (A)   For all measurements and calculations, the applicant or property owner
shall be responsible for supplying drawings accurately illustrating the
measurements that apply to a project. These drawings shall be drawn to scale
and shall include sufficient detail to allow easy verification upon inspection
by the city.
   (B)   When measuring a required distance, such as the minimum distance
between a structure and a lot line, the measurement shall be made at the
closest or shortest distance between the two objects.
   (C)   Distances are measured along a horizontal plane unless otherwise
specified.
   (D)   Measurements involving a structure are made to the closest wall of the
structure unless otherwise specified.
   (E)   When measuring the distance between two land uses, the measurement
shall be made from the closest lot line to the lot line.
   (F)   When measuring height, the measurement shall be the vertical distance
from the highest point to the ground level directly below, unless otherwise
specified; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to
the height of any structure necessary for public safety or as required by any
law or regulation of the state or an agency thereof.
   (G)   Where there is a grade difference on either side of a fence or wall,
the height of the fence or wall shall be measured on the higher side.
   (H)   Minimum lot width shall be measured at the front setback line, or from
the front property line if there is no required setback, as determined by the
zoning of the lot.
   (I)   Lot depth is measured along an imaginary straight line drawn from the
midpoint of the front property line of the lot to the midpoint of the rear
property line or to the most distant point on any other lot line where there is
no rear lot line.
   (J)   Required building setback area shall be measured as the minimum
horizontal distance from the property line of the site or street line to a line
parallel thereto on the site; provided, however, where a precise street plan
has been adopted by the City Council, required front building setback area
shall be measured from the precise street plan line.
   (K)   Where a site abuts a street having only a portion of its required
width dedicated or reserved for street purposes, the site area and required
building setback areas shall be measured from a line representing the boundary
of the additional width required for street purposes abutting the site.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.06: ZONE DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP
Section
   
10.06.010   Purpose.
   
10.06.020   Applicability.
   
10.06.030   Establishment of zone districts.
   
10.06.040   Establishment of Zoning Map.
   
10.06.050   Interpretation of zone boundary lines.
   
10.06.060   Zone changes.
   
10.06.070   Prezoning.
   
10.06.080   Right-of-way abandonment.
§ 10.06.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish zone districts and a Zoning Map
to classify, regulate, restrict, and segregate the uses of land and buildings,
to regulate and restrict the height and bulk of buildings, to regulate the area
of yards and other open spaces about buildings, and to regulate the density of
population.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.06.020 Applicability.
   The zoning districts are applicable in all areas of the city.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.06.030 Establishment of zone districts.
   (A)   Base zone districts establish the basic land use and property
development regulations applicable to all property within the city, as provided
in §
10.02.110. Overlay zone districts provide additional regulations that are to be
exercised over certain lands within the overlay zone to meet special community
health, safety, welfare, environmental, or development objectives described by
the General Plan or a specific plan. Overlay zone district regulations apply in
addition to base zone district regulations and other regulations of this
chapter.
   (B)   The base zoning districts are hereby established as follows:
      (1)   Rural Residential zone, abbreviated R-1-20.
      (2)   Residential Estate zone, abbreviated R-1-12.5.
      (3)   Low Density Residential zone, abbreviated as R-1 (R-1-4 & R-1-6).
      (4)   Medium Density Residential zone, abbreviated as R-M.
      (5)   High Density Residential zone, abbreviated as R-H (R-H-14 & R-H-
20).
      (6)   Neighborhood Commercial zone, abbreviated as C-1.
      (7)   Office Commercial zone, abbreviated as C-2.
      (8)   Retail Commercial zone, abbreviated as C-3.
      (9)   Service Commercial zone, abbreviated as C-4.
      (10)   Light Industrial zone, abbreviated as M-1.
      (11)   Heavy Industrial zone, abbreviated as M-2.
      (12)   Public Lands zone, abbreviated as PL.
      (13)   Parks and Recreation zone, abbreviated as PR.
      (14)   Agricultural/Open Space zone, abbreviated as A.
   (C)   The overlay zoning districts are hereby established as follows:
      (1)   Historic Site and Historic Neighborhood Overlay zone, abbreviated
as H.
      (2)   Planned Unit Development Overlay zone, abbreviated as PD.
      (3)   Downtown Design Overlay zone, abbreviated as D.
      (4)   Airport Overlay zone, abbreviated as AP.
      (5)   Mixed-Use Overlay zone, abbreviated as MU.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.06.040 Establishment of Zoning Map.
   (A)   To ensure that comprehensive zoning regulations may be applied
uniformly to all incorporated territories upon adoption of this title, a Zoning
Map is hereby established to delineate the location and boundaries of zone
districts within the city. The Zoning Map is incorporated into this title by
this reference with the same force and effect as if the boundaries, together
with any notations, references, and information shown on the Zoning Map, were
specifically stated and described in this title.
   (B)   The Zoning Map, together with such additional maps as may be adopted
in accordance with the provisions of this title, shall be collectively known as
the "City of Tulare Zoning Map."
   (C)   The official copy of the Zoning Map shall be kept, maintained, and
made available to the public by the Tulare Community Development Department.
The Zoning Map may be maintained in hard copy and/or electronic formats.
   (D)   All property within the incorporated territory shall be delineated
within a zoning district on the Zoning Map.
   (E)   The location of zoning districts on the Zoning Map shall be consistent
with the applicable policies and land use designations set forth in the General
Plan.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.06.050 Interpretation of zone boundary lines.
   Whenever any uncertainty exists as to the boundary line between two zoning
districts shown on the Zoning Map, the following interpretations shall control:
   (A)   Where a zoning boundary line is indicated as following a street,
alley, railroad right-of-way, drainage channel, or other watercourse, the
center line of such street, alley, railroad right-of-way, drainage channel, or
other watercourse shall be the boundary line.
   (B)   Where a zoning boundary line is indicated as following a lot line or
property line, the boundary line shall be construed as following such lot line
or property line.
   (C)   Where a zoning boundary line is not indicated as following a street or
alley and does not follow or coincide approximately with a lot line or property
line, the zoning boundary line shall be determined by the Director utilizing
the scale designated on the Zoning Map.
   (D)   Where further uncertainty exists, the Planning Commission, upon a
written application from the owner of the property in question or upon its own
motion, shall determine the location of the zoning boundary line in question,
giving due consideration to the location indicated on the Zoning Map, the
purposes and objectives of the zoning ordinance, and the applicable policies
set forth in the General Plan.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.06.060 Zone changes.
   (A)   Changes to the Zoning Map shall be approved by the ordinance of the
City Council in accordance with Chapter 10.86.
   (B)   When the Director determines that there is a technical error on the
Zoning Map, the Zoning Map may be corrected to remove the technical error
without the approval of an ordinance.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.060.070 Prezoning.
   Territories proposed for annexation into the city shall be prezoned
concurrent with the City Council initiation of annexation proceedings, in
accordance with
Chapter 10.86.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.06.080 Right-of-way abandonment.
   When a public street, alley, or railroad right-of-way is abandoned, the
abandoned territory shall be immediately, and without any further action,
included in the zoning district of the adjacent territory.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.08: LAND USE TABLES
Section
   
10.08.010   Land use restriction.
   
10.08.020   Residential land use table.
   
10.08.030   Commercial, industrial, public, and open space zone use table.
   
10.08.040   Addition of a use to land use tables.
§ 10.08.010 Land use restriction.
   No structure, or any part thereof, shall be erected or enlarged, nor shall
any site or structure be used, designated, or intended to be used for any
purpose or in any manner other than is included among the uses listed in the
land use tables in this chapter as permitted, administratively permitted, or
conditionally permitted in the zone district in which such structure, land, or
site is located, except as otherwise authorized by this title.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.08.020 Residential land use table.
   (A)   The following table identifies which land uses are permitted by right,
require a conditional use permit, or are not allowed in the R-1, R-M, and R-
H zones.
   (B)   A "P" means that the use is permitted by right in that zone. A "C"
means the use requires a conditional use permit in that zone. An "A" means the
use requires an administrative use permit in that zone. A "T" means the use
requires a temporary use permit in that zone. A blank box means the use is not
allowed in that zone.
   (C)   Land uses are grouped generally by type of use, and then listed
alphabetically. The land use groups are Residential Uses; Accessory and Support
Uses; and Other Uses. The use of the word "or" can mean either or both uses.
   (D)   Land uses with specific land use standards shall meet the requirements
found in the identified section in the last column of the table.
   (E)   If two or more land uses are permitted in the same zone, those land
uses may coexist on the same site.
Table 10.08.020-1
Residential Zone Use Table
Table 10.08.020-1
Residential Zone Use Table
P = Use is Permitted by Right
C = Use Requires Conditional Use Permit
A = Use Requires Administrative Use Permit
T = Use Requires Temporary Use Permit
Blank = Use is Not Allowed
                                               Residential Zones    Specific
                                                               R-H- Land Use
                                               R- R-  R-1-     1 4  Standards
Land Uses                                      1- 1-  4 &  R-M & R- (See
                                               20 12. R-1-     H-   identified
                                                  5   6        2 0  Section)

  Residential Uses                                                  
1  Assisted living, skilled nursing, or        P  P   P    P   P     
   hospice facility (6 or fewer residents)
2  Assisted living, skilled nursing, or        C  C   C    P   P     
   hospice facility (more than 6 residents)
3  Bed and breakfast inn                       C  C   C    C   C    10.60.070
4  Boarding house or rooming house                             P     
5  Emergency shelter                                       P   P     
6  Employee housing, small (6 or fewer         P  P   P    P   P     
   employees)
7  Employee housing, large (more than 6        C  C   C    C   C     
   employees)
                                                                    Only as
8  Hotel or motel                                          C   C    part of a
                                                                    mixed-use
                                                                    development
9  Low Barrier Navigation Center                           P   P     
10 Manufactured home not within a mobile home  P                    10.60.120
   park, more than 10 years old
11 Manufactured home not within a mobile home  P  P   P             10.60.120
   park, less than 10 years old
12 Mobile home or manufactured home park       C  C   C    C        10.60.130
13 Multi-family dwelling, 2 units per building             P   P     
   (duplex)
14 Multi-family dwelling, 3 or 4 units per                 P   P     
   building (triplex or fourplex)
15 Multi-family dwelling, 5 or more units per              P   P     
   building
16 Recreational vehicle park                   C                     
17 Residential care facility, 6 or fewer       P  P   P    P   P     
   residents
18 Residential care facility, more than 6      C  C   C    C   C     
   residents
19 Single-family dwelling, attached            C  C   P    P         
20 Single-family dwelling, detached            P  P   P    C         
   Single-family dwelling or duplex that meets
21 the requirements of Cal. Gov t Code         P  P   P              
   65852.21 (SB 9)
22 Single-room occupancy (SRO)                             P   P     
23 Supportive housing                          P  P   P    P   P     
24 Transitional housing                        P  P   P    P   P     
  Residential Accessory and Support Uses                            
30 Accessory dwelling unit                     P  P   P    P   P    10.60.030
31 Junior accessory dwelling unit              P  P   P    P   P    10.60.040
32 Building ancillary to the main residential  P  P   P    P   P     
   use
33 Cottage food operation                      A  A   A    A   A    10.60.080
34 Expansion of existing non-conforming        A  A   A    A   A     
   residential use
35 Home occupation                             A  A   A    A   A    Chapter
                                                                    10.78
                                                                    Title 6
36 Keeping of household pets                   P  P   P    P   P    Chapter
                                                                    6.12
37 Raising of fruit, vegetables, and           P  P   P    P   P     
   horticultural specialties for personal use
38 Temporary caretaker's dwelling              T  T   T    T   T     
39 Temporary materials storage yard            T  T   T    T   T     
40 Temporary residential sales office          T  T   T    T   T     
   Other accessory or ancillary use or
41 structure that the Director determines is   P  P   P    P   P     
   customarily associated with, and
   subordinate to, a primary permitted use.
  Other Uses                                                        
50 Assembly facility (e.g. meeting facilities, C  C   C    C   C     
   churches, community centers)
51 Cannabis Cultivation for Personal Use per   P  P   P    P   P     
   Proposition 64 Guidelines (Indoor)
52 Cannabis Cultivation for Personal Use per   P  P   P              
   Proposition 64 Guidelines (Outdoor)
53 Cannabis deliveries (Receiving)             P  P   P    P   P     
54 Community center or facility (5,000 square  P  P   P    P   P     
   feet or less)
55 Community center or facility (over 5,000    C  C   C    C   C     
   square feet)
56 Daycare, adult                              P  P   P    P   P     
57 Daycare, small family                       P  P   P    P   P     
58 Daycare, large family                       P  P   P    P   P     
59 Daycare center                              C  C   C    C   C     
   Electrical transmission and distribution
   substation, gas regulator station,
60 communications equipment building, public   C  C   C    C   C     
   service pumping station, or elevated
   pressure tank
61 Golf Course                                 C  C                  
62 Kennel                                      C                     
63 Mixed-Use                                               C   C    10.46
64 Mobile vendor or food truck                                       
65 Outdoor Assembly                            C                    10.60.150
66 Outdoor storage that is visible from a                            
   public right-of-way
67 Park or playground                          P  P   P    P   P     
68 School, private (kindergarten to 12th       C  C   C    C   C     
   grade)
69 School, public (kindergarten to 12th grade) P  P   P    P   P     
70 School; charter, trade, vocational, art,                          
   business, or professional
71 Self-storage facility or mini-warehouse                           
72 Storm drainage basin, with or without a     P  P   P    P   P     
   park
   Land uses listed in the Commercial, Office,
73 and Industrial Zone Use Table (§                                
   10.08.030) that are not listed in this
   Residential Zone Use Table
 
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.08.030 Commercial, industrial, public, and open space zone use table.
   (A)   The following table identifies which land uses are permitted by right,
require a use permit, or are not allowed in the C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, M-1, M-2,
PL, PR, and A zones.
   (B)   A "P" means that the use is permitted by right in that zone. A "C"
means the use requires a conditional use permit in that zone. An "A" means the
use requires an administrative use permit in that zone. A "T" means the use
requires a temporary use permit in that zone. A blank box means the use is not
allowed in that zone.
   (C)   Land uses are grouped generally by type of use, and then listed
alphabetically. The land use groups are Accessory and Support Uses; Eating and
Drinking Establishment Uses; Education and Assembly Uses; Manufacturing and
Processing Uses; Office and Medical Uses; Public and Quasi-Public Uses;
Recreation Uses; Residential Uses; Retail Uses; Service Uses; Transportation
and Storage Uses; and Other Uses.
   (D)   Land uses with specific land use standards shall meet the requirements
found in the identified section in the last column of the table.
   (E)   If two or more land uses are permitted in the same zone, those land
uses may coexist on the same site.
Table 10.08.030-1
Commercial, Industrial, Public, and Open Space Zone Use Table
Table 10.08.030-1
Commercial, Industrial, Public, and Open Space Zone Use Table
P = Use is Permitted by Right   
C = Use Requires Conditional Use Permit
A = Use Requires Administrative Use Permit
T = Use Requires Temporary Use Permit
Blank = Use is Not Allowed
                   Commercial Zones Industrial, Public, and Open
                                    Space Zones                  Specific Land
                                                                 Use Standards
Land Uses                                                        (See
                   C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4  M- 1 M- 2 PF PR A            identified
                                                                 Section)

   Accessory and                                                 
    Support Uses
    Automated
A1  teller machine P   P   P   P    P    P                        
    (ATM)
    Caretaker
A2  residence or   C   P   P   P    P    P    P  P  P             
    quarters
A3  Cottage food   A   A   A   A                                 10.60.080
    operation
    Daycare
    primarily for
    children of
A4  employees on   P   P   P   P    P    P    P     P             
    the same site
    as a permitted
    use
    Drive-thru
    pick-up window
A5  meeting all    C   C   P   P    P    C                       10.60.090
    standards of
    10.60.090
    Drive-thru
    pick-up window
A6  not meeting    C   C   C   C    C    C                       10.60.090
    all standards
    of 10.60.090
    Electric
A7  vehicle        P   P   P   P    P    P    P  P  P             
    recharging
    facility
    Food service
    primarily for
A8  employees on   P   P   P   P    P    P    P  P  P             
    the same site
    as a permitted
    use
A9  Home           A   A   A   A                    A            Chapter 10.78
    occupation
A10 Keeping of     P   P   P   P                    P            Title 6
    household pets                                               Chapter 6.12
A11 Mobile vendor  C   C   C   C    C    C    C                  Title 5
    or food truck                                                Chapter 5.92
    Outdoor
    storage
A13 ancillary to               P    P    P    P  P  P            10.60.180
    and on the
    same site as a
    permitted use
    Solar that is
    placed upon an
    existing
    structure or
A14 carport with   P   P   P   P    P    P    P  P  P             
    energy
    produces only
    being used for
    offset.
    Ground-mounted
    Solar energy
A15 system, less               C    P    P    P  P                
    than 10,000
    sq. ft.
    Ground-mounted
    Solar energy
A16 system, more                    C    C    C                   
    than 10,000
    sq. ft.
    Temporary
A17 materials and/ T   T   T   T    T    T    T                   
    or equipment
    storage yard
    Temporary
A18 outdoor sales  T   T   T   T    T    T    T  T  T            10.60.170
    (including
    parking lot)
A19 Vending        P   P   P   P    P    P    P  P  P            10.60.240
    machines
    Eating and
   Drinking                                                      
    Establishment
    Uses
    Artisan food
B1  and beverage   P   P   P   P    P    P          P             
    production and
    sales
    Bar,
B2  nightclub, or  C   C   C   C                                 10.60.050
    lounge
B3  Brewpub        C   C   C   C    C    C                       10.60.050
B4  Microbrewery   C   C   C   C    C    C                       10.60.050
B5  Restaurant,    P   P   P   P    C    C                        
    full service
    Restaurant,
    limited
    service with
B6  drive-thru     C   P   P   P    C    C                       10.60.090
    pickup window
    meeting all
    standards of
    10.60.090
    Restaurant,
    limited
    service with
    drive-thru
B7  pickup window  C   C   C   C    C    C                       10.60.090
    not meeting
    all standards
    of
    10.60.090
    Restaurant,
    limited
B8  service        P   P   P   P    C    C                        
    without drive-
    thru pickup
    window
   Education and                                                 
    Assembly Uses
    Assembly
    facility
    (e.g., meeting
C1  facilities,    C   C   C   C    C    C    C                   
    churches,
    community
    centers)
    Auditorium or
    theater (live
C2  or movie)      P   P   P   P              P  P                
    capacity up to
    2,500 persons
    Auditorium or
    theater (live
C3  or movie)      C   C   C   C              P  P                
    capacity over
    2,500 persons
C4  Card room                  C    C    C                        
    Club, lodge,
C5  or private     P   P   C   P                                  
    meeting hall
C6  Carnival or    T   T   T   T    T    T    T  T  T             
    circus
    College or
C7  university,    C   C   C   C    C    C    P                   
    public or
    private
    Convention or
C8  conference         P   P   P    C    C    C                   
    center
C9  Funeral home       C   C   P                                  
    or mortuary
    Library,
C10 museum, or     P   P   P   P    C    C    P  C  C             
    cultural
    facility
    Pool hall or
C11 billiard           C   P   P                                  
    parlor
    School,
C12 private        C   P   P   C              C                   
    (kindergarten
    to 12th grade)
    School, public
C13 (kindergarten  P   P   P   P              P                   
    to 12th grade)
    School;
    charter,
    trade,
C14 vocational,    C   P   P   P    P    C    P                   
    art, business,
    or
    professional
    Studio for
    martial arts,
    music, dance,
C15 yoga,          P   P   P   P    P    P    P                   
    exercise,
    gymnastics, or
    similar
    Manufacturing
   and Processing                                                
    Uses
    Agricultural
D1  crop                            C    C    A  C  P             
    production
    Agricultural
    products
D2  packing,                        C    P          P             
    packaging,
    preparing, or
    processing
D3  Animal raising                            A     P             
    Brewery,
D4  winery, or         C   C   C    C    C    C     C            10.60.050
    distillery
D5  Hazardous                                                     
    waste facility
    Assembling,
    cleaning,
    manufacturing,
    processing,
    repairing or
D6  testing                         C    C                        
    products
    primarily
    outdoors.
    (Unless
    otherwise
    listed)
    Assembling,
    cleaning,
    manufacturing,
    processing,
    repairing or
    testing of
D7  products                   C    P    P                        
    primarily
    within an
    enclosed
    structure.
    (Unless
    otherwise
    listed)
D8  Drop forges                          C                        
    Explosives
    storage,
    manufacturing,
D9  and                                  C                        
    processing,
    including
    fireworks
D10 Fertilizer                           C                        
    Manufacturing
    Petroleum
    products
    manufacturing,
    processing and
D11 storage,                             C                        
    including
    oils,
    gasoline,
    paints, and
    tar
D12 Incinerators                         C                        
    Metal
    industries
    (ores
D13 reduction,                           C                        
    refining,
    smelting, and
    alloying)
D14 Paper Mills                          C                        
D15 Textile Mills                        C                        
D16 Chemical                             C                        
    Manufacturing
D17 Rubber                               C                        
    Manufacturing
    Meat packing
D18 or                                   C                        
    slaughterhouse
    Mining,
    quarry, or
D19 sand and                             C          C             
    gravel
    excavation
    Research and
D20 development        P   C   P    P    P    P     P             
    facility
   Office and                                                    
    Medical Uses
E1  Call center        P       P    P                             
    Communications
E2  broadcasting       P   P   P    P    P    C                   
    or media
    studio
    Laboratory;
E3  general,           P   P   P    P    C    P                   
    medical, or
    dental
    Hospital,
E4  general, or        C   C   C              P                   
    psychiatric
    Office;
E5  medical,       P   P   P   P                                  
    dental, or
    optometry
    Office;
E6  professional   P   P   P   P                                  
    or commercial
E7  Pharmacy       P   P   P   P                                  
    Urgent care
E8  center or      P   P   P   P                                  
    other walk-in
    clinic
    Public and
   Quasi-Public                                                  
    Uses
F1  Cemetery                                  C                   
    Community
F2  center or      P   P   P   P              P  P                
    facility
F3  Community      P   P   P   P    A    A    P  P  P             
    garden
    Electrical
    substation,
    gas regulator
    station,
    communications
F4  equipment      C   C   C   C    C    C    P  C  C             
    building,
    public service
    pumping
    station, or
    elevated
    pressure tank
F5  Fairgrounds    C   C   C   C    P         P     C             
    Government
F6  office; local, P   P   P   P    P    P    P  P                
    state, or
    federal
F7  Post office    P   P   P   P    P    P    P  P                
    Public
    corporation
    yard, utility
    yard, or
F8  vehicle and                C    P    P    P  C                
    heavy
    equipment
    maintenance
    and storage
    yard
    Public safety
F9  facility or    C   C   C   P    P    P    P                   
    station
    Social service
    office,
F10 assistance     P   P   P   P    P    P    P                   
    center, or
    guidance
    center
    Storm drainage
F11 basin, with or P   P   P   P    P    P    P  P  P             
    without a park
    Wireless
F12 communication  C   C   C   C    P    P    P     C            Chapter 10.68
    facility (WCF)
   Recreation                                                    
    Uses
    Athletic
G1  complex or     C       C                  P  P  P             
    ball field
    Commercial
G2  recreation     C   P   P   P    C         C                   
    facility,
    indoor
    Commercial
G3  recreation         C   P   P    C         C  C                
    facility,
    outdoor
G4  Golf course or         C   C              C  P  C             
    country club
    Health or
G5  fitness            C   P   P    C         C                   
    facility,
    large
    Health or
G6  fitness        P   P   P   P    P         P                   
    facility,
    small
G7  Park or        P   P   P   P              P  P  P             
    playground
   Residential                                                   
    Uses
    Assisted
    living,
H1  skilled            C   C   P                                  
    nursing, or
    hospice
    facility
H2  Bed and                C   C                    C            10.60.070
    breakfast inn
H3  Boarding or            C   C                                  
    rooming house
H4  Emergency                  P    P         P                   
    shelter
    Employee
    housing
    (including
H5  farmworker         P                            P            Chapter 10.14
    housing),
    small (6 or
    fewer
    employees)
    Employee
    housing, large
    (including
H6  farmworker         C                            P            Chapter 10.14
    housing) (more
    than 6
    employees)
H7  Hotel or motel     C   P   P    C                             
H8  Live/work      P   P   P   P    C                             
    facility
    Low Barrier
H9  Navigation     P   P   P                                      
    Center
    Manufactured
    home not
    within a
H10 mobile home                                                  10.60.120
    park, more
    than 10 years
    old
    Manufactured
    home not
    within a
H11 mobile home                               P  P  P            10.60.120
    park, less
    than 10 years
    old
    Mobile home or
H12 manufactured               C                                 10.60.130
    home park
                                                                 Only as part
                                                                 of a mixed-use
H13 Multi-family   C   C   C                                     development .
    dwelling                                                     Chapter 10.16
                                                                 or
                                                                 10.18
H14 Recreational               C    C                             
    vehicle park
    Residential
H15 care facility,     P   P   P                                  
    up to 6
    persons
    Residential
H16 care facility,     C   C   P                                  
    7 or more
    persons
    Residential
    dwelling
H17 located in     C   P   P   P                                  
    same building
    with office or
    commercial use
    Single-family
H18 dwelling,                                       C             
    attached
    Single-family
H19 dwelling,                                       P             
    detached
    Single-room
H20 occupancy              P   C                                  
    (SRO)
H21 Supportive         C       P    P         P                   
    housing
H22 Transitional               P    P         P                   
    housing
   Retail Uses                                                   
    Adult
I1  entertainment              A    A    A                       Chapter 10.62
    establishment
I2  Auction or             P   P    C    C                        
    sales house
I3  Auction or                 C    C    P          C             
    sales yard
    Automobile and
I4  pick-up sales,         C   P    C    C                       10.60.200
    new and used
    Automobile and
I5  pick-up sales,         C   P    C    C                       10.60.200
    used only
    Boat,
    recreational
I6  vehicle (RV),          C   C    P    C                        
    and truck
    sales
    Building
    materials and
I7  supply or home         P   P    P    P                        
    improvement
    store
    Convenience
I8  store, with or P   P   P   P    P    C                       10.60.210
    without fuel
    sales
    Farm or
    construction
I9  equipment              C   C    P    P          C             
    sales or
    service
I10 Farmers market A   A   A   A              A  A  A             
I11 Feed and seed  C       P   P    P    C          P             
    store
I12 Food market    P   P   P   P    C               C             
I13 Food produce   A   A   A   A    A    A    A  A  P             
    stand
    Fuel sales,
I14 fleet or               C   P    P    P    P     C            10.60.210
    cardlock
I15 Fuel sales,    C       C   C    C    C                       10.60.210
    retail
I16 Garden shop    P       P   P    C    C          P             
I17 Landscape      C       P   P    P    P          P             
    nursery
I18 Liquor store   C       C   C    C    C                        
    Manufactured
I19 home sales                 C    C    C                        
    yard
    News, magazine
I20 or flower      P   P   P   P    P    P          A             
    stand, outdoor
I21 Pawn shop              C   C    C                             
I22 Pet store      P   P   P   P                                  
    Retail sales
I23 store, less    P   P   P   P    P                             
    than 10,000
    square feet
    Retail sales
I24 store, more    P   P   P   P    P    P                        
    than 10,000
    square feet
    Retail sales
    solely via
I25 internet,      P   P   P   P    P               P             
    direct mail,
    or telephone
I26 Secondhand or  P   P   P   P                                  
    thrift store
    Swap meet or
I27 flea market                     C    C    C  C  C             
    (Outdoor)
    Tobacco,
I28 smoke, or vape P   P   P   P    P                             
    shop
   Service Uses                                                  
J1  Ambulance          C       P    C    C    C                   
    service
J2  Bank or credit P   P   P   P    P                             
    union
    Barbershop,
J3  hair salon,    P   P   P   P                                  
    nail care, or
    day spa
J4  Massage        A   A   A   A                                 Title 5
    Therapy                                                      Chapter 5.104
    Car wash,
J5  automatic or   C       P   P    P    C                        
    full-service
J6  Car wash,              C   P    P    P                        
    self-service
J7  Carpet                     P    P    P                        
    cleaning
    Construction
J8  materials                            C                        
    recycling
    Copy,
J9  printing, or   P   P   P   P    P    P                        
    mailing
    service
J10 Crematorium                          C                        
J11 Dry cleaning   P       P   P                                  
    or laundromat
J12 Equipment              C   P    P    P                        
    rental yard
    Exterminator
J13 or pest                C   P    P    P                        
    control
    service
J14 Food catering  C   P   P   P    P                             
J15 Fortune            C   C   P                                  
    telling
J16 Fuel                       P    P    P                        
    distributing
    Kennel or
J17 animal         C   C   C   P    C    P          P             
    boarding
    Linen, diaper,
J18 or uniform                 P    P    P                        
    supply service
    Motor vehicle
J19 repair or              C   P    P    P                        
    service, major
    Motor vehicle
J20 repair or      C       P   P    P    P                        
    service, minor
    Payday lenders
J21 or check               P   P    P    P                        
    cashing
    establishment
J22 Pet grooming   P   P   P   P    P    P                        
J23 Photography    P   P   P   P    P    P                        
    studio
    Recycling,
    small
J24 collection     P   P   P   P    P    P    P                  10.60.190
    facility (CRV
    only)
    Recycling,
J25 large                      C    P    P                       10.60.190
    collection
    facility
    Recycling,
J26 processing, or                  C    P                        
    sorting
    facility
    Repair shop,
J27 large                      P    P    P                        
    appliance or
    equipment
    Repair shop,
J28 small          C   P   P   P    P    P                        
    appliance or
    equipment
J29 Shooting                   C    C    P    C                   
    range, indoor
J30 Shooting                             C                        
    range, outdoor
    Specialty
J31 construction               P    P    P                        
    or trade
    service
    Tailoring or
J32 clothing       P   P   P   P                                  
    alterations
J33 Tattooing or   C   C   P   P    P    C                        
    body art
    Veterinary
J34 clinic or      P   P   P   P    P    P          P             
    office
J35 Veterinary             C   C    P    P          P             
    hospital
    Transportation
   and Storage                                                   
    Uses
K1  Airport or                                P     C             
    heliport
    Bus, transit,
K2  or train       C   P   P   P              P                   
    station
K3  Cold storage               C    P    P                        
    or ice house
K4  Food locker            C   P    P    P                        
    Junk yard,
K5  wrecking yard,                       C                        
    or salvage
    facility
    Mini-warehouse
K6  or self-                   C    P    P                        
    storage
    facility
    Parking
K7  facility, off-     C   C   C    C    P    P                   
    site
K8  Truck stop or              C    C    C                       10.60.210
    travel center
    Trucking or
K9  transportation             C    C    P                        
    terminal
K10 Vehicle                    P    P    P    P                   
    impound yard
    Warehouse or
K11 distribution                    P    P                        
    center
   Other Uses                                                    
    Cannabis
L1  Cultivation                                                   
    (Indoor)
    Cannabis
L2  Cultivation                                                   
    (Mixed Light)
    Cannabis                                                     Title 5
L3  deliveries     P   P   P   P    P    P    P  P  P            Chapter 5.96
    (Receiving)
L4  Cannabis                                                      
    distribution
    Cannabis
L5  laboratory                                                    
    testing
L6  Cannabis                                                      
    manufacturing
L7  Cannabis                                                      
    processing
    Cannabis
L8  product                                                       
    labeling
L9  Cannabis               P   P                                 Title 5
    retail                                                       Chapter 5.96
L10 Daycare, adult P   P   P   P    C         P                   
L11 Daycare, small P   P   P                  P     P             
    family
L12 Daycare, large P   P   P                  P     P             
    family
L13 Daycare center C   P   P   P    P         P                   
    Other uses not
    listed that
    are determined
    by the
    Director to be
L14 similar in     P   P   P   P    P    P    P  P  P             
    nature to a
    listed use
    that is
    permitted in
    the same zone
    Other uses not
    listed that
    are determined
    by the
    Director to be
    similar in
L15 nature to a    A   A   A   A    A    A    A  A  A             
    listed use
    that requires
    an
    administrative
    use permit in
    the same zone
    Other uses not
    listed that
    are determined
    by the
    Director to be
L16 similar in     C   C   C   C    C    C    C  C  C             
    nature to a
    listed use
    that requires
    a conditional
    use permit in
    the same zone
 
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.08.040 Addition of a use to land use tables.
   Upon an application or on its own initiative and pursuant to
Chapter 10.86, the City Council may add a use to the land use tables
established in this chapter if the Council makes all the following findings:
   (A)   That the addition of the use to the land use table will be in
accordance with the purposes of this title and of the zone district or
districts in which the use will be permitted.
   (B)   That the zone district or districts in which the use is to be
permitted has similar basic characteristics as the present uses allowed in the
district or districts.
   (C)   That the use will not generate a noticeably greater amount of odor,
dirt, smoke, noise, vibration, illumination, glare, unsightliness, or any other
objectionable influence or hazard than the amount normally created by any of
the other uses permitted in the district or districts in which the use will be
permitted.
   (D)   That the establishment of the use in the zone district or districts in
which it will be permitted will not be detrimental to the public health,
safety, or welfare.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.10: RURAL RESIDENTIAL ZONE
Section
   
10.10.010   Purpose and application.
   
10.10.020   Permitted uses.
   
10.10.030   Lot area.
   
10.10.040   Lot dimensions.
   
10.10.050   Dwelling units per lot.
   
10.10.060   Coverage.
   
10.10.070   Building setback areas.
   
10.10.080   Distance between structures.
   
10.10.090   Height of structures.
   
10.10.100   Driveways.
   
10.10.110   Accessory structures.
   
10.10.120   Other setback standards.
   
10.10.130   Off-street parking.
   
10.10.140   Usable open space.
   
10.10.150   Landscaping.
   
10.10.160   Screening, fences, and walls.
   
10.10.170   Signs.
   
10.10.180   General provisions and standards.
§ 10.10.010 Purpose and application.
   This chapter shall apply to all land within the Rural Residential (R-1-20)
zone. The purpose of the R-1-20 zone is to provide living areas within the city
where development is limited to very low density concentrations of one-family
dwellings at a density of zero to two dwellings per gross acre, where mini-
farms or ranchettes may be developed with the allowance for limited numbers of
livestock to be raised and crops to be grown.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.10.020 Permitted uses.
   Uses shall be permitted or not permitted, conditionally permitted,
administratively permitted, or temporarily permitted as prescribed in the land
use table in §
10.08.020.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.10.030 Lot area.
   The minimum lot area shall be 20,000 square feet, except that a municipal
water well site shall have a minimum lot area of 2,000 square feet.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.10.040 Lot dimensions.
   (A)   The minimum lot frontage shall be 40 feet on a public street.
   (B)   The minimum lot width shall be 100 feet.
   (C)   The minimum lot depth shall be 100 feet.
   (D)   A municipal water well site shall not be subject to minimum lot
dimension standards.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.10.050 Dwelling units per lot.
   Not more than one dwelling unit shall be allowed on each lot unless approved
as an accessory dwelling unit in accordance with §
10.60.030.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.10.060 Coverage.
   The maximum coverage of a lot in the R-1-20 zone shall be 50% of the area of
the lot.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.10.070 Building setback areas.
   (A)   No structure shall be placed within a building setback area.
   (B)   The front building setback area shall be a minimum of 30 feet from the
front lot line.
   (C)   For single-family dwellings that include a usable front porch
measuring at least ten feet in width by five feet in depth, the front yard
setback may be reduced by five feet.
   (D)   The rear building setback shall be a minimum of 15 feet from the rear
lot line.
   (E)   The side building setback area shall be a minimum of 15 feet from a
side lot line.
   (F)   A garage or carport facing the street shall be set back at least 20
feet from the property line. If the garage does not face the street, the garage
may be set back the required minimum distance listed in divisions (A) through
(E) above.
   (G)   Structures used for the purpose of housing livestock or for
processing, packing, or storing agricultural produce shall be at least 50 feet
away from the front property line, at least 25 feet from the street side of a
corner lot, and at least 100 feet from any public parks, schools, hospitals, or
similar institution.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.10.080 Distance between structures.
   (A)   The minimum distance between structures shall be ten feet, except as
provided by the building code.
   (B)   The minimum distance between residential structures and structures
used for the purpose of housing livestock or for processing, packing, or
storing agricultural produce shall be 30 feet.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.10.090 Height of structures.
   The maximum structure height shall be 35 feet unless approved up to 50 feet
with a conditional use permit in accordance with
Chapter 10.80.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.10.100 Driveways.
   (A)   The width of a driveway and any paved area shall not cumulatively
exceed 40% of the width of the lot's street frontage on which the driveway and
any paved area face. In the case of "L" or "U" shaped driveways or other
configurations besides perpendicular driveways, the paved area of these
driveways shall not exceed 50% of the front building setback area.
   (B)   On corner lots, the driveway shall be located on the side of the lot
adjacent to the interior lot line.
   (C)   On key lots, the driveway shall be located on the side of the lot that
is not adjacent to the rear lot line of the adjacent reverse corner lot.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.10.110 Accessory structures.
   Accessory structures may be located within a required rear or side building
setback area subject to all of the following:
   (A)   The walls shall be at least five feet from the rear and side lot
lines.
   (B)   The accessory structure shall be separated from other structures by a
minimum of ten feet.
   (C)   This section does not apply to an accessory dwelling unit (as defined
in Cal. Gov’t Code § 65852.2) which is instead regulated by §
10.60.030.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.10.120 Other setback standards.
   (A)   Mechanical equipment shall be located a minimum of three feet from a
side lot line that adjoins a neighboring side lot line.
   (B)   Above- or below-ground swimming pools shall be set back three feet
from all lot lines.
   (C)   Architectural features, including eaves, sills, chimneys, and
cornices, may extend up to 30 inches into a required side yard or space between
structures and up to 36 inches into a required front or rear yard.
   (D)   Uncovered, unenclosed porches, platforms, or landing places that do
not extend above the level of the first floor of the building may extend up to
six feet into a required front, side, or rear yard, or into a space between
buildings. Railing up to 30 inches tall may be installed on any such porch,
platform, or landing.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.10.130 Off-street parking.
   (A)   Off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be provided
on the site for each use as prescribed in
Chapter 10.54.
   (B)   Single-family dwellings shall provide a minimum of two covered parking
spaces. Each space shall measure a minimum of nine feet in width and 20 feet in
depth. All parking spaces and driveways shall be surfaced with asphalt
concrete, chip seal, or other suitable all-weather surfacing. Where a carport
or garage is open to a public street, a driveway length of at least 20 feet
shall be provided between the parking structure and the front property line.
   (C)   Required parking spaces may not be provided within any front, side, or
rear building setback area except that garages or carports opening onto an
alley shall be set back five feet, provided that the structure, including roof
overhang, shall not extend into the alley right-of-way.
   (D)   The exterior siding and roofing materials utilized on garages and
carports shall match the design and materials of any single-family dwelling on
the same lot. New two-car carports may be utilized in place of a two-car garage
only if located at least 20 feet behind the front building setback line and
must be connected to the main dwelling, have a similar roof pitch as the main
dwelling, use similar roofing material as the main dwelling, and have support
beams or posts that are decorative in style.
   (E)   No recreation vehicle, including, without limitation, camping trailer,
boat trailer, utility trailer, boat, pickup camper, motor home, dune buggy, or
similar vehicle/trailer shall be stored or parked, except within a fenced side
or rear yard or within a garage or carport.
   (F)   No recreational vehicle or trailer shall be used as a residence.
   (G)   All motor vehicles incapable of movement under their own power, other
than in cases of emergency, shall be stored in an entirely enclosed space,
garage, or carport.
   (H)   Repair of vehicles owned by the resident of the property and storage
of parts shall be within an enclosed garage or carport if no garage exists.
Vehicle repair and storage of parts are prohibited in a driveway and the front
or street side building setback areas.
   (I)   Driveways shall be designed so that vehicles are not required to back
out onto collector or arterial streets.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.10.140 Usable open space.
   There is no open space requirement in the Rural Residential zone.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.10.150 Landscaping.
   (A)   Landscaping shall be provided for each use as prescribed in
Chapter 10.52 standards.
   (B)   Except for driveways and approved parking areas, all setback areas
visible from the street(s) shall be landscaped with live plant materials and
ornamentation, or up to 100% of the yard and setback area may be landscaped
with artificial turf and other permeable surfaces.
   (C)   Required landscaping is to be installed prior to occupancy and
continually maintained pursuant to
Chapter 10.52. The Director may grant an exception to this section to avoid
planting in inclement weather.
   (D)   Landscaped areas are not to be used or converted to parking areas or
any other use which results in the damage or removal of the landscaping.
However, the widening of an existing paved driveway perpendicular to the street
is permitted if the total width of the existing paving and the new paving does
not exceed 50% of the lot frontage along the street.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.10.160 Screening, fences, and walls.
   Fences, walls, and hedges in the R-1-20 zone shall conform to the design
standards in §
10.50.040 and the following:
   (A)   These regulations do not apply to fences or walls required by
regulations of a state or federal agency, or by the city for reasons of public
safety, or to retaining walls that adjoin land uses.
   (B)   Fences, walls, and hedges may be erected and properly maintained to
the heights identified below and measured from the highest adjoining finish
grade:
      (1)   Fences, walls, and hedges shall not exceed four feet in height in a
required front yard, and in the street side yard of a corner lot, provided that
the top one foot shall be of a see-through material such as wrought iron.
Hedges up to three feet tall are also permitted in a required front yard.
      (2)   Fences and walls shall not exceed seven feet in height in any rear
or side yard or other areas outside a required front yard.
      (3)   On corner lots, a fence may not exceed four feet in height in the
street corner area of the parcel formed by a right triangle with the right
angle at the street corner property lines and its right-angle sides measuring
25 feet. The top one foot of the fence shall be of a see-through material (such
as wrought iron).
      (4)   Walls along arterial and collector streets shall be installed and
maintained equal to a minimum of six feet and a maximum of seven feet in
height.
      (5)   Walls greater than seven feet in height may be permitted, if
approved by the Planning Commission, to mitigate noise impacts identified in
the Tulare General Plan.
   (C)   All fences shall be limited to the following materials or a
combination of materials:
      (1)   Front and street side yards:
         (a)   Concrete/block/brick.
         (b)   Latticework fencing.
         (c)   Wood (excluding plywood, OSB, or other wood not typically
designed or used for fencing).
         (d)   Wrought iron.
         (e)   Vinyl.
         (f)   Chain link fencing.
      (2)   Rear and interior side yards:
         (a)   Concrete/block.
         (b)   Latticework fencing.
         (c)   Wood (excluding plywood, OSB, or other wood not typically
designed or used for fencing).
         (d)   Vinyl.
   (D)   Perimeter walls around residential subdivisions shall be of neutral
color and shall be textured with stone, brick, stucco, or other surface finish.
Walls shall incorporate vertical elements (e.g., pilasters, indentations) of
differing colors and/or materials at least every 50 feet.
   (E)   Temporary fencing may be necessary to protect archaeological or
historic resources and/or trees during site preparation and construction.
Temporary fencing for these purposes shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Director.
   (F)   Swimming pools shall be entirely enclosed by structures, fences, or
walls in compliance with Cal. Gov’t Code § 115920 - The Swimming Pool Act.
      (1)   Pool fences shall have a minimum height of five feet. Such fences
shall be substantial and shall be constructed so there are no openings greater
than four inches when all gates are closed. All gates, five feet or less in
width, in enclosing fences shall be self-closing and self-latching. All gates
greater than five feet in width shall be provided with a means of latching said
gate closed. All latches on gates in enclosing fences shall be a minimum of 60
inches above grade. No pool shall be filled with water until the enclosing
fence has been constructed and approved by the building inspector. Surrounding
structures, existing fences, and gates shall suffice for this requirement if
they comply with all requirements of this section as determined by the building
inspector.
   (G)   The city reserves the right to remove, at the expense of the owner of
the property or properties enclosed by the fence, any fence in a public
easement in any emergency.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.10.170 Signs.
   Signs placed in the Rural Residential zone shall be subject to the
requirements and standards prescribed in
Chapter 10.56.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.10.180 General provisions and standards.
   The following standards apply to all single-family dwellings, including
manufactured homes, developed in the R-1-20 district:
   (A)   The minimum width of a primary one-family dwelling or manufactured
home shall be 20 feet.
   (B)   All residential units shall be attached to a permanent foundation,
pursuant to the State's Health and Safety Code.
   (C)   Roofing material shall be composed of composition shingles, ceramic
tile, wood shakes, wood shingles, or other materials consistent with the
Uniform Building Code.
   (D)   Exterior siding material shall be composed of, or resemble, wood,
masonry, or plaster.
   (E)   Siding shall extend to the ground, except when a solid concrete or
masonry perimeter foundation or retaining wall is used, in which case the
material need only extend to the top of the foundation or wall.
   (F)   Manufactured homes must be certified under the National Manufactured
Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.12: RESIDENTIAL ESTATE ZONE
Section
   
10.12.010   Purpose and application.
   
10.12.020   Permitted uses.
   
10.12.030   Lot area.
   
10.12.040   Lot dimensions.
   
10.12.050   Dwelling units per lot.
   
10.12.060   Coverage.
   
10.12.070   Building setback areas.
   
10.12.080   Distance between structures.
   
10.12.090   Height of structures.
   
10.12.100   Driveways.
   
10.12.110   Accessory structures.
   
10.12.120   Other setback standards.
   
10.12.130   Off-street parking.
   
10.12.140   Usable open space.
   
10.12.150   Landscaping.
   
10.12.160   Screening, fences, and walls.
   
10.12.170   Signs.
   
10.12.180   General provisions and standards.
§ 10.12.010 Purpose and application.
   This chapter shall apply to all land within the Residential Estate (R-1-
12.5) zone. The purpose of the R-1-12.5 zone is to provide areas for large lot,
single-family estate dwellings at a density of two and one-tenth to three
dwellings per gross acre.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.12.020 Permitted uses.
   Uses shall be permitted or not permitted, conditionally permitted,
administratively permitted, or temporarily permitted as prescribed in the land
use table in §
10.08.020.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.12.030 Lot area.
   The minimum lot area shall be 12,500 square feet, except that a municipal
water well site shall have a minimum lot area of 2,000 square feet.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.12.040 Lot dimensions.
   (A)   The minimum lot frontage shall be 40 feet on a public street.
   (B)   The minimum lot width shall be 90 feet for interior lots and 100 feet
for corner lots.
   (C)   The minimum lot depth shall be 100 feet.
   (D)   A municipal water well site shall not be subject to minimum lot
dimension standards.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.12.050 Dwelling units per lot.
   Not more than one dwelling unit shall be allowed on each lot unless approved
as an accessory dwelling unit in accordance with §
10.60.030.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.12.060 Coverage.
   The maximum coverage of a lot in the R-1-12.5 zone shall be 50% of the area
of the lot.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.12.070 Building setback areas.
   (A)   No structure shall be placed within a building setback area.
   (B)   The front building setback area shall be a minimum of 20 feet from the
front lot line.
   (C)   For single-family dwellings that include a usable front porch
measuring at least ten feet in width by five feet in depth, the front yard
setback may be reduced by five feet.
   (D)   The rear building setback shall be a minimum of ten feet from the rear
lot line for one-story buildings and a minimum of 15 feet for multi-story
buildings.
   (E)   The interior side building setback area shall be a minimum of seven
and one-half feet from an interior side lot line. The side yard on the street
side of a corner lot shall be a minimum of ten feet.
   (F)   A garage or carport facing the street shall be set back at least 20
feet from the property line. If the garage does not face the street, the garage
may be set back the required minimum distance listed in divisions (A) through
(E) above.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.12.080 Distance between structures.
   The minimum distance between structures shall be ten feet, except as
provided by the building code.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.12.090 Height of structures.
   The maximum structure height shall be 35 feet unless approved up to 50 feet
with a conditional use permit in accordance with
Chapter 10.80.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.12.100 Driveways.
   (A)   The width of a driveway and any paved area shall not cumulatively
exceed 40% of the width of the lot's street frontage on which the driveway and
any paved area face. In the case of "L" or "U" shaped driveways or other
configurations besides perpendicular driveways, the paved area of these
driveways shall not exceed 50% of the front building setback area.
   (B)   On corner lots, the driveway shall be located on the side of the lot
adjacent to the interior lot line.
   (C)   On key lots, the driveway shall be located on the side of the lot that
is not adjacent to the rear lot line of the adjacent reverse corner lot.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.12.110 Accessory structures.
   Accessory structures may be located with a required rear or side building
setback area subject to all of the following:
   (A)   The walls shall be at least five feet from the rear and side lot
lines.
   (B)   The accessory structure shall be separated from other structures by a
minimum of ten feet.
   (C)   This section does not apply to an accessory dwelling unit (as defined
in Cal. Gov’t Code § 65852.2) which is instead regulated by §
10.60.030.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.12.120 Other setback standards.
   (A)   Mechanical equipment shall be located a minimum of three feet from a
side lot line that adjoins a neighboring side lot line.
   (B)   Above- or below-ground swimming pools shall be set back three feet
from all lot lines.
   (C)   Architectural features, including eaves, sills, chimneys, and
cornices, may extend up to 30 inches into a required side yard or space between
structures and up to 36 inches into a required front or rear yard.
   (D)   Uncovered, unenclosed porches, platforms, or landing places that do
not extend above the level of the first floor of the building may extend up to
six feet into a required front, side, or rear yard, or into a space between
buildings. Railing up to 30 inches tall may be installed on any such porch,
platform, or landing.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.12.130 Off-street parking.
   (A)   Off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be provided
on the site for each use as prescribed in
Chapter 10.54.
   (B)   Single-family dwellings shall provide a minimum of two covered parking
spaces. Each space shall measure a minimum of nine feet in width and 20 feet in
depth. All parking spaces and driveways shall be surfaced with asphalt
concrete, chip seal, or other suitable all-weather surfacing. Where a carport
or garage is open to a public street, a driveway length of at least 20 feet
shall be provided between the parking structure and the front property line.
   (C)   Required parking spaces may not be provided within any front, side, or
rear building setback area except that garages or carports opening onto an
alley shall be set back five feet, provided that the structure, including roof
overhang, shall not extend into the alley right-of-way.
   (D)   The exterior siding and roofing materials utilized on garages and
carports shall match the design and materials of any single-family dwelling on
the same lot. New two-car carports may be utilized in place of a two-car garage
only if located at least 20 feet behind the front building setback line and
must be connected to the main dwelling, have a similar roof pitch as the main
dwelling, use similar roofing material as the main dwelling, and have support
beams or posts that are decorative in style.
   (E)   No recreation vehicle, including, without limitation, camping trailer,
boat trailer, utility trailer, boat, pickup camper, motor home, dune buggy, or
similar vehicle/trailer shall be stored or parked, except within a fenced side
or rear yard or within a garage or carport.
   (F)   No recreational vehicle or trailer shall be used as a residence.
   (G)   All motor vehicles incapable of movement under their own power, other
than in cases of emergency, shall be stored in an entirely enclosed space,
garage, or carport.
   (H)   Repair of vehicles owned by the resident of the property and storage
of parts shall be within an enclosed garage or carport if no garage exists.
Vehicle repair and storage of parts are prohibited in a driveway and the front
or street side building setback areas.
   (I)   Driveways shall be designed so that vehicles are not required to back
out onto collector or arterial streets.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.12.140 Usable open space.
   There is no open space requirement in the Residential Estate zone.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.12.150 Landscaping.
   (A)   Landscaping shall be provided for each use as prescribed in
Chapter 10.52 Landscape Standards.
   (B)   Except for driveways and approved parking areas, all setback areas
visible from the street(s) shall be landscaped with live plant materials and
ornamentation, or up to 100% of the yard and setback area may be landscaped
with artificial turf and other permeable surfaces.
   (C)   Required landscaping is to be installed prior to occupancy and
continually maintained pursuant to
Chapter 10.52. The Director may grant an exception to this section to avoid
planting in inclement weather.
   (D)   Landscaped areas are not to be used or converted to parking areas or
any other use which results in the damage or removal of the landscaping.
However, the widening of an existing paved driveway perpendicular to the street
is permitted if the total width of the existing paving and the new paving does
not exceed 50% of the lot frontage along the street.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.12.160 Screening, fences, and walls.
   Fences, walls, and hedges in the R-1-12.5 zone shall conform to the design
standards in §
10.50.040 and the following:
   (A)   These regulations do not apply to fences or walls required by
regulations of a state or federal agency, or by the city for reasons of public
safety, or to retaining walls that adjoin land uses.
   (B)   Fences, walls, and hedges may be erected and properly maintained to
the heights identified below and measured from the highest adjoining finish
grade:
      (1)   Fences, walls, and hedges shall not exceed four feet in height in a
required front yard, and in the street side yard of a corner lot, provided that
the top one foot shall be of a see-through material such as wrought iron.
Hedges up to three feet tall are also permitted in a required front yard.
      (2)   Fences and walls shall not exceed seven feet in height in any rear
or side yard or other areas outside a required front yard.
      (3)   On corner lots, a fence may not exceed four feet in height in the
street corner area of the parcel formed by a right triangle with the right
angle at the street corner property lines and its right-angle sides measuring
25 feet. The top one foot of the fence shall be of a see-through material (such
as wrought iron).
      (4)   Walls along arterial and collector streets shall be installed and
maintained equal to a minimum of six feet and a maximum of seven feet in
height.
      (5)   Walls greater than seven feet in height may be permitted, if
approved by the Planning Commission, to mitigate noise impacts identified in
the Tulare General Plan.
   (C)   All fences shall be limited to the following materials or a
combination of materials:
      (1)   Front and street side yards:
         (a)   Concrete/block/brick.
         (b)   Latticework fencing.
         (c)   Wood (excluding plywood, OSB, or other wood not typically
designed or used for fencing).
         (d)   Wrought iron.
         (e)   Vinyl.
         (f)   Chain link fencing.
      (2)   Rear and interior side yards:
         (a)   Concrete/block.
         (b)   Latticework fencing.
         (c)   Wood (excluding plywood, OSB, or other wood not typically
designed or used for fencing).
         (d)   Vinyl.
   (D)   Perimeter walls around residential subdivisions shall be of neutral
color and shall be textured with stone, brick, stucco, or other surface finish.
Wall shall incorporate vertical elements (e.g., pilasters, indentations) of
differing colors and/or materials at least every 50 feet.
   (E)   Temporary fencing may be necessary to protect archaeological or
historic resources and/or trees during site preparation and construction.
Temporary fencing for these purposes shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Director.
   (F)   Swimming pools shall be entirely enclosed by structures, fences, or
walls in compliance with Cal. Gov’t Code § 115920 - The Swimming Pool Act.
      (1)   Pool fences shall have a minimum height of five feet. Such fences
shall be substantial and shall be constructed so there are no openings greater
than four inches when all gates are closed. All gates, five feet or less in
width, in enclosing fences shall be self-closing and self-latching. All gates
greater than five feet in width shall be provided with a means of latching said
gate closed. All latches on gates in enclosing fences shall be a minimum of 60
inches above grade. No pool shall be filled with water until the enclosing
fence has been constructed and approved by the building inspector. Surrounding
structures, existing fences, and gates shall suffice for this requirement if
they comply with all requirements of this section as determined by the building
inspector.
   (G)   The city reserves the right to remove, at the expense of the owner of
the property or properties enclosed by the fence, any fence in a public
easement in any emergency.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.12.170 Signs.
   Signs placed in the Residential Estate zone shall be subject to the
requirements and standards prescribed in
Chapter 10.56.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.12.180 General provisions and standards.
   The following standards apply to all single-family dwellings, including
manufactured homes, developed in the R-1-12.5 district:
   (A)   The minimum width of a primary one-family dwelling or manufactured
home shall be 20 feet.
   (B)   All residential units shall be attached to a permanent foundation,
pursuant to the State's Health and Safety Code.
   (C)   Roofing material shall be composed of composition shingles, ceramic
tile, wood shakes, wood shingles, or other materials consistent with the
Uniform Building Code.
   (D)   Exterior siding material shall be composed of, or resemble, wood,
masonry, or plaster.
   (E)   Siding shall extend to the ground, except when a solid concrete or
masonry perimeter foundation or retaining wall is used, in which case the
material need only extend to the top of the foundation or wall.
   (F)   Manufactured homes must be certified under the National Manufactured
Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974.
   (G)   Installation of a manufactured home is prohibited if more than ten
years have elapsed between the date of the manufacture and the date of the
application for the issuance of a permit to install the manufactured home.
   (H)   Entryways for new subdivisions of ten or more units fronting an
arterial street shall be delineated and enhanced with the incorporation of at
least two of the following:
      (1)   Enhanced paving treatment with patterned and/or colored pavers,
brick, or decorative colored and scored concrete a minimum of 20 feet deep and
spanning the width of the entry roadway.
      (2)   A monument sign or place name incorporated into a wall.
      (3)   Enhanced landscaping that incorporates features such as arbors,
trellises, and hedges.
      (4)   A landscaped median at least six feet wide and 50 feet long in the
middle of the entry roadway.
      (5)   An expansion of the landscaped area by a minimum of five feet in
depth spanning a minimum of ten feet on each side of the entry roadway.
   (I)   Where new streets are proposed, the ends of new streets shall align
with existing streets or paseos in adjacent blocks.
   (J)   The maximum allowable length of closed-end streets (cul-de-sacs) in
residential developments shall be 500 feet.
   (K)   Where cul-de-sacs exist, pedestrian linkages are required and shall
provide direct connections to adjacent streets or public areas.
   (L)   Single-family subdivisions over 160 acres must include at least four
points of access to connect with arterials, collectors, or other neighboring
developments.
   (M)   Within a subdivision, including home plans, homes built on side-by-
side lots shall not repeat the floor plan unless the front elevation has a
substantially different appearance and color.
   (N)   Single-family homes proposed in a subdivision of eight or more homes
shall include at least two of the following design features:
      (1)   Tile roofing.
      (2)   A garage subordinate design on at least 50% of the available floor
plans.
      (3)   Three-color exterior paint.
      (4)   Architecturalelements, includingwindow shutters, decorative
moldings, gable decorations, or decorative molding.
      (5)   Stone, rock, or brick elevation treatments at the base of ground
floor front street-facing facades.
      (6)   A concrete or stone walkway from the sidewalk to the front door
exclusive of the driveway.
      (7)   Front yard porch or courtyard of at least 25 square feet with no
dimension measuring less than five-feet-wide.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.14: LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ZONE
Section
   
10.14.010   Purpose and application.
   
10.14.020   Permitted uses.
   
10.14.030   Lot area.
   
10.14.040   Lot dimensions.
   
10.14.050   Dwelling units per lot.
   
10.14.060   Coverage.
   
10.14.070   Building setback areas.
   
10.14.080   Distance between structures.
   
10.14.090   Height of structures.
   
10.14.100   Driveways.
   
10.14.110   Accessory structures.
   
10.14.120   Other setback standards.
   
10.14.130   Off-street parking.
   
10.14.140   Usable open space.
   
10.14.150   Landscaping.
   
10.14.160   Screening, fences, and walls.
   
10.14.170   Signs.
   
10.14.180   General provisions and standards.
§ 10.14.010 Purpose and application.
   This chapter shall apply to all land within the Low Density Residential (R-
1) zone. The purpose of the R-1 zone is to provide residential neighborhoods of
mostly, but not exclusively, single-family homes at a density of three and one-
tenth to seven dwellings per gross acre. In order to adequately plan for
single-family development of various densities, the R-1 district is further
subdivided into the following sub-districts: R-1-4 and R-1-6.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.14.020 Permitted uses.
   Uses shall be permitted or not permitted, conditionally permitted,
administratively permitted, or temporarily permitted as prescribed in the land
use table in §
10.08.020.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.14.030 Lot area.
   (A)   The minimum lot area shall be 4,000 square feet for the R-1-
4 district.
   (B)   The minimum lot area shall be 6,000 square feet for the R-1-
6 district.
   (C)   A municipal water well site shall have a minimum lot area of 2,000
square feet.
   (D)   The minimum lot area in the R-1-4 district may be reduced to 3,200
square feet with the approval of a planned unit development application for a
Small Lot Residential development.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.14.040 Lot dimensions.
   (A)   The following standards apply to the R-1-4 district:
      (1)   The minimum lot frontage shall be 40 feet on a public street.
      (2)   The minimum lot width shall be 40 feet for interior lots and 50
feet for corner lots. The minimum lot width may be reduced to 30 feet if there
is an alley.
      (3)   The minimum lot depth shall be 65 feet for lots fronting on a local
street and 100 feet for lots fronting on collector or arterial streets.
   (B)   The following standards apply to the R-1-6 district:
      (1)   The minimum lot frontage shall be 40 feet on a public street.
      (2)   The minimum lot width shall be 60 feet for interior lots and 70
feet for corner lots.
      (3)   The minimum lot depth shall be 100 feet for lots fronting on a
local street and 120 feet for lots fronting on collector or arterial streets.
   (C)   New subdivisions shall not place the front lot line of new lots along
arterial or collector streets.
   (D)   A municipal water well site shall not be subject to minimum lot
dimension standards.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.14.050 Dwelling units per lot.
   Not more than one dwelling unit shall be allowed on each lot unless approved
as an accessory dwelling unit in accordance with §
10.60.030.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.14.060 Coverage.
   The maximum coverage of a lot shall be 60%.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.14.070 Building setback areas.
   (A)   No structure shall be placed within a building setback area.
   (B)   The front building setback area shall be a minimum of 15 feet from the
front lot line to the structure's living space unless reduced to ten feet in
the R-1-6 district or eight feet in the R-1-4 district with a conditional use
permit in accordance with
Chapter 10.80.
   (C)   The rear building setback shall be a minimum of five feet from the
rear lot line.
   (D)   The interior side building setback area shall be a minimum of five
feet.
   (E)   The street side building setback area shall be a minimum of ten feet.
   (F)   A garage or carport facing the street shall be set back at least 20
feet from the property line. If the garage does not face the street, the garage
may be set back the required minimum distance listed in divisions (A) through
(E) above.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.14.080 Distance between structures.
   The minimum distance between structures shall be ten feet, except as
provided by the building code.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.14.090 Height of structures.
   The maximum structure height shall be 35 feet unless approved up to 45 feet
with a conditional use permit in accordance with
Chapter 10.80.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.14.100 Driveways.
   (A)   The width of a driveway and any paved area shall not cumulatively
exceed 40% of the width of the lot's street frontage on which the driveway and
any paved area face.
   (B)   In the case of "L" or "U" shaped driveways or other configurations
besides perpendicular driveways, the paved area of these driveways shall not
exceed 50% of the front building setback area.
   (C)   On corner lots, the driveway shall be located on the side of the lot
adjacent to the interior lot line.
   (D)   On key lots, the driveway shall be located on the side of the lot that
is not adjacent to the rear lot line of the adjacent reverse corner lot.
   (E)   Each alley or private drive shall be 20 feet in width with an approved
turning radius to accommodate garbage trucks. Each alley or private drive shall
be designed to allow for the exiting of garbage trucks.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.14.110 Accessory structures.
   Accessory structures may be located within a required rear or side building
setback area subject to all of the following:
   (A)   The walls shall be at least five feet from the rear and side lot
lines.
   (B)   The accessory structure shall be separated from other structures by a
minimum of ten feet.
   (C)   This section does not apply to an accessory dwelling unit (as defined
in Cal. Gov’t Code § 65852.2) which is instead regulated by §
10.60.030.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.14.120 Other setback standards.
   (A)   Mechanical equipment shall be located a minimum of three feet from a
side lot line that adjoins a neighboring side lot line.
   (B)   Above- or below-ground swimming pools shall be set back three feet
from all lot lines.
   (C)   Architectural features, including eaves, sills, chimneys, and
cornices, may extend up to 30 inches into a required side yard or space between
structures and up to 36 inches into a required front or rear yard.
   (D)   Uncovered, unenclosed porches, platforms, or landing places that do
not extend above the level of the first floor of the building may extend up to
six feet into a required front, side, or rear yard, or into a space between
buildings. Railing up to 30 inches tall may be installed on any such porch,
platform, or landing.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.14.130 Off-street parking.
   (A)   Off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be provided
on the site for each use as prescribed in
Chapter 10.54.
   (B)   Single-family dwellings shall provide a minimum of two covered parking
spaces. Each space shall measure a minimum of nine feet in width and 20 feet in
depth. All parking spaces and driveways shall be surfaced with asphalt
concrete, chip seal, or other suitable all-weather surfacing. Where a carport
or garage is open to a public street, a driveway length of at least 20 feet
shall be provided between the parking structure and the front property line.
   (C)   Required parking spaces may not be provided within any front, side, or
rear building setback area except that garages or carports opening onto an
alley shall be set back five feet, provided that the structure, including roof
overhang, shall not extend into the alley right-of-way. Each garage facing a
courtyard shall have an apron of not less than six feet or more than 18 feet.
   (D)   The exterior siding and roofing materials utilized on garages and
carports shall match the design and materials of any single-family dwelling on
the same lot. New two-car carports may be utilized in place of a two-car garage
only if located at least 20 feet behind the front building setback line and
must be connected to the main dwelling, have a similar roof pitch as the main
dwelling, use similar roofing material as the main dwelling, and have support
beams or posts that are decorative in style.
   (E)   No recreation vehicle, including, without limitation, camping trailer,
boat trailer, utility trailer, boat, pickup camper, motor home, dune buggy, or
similar vehicle/trailer shall be stored or parked, except within a fenced side
or rear yard or within a garage or carport.
   (F)   No recreational vehicle or trailer shall be used as a residence.
   (G)   All motor vehicles incapable of movement under their own power, other
than in cases of emergency, shall be stored in an entirely enclosed space,
garage, or carport.
   (H)   Repair of vehicles owned by the resident of the property and storage
of parts shall be within an enclosed garage or carport if no garage exists.
Vehicle repair and storage of parts are prohibited in a driveway and the front
or street side building setback areas.
   (I)   Driveways shall be designed so that vehicles are not required to back
out onto collector or arterial streets.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.14.140 Usable open space.
   There is no open space requirement in the R-1 zone.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.14.150 Landscaping.
   (A)   Landscaping shall be provided for each use as prescribed in
Chapter 10.52 Landscape Standards.
   (B)   Except for driveways and approved parking areas, all yard areas and
setback areas visible from the street(s) shall be landscaped with live plant
materials and ornamentation common to the area, or up to 100% of the yard and
setback area may be landscaped with artificial turf and other permeable
surfaces.
   (C)   Required landscaping is to be installed prior to occupancy of the
residence and continually maintained pursuant to
Chapter 10.52. The Director may grant an exception to this section to avoid
planting in inclement weather.
   (D)   Landscaped areas are not to be used or converted to parking areas or
any other use which results in the damage or removal of the landscaping.
However, the widening of an existing paved driveway perpendicular to the street
is permitted if the total width of the existing paving and the new paving does
not exceed 40% of the lot frontage along the street.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.14.160 Screening, fences, and walls.
   Fences, walls, and hedges in the R-1 zone shall conform to the design
standards in §
10.50.040 and the following:
   (A)   These regulations do not apply to fences or walls required by
regulations of a state or federal agency, or by the city for reasons of public
safety, or to retaining walls that adjoin land uses.
   (B)   Fences, walls, and hedges may be erected and properly maintained to
the heights identified below and measured from the highest adjoining finish
grade:
      (1)   Fences, walls, and hedges shall not exceed four feet in height in a
required front yard and in the street side yard of a corner lot, provided that
the top one foot shall be of a see-through material such as wrought iron.
Hedges up to three feet tall are also permitted in a required front yard.
      (2)   Fences and walls shall not exceed seven feet in height in any rear
or side yard or other areas outside a required front yard.
      (3)   On corner lots, a fence may not exceed four feet in height in the
street corner area of the parcel formed by a right triangle with the right
angle at the street corner property lines and its right-angle sides measuring
25 feet. The top one foot of the fence shall be of a see-through material (such
as wrought iron).
      (4)   Walls along arterial and collector streets shall be installed and
maintained equal to a minimum of six feet and a maximum of seven feet in
height.
      (5)   Walls greater than seven feet in height may be permitted, if
approved by the Planning Commission, to mitigate noise impacts identified in
the Tulare General Plan.
   (C)   Allowable fence materials. All fences constructed or installed within
the city shall be limited to the following materials or a combination of
materials:
      (1)   Front and street side yards:
         (a)   Concrete/block/brick.
         (b)   Latticework fencing.
         (c)   Wood (excluding plywood, OSB, or other wood not typically
designed or used for fencing).
         (d)   Wrought iron.
         (e)   Vinyl.
         (f)   Chain link fencing.
      (2)   Rear and interior side yards:
         (a)   Concrete/block.
         (b)   Latticework fencing.
         (c)   Wood (excluding plywood, OSB, or other wood not typically
designed or used for fencing).
         (d)   Vinyl.
   (D)   Perimeter walls around residential subdivisions shall be of neutral
color and shall be textured with stone, brick, stucco, or other surface finish.
Walls shall incorporate vertical elements (e.g., pilasters, indentations) of
differing colors and/or materials at least every 50 feet.
   (E)   Walls for residential developments along arterial or collector
roadways shall be designed to provide pedestrian access between the arterial or
collector to the residential development.
   (F)   Temporary fencing may be necessary to protect archaeological or
historic resources and/or trees during site preparation and construction.
Temporary fencing for these purposes shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Director.
   (G)   Swimming pools shall be entirely enclosed by structures, fences, or
walls in compliance with Cal. Gov’t Code § 115920 - The Swimming Pool Act.
      (1)   Pool fences shall have a minimum height of five feet. Such fences
shall be substantial and shall be constructed so there are no openings greater
than four inches when all gates are closed. All gates, five feet or less in
width, in enclosing fences shall be self-closing and self-latching. All gates
greater than five feet in width shall be provided with a means of latching said
gate closed. All latches on gates in enclosing fences shall be a minimum of 60
inches above grade. No pool shall be filled with water until the enclosing
fence has been constructed and approved by the building inspector. Surrounding
structures, existing fences, and gates shall suffice for this requirement if
they comply with all requirements of this section as determined by the building
inspector.
   (H)   The city reserves the right to remove, at the expense of the owner of
the property or properties enclosed by the fence, any fence in a public
easement in any emergency.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.14.170 Signs.
   Signs placed in the R-1 zone shall be subject to the requirements and
standards prescribed in
Chapter 10.56.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.14.180 General provisions and standards.
   The following standards apply to all single-family dwellings, including
manufactured homes, developed in the R-1-4 and R-1-6 districts:
   (A)   The minimum width of a primary one-family dwelling or manufactured
home shall be 20 feet.
   (B)   Orientation and appearance of all single-family dwellings shall be
consistent and compatible with other dwelling units in the surrounding area.
   (C)   All residential units shall be attached to a permanent foundation,
pursuant to the State's Health and Safety Code.
   (D)   Roofing material shall be composed of composition shingles, ceramic
tile, wood shakes, wood shingles, or other materials consistent with the
Uniform Building Code.
   (E)   Exterior siding material shall be composed of, or resemble, wood,
masonry, or plaster.
   (F)   Siding shall extend to the ground, except when a solid concrete or
masonry perimeter foundation or retaining wall is used, in which case the
material need only extend to the top of the foundation or wall.
   (G)   Manufactured homes must be certified under the National Manufactured
Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974.
   (H)   Installation of a manufactured home is prohibited if more than ten
years have elapsed between the date of the manufacture and the date of the
application for the issuance of a permit to install the manufactured home.
   (I)   Entryways for new subdivisions of ten or more units, fronting on an
arterial street shall be delineated and enhanced with the incorporation of at
least two of the following:
      (1)   Enhanced paving treatment with patterned and/or colored pavers,
brick, or decorative colored and scored concrete a minimum of 20 feet deep and
spanning the width of the entry roadway.
      (2)   A monument sign or place name incorporated into a wall.
      (3)   Enhanced landscaping that incorporates features such as arbors,
trellises, and hedges.
      (4)   A landscaped median at least six feet wide and 50 feet long in the
middle of the entry roadway.
      (5)   An expansion of the landscaped area by a minimum of five feet in
depth, spanning a minimum of ten feet on each side of the entry roadway.
   (J)   Where new streets are proposed, the ends of new streets shall align
with existing streets or paseos in adjacent blocks.
   (K)   The maximum allowable length of closed-end streets (cul-de-sacs) in
residential developments shall be 500 feet.
   (L)   Where cul-de-sacs exist, pedestrian linkages are required and shall
provide direct connections to adjacent streets or public areas.
   (M)   Residential developments over 50 units shall be designed with at least
two points of access to connect with arterials, collectors, or other
neighboring developments.
   (N)   Single-family subdivisions over 160 acres must include at least four
points of access to connect with arterials, collectors, or other neighboring
developments.
   (O)   Single-family homes proposed in a subdivision of eight or more homes
shall include at least two of the following design features:
      (1)   Tile roofing.
      (2)   A garage subordinate design on at least 50% of the floor plans.
      (3)   Three-color exterior paint.
      (4)   Architectural elements, including window shutters, decorative
moldings, gable decorations, or decorative molding.
      (5)   Stone, rock, or brick elevation treatments at the base of ground
floor front street-facing facades.
      (6)   A concrete or stone walkway from the sidewalk to the front door
exclusive of the driveway.
      (7)   Front yard porch or courtyard of at least 25 square feet with no
dimension measuring less than five feet wide.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.16: MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ZONE
Section
   
10.16.010   Purpose and application.
   
10.16.020   Permitted uses.
   
10.16.030   Lot area.
   
10.16.040   Lot dimensions.
   
10.16.050   Site area per dwelling unit.
   
10.16.060   Coverage.
   
10.16.070   Building setback areas.
   
10.16.080   Distance between structures.
   
10.16.090   Height of structures.
   
10.16.100   Driveways.
   
10.16.110   Accessory structures.
   
10.16.120   Other setback standards.
   
10.16.130   Off-street parking.
   
10.16.140   Usable open space.
   
10.16.150   Landscaping.
   
10.16.160   Screening, fences, and walls.
   
10.16.170   Signs.
   
10.16.180   General provisions and design standards.
§ 10.16.010 Purpose and application.
   This chapter shall apply to all land within the Medium Density Residential
(R-M) zone. The purpose of the R-M zone is to provide areas for living areas
within the city where development is permitted at relatively dense
concentrations of dwellings between seven and one-tenth and 14 units per acre.
The objectives of the R-M district are:
   (A)   The development of a suitable environment for family life, recognizing
that a significant part of the multiple-family population is adults, including
older adults.
   (B)   The creation of vibrant residential neighborhoods that exhibit high
standards of design, including the following features:
      (1)   Attractive, tree-lined streets, which emphasize and encourage
walking and bicycling as well as efficient automobile transit. In such
neighborhoods, the sidewalk will be set back from the street, providing space
for a tree-lined parking strip.
      (2)   Multiple-family units designed in a manner that encourages human
activity in the front yard by placing front doors facing the street, providing
front porches, and reducing the dominance of parking facilities as a prominent
feature in the front yard.
   (C)   To provide for limited commercial uses on the same site of multiple-
family developments. The commercial uses shall be operated as a subordinate
part of the multiple-family development. This type of land use arrangement will
work to reduce the need for residents to travel to off-site stores for basic
consumer needs.
   (D)   To provide space for community facilities needed to complement urban
residential areas and for institutions that require a residential environment.
   (E)   To minimize traffic congestion while providing an efficient
circulation system.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.16.020 Permitted uses.
   Uses shall be permitted or not permitted, conditionally permitted,
administratively permitted, or temporarily permitted as prescribed in the land
use table in §
10.08.020.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.16.030 Lot area.
   The minimum lot area shall be 6,000 square feet, except that a municipal
water well site shall have a minimum lot area of 2,000 square feet.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.16.040 Lot dimensions.
   (A)   The minimum lot frontage shall be 40 feet on a public street.
   (B)   The minimum lot width shall be 50 feet for interior lots and 60 feet
for corner lots.
   (C)   The minimum lot depth shall be 100 feet for lots fronting on a local
street and 120 feet for lots fronting on collector or arterial streets.
   (D)   A municipal water well site shall not be subject to minimum lot
dimension standards.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.16.050 Site area per dwelling unit.
   The minimum site area per dwelling unit shall be 3,000 square feet of area.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.16.060 Coverage.
   The maximum coverage of a lot shall be determined by the combined building
setback area requirements, accessory structure limitations, open space
requirements, and off-street parking requirements. These requirements shall not
reduce the maximum lot coverage below 60% of the overall lot.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.16.070 Building setback areas.
   (A)   No structure shall be placed within a building setback area.
   (B)   The front building setback area shall be a minimum of 15 feet from the
front lot line for livable building space and 20 feet for garages, carports,
and other non-livable building space.
   (C)   The rear building setback area shall be a minimum of five feet per
story.
   (D)   The side building setback area shall be five feet per story from an
interior side lot line and ten feet from a street side property line. For a
reverse corner lot, the street side setback shall be one-half the required
front yard setback of the lot to the rear.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.16.080 Distance between structures.
   The minimum distance between structures shall be ten feet, except as
provided by the building code.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.16.090 Height of structures.
   The maximum structure height shall be 35 feet. No portion of a structure
that is within 30 feet of an interior property line shall be higher than 25
feet.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.16.100 Driveways.
   (A)   The width of a driveway and any paved area shall not cumulatively
exceed 40% of the width of the lot's street frontage on which the driveway and
any paved area faces. In the case of "L" or "U" shaped driveways or other
configurations besides perpendicular driveways, the paved area of these
driveways shall not exceed 50% of the front building setback area.
   (B)   Driveways shall be designed so that vehicles are not required to back
out onto collector or arterial streets.
   (C)   On corner lots, the driveway shall be located on the side of the lot
adjacent to the interior lot line.
   (D)   On key lots, the driveway shall be located on the side of the lot,
which is not adjacent to the rear lot line of the adjacent reverse corner lot.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.16.110 Accessory structures.
   Accessory structures may be located with a required rear or side building
setback area subject to all of the following:
   (A)   The floor area shall be a maximum of 300 square feet.
   (B)   The walls shall be at least three feet from the rear and side lot
lines.
   (C)   The roof eaves shall be at least two feet from the rear and side lot
lines.
   (D)   The accessory structure shall be separated from other structures by a
minimum of ten feet.
   (E)   The maximum height shall be 20 feet.
   (F)   This section does not apply to an accessory dwelling unit (as defined
in Cal. Gov’t Code § 65852.2) which is instead regulated by §
10.60.030.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.16.120 Other setback standards.
   (A)   Mechanical equipment shall be located a minimum of five feet from a
side lot line that adjoins a neighboring side lot line.
   (B)   Above- or below-ground swimming pools shall be set back three feet
from all lot lines.
   (C)   Architectural features, including eaves, sills, chimneys, and
cornices, may extend up to 30 inches into a required side yard or space between
structures and up to 36 inches into a required front or rear yard.
   (D)   Uncovered, unenclosed porches, platforms, or landing places that do
not extend above the level of the first floor of the building may extend up to
six feet into a required front, side, or rear yard, or into a space between
buildings. Railing up to 30 inches tall may be installed on any such porch,
platform, or landing.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.16.130 Off-street parking.
   (A)   Off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be provided
on the site for each use as prescribed in
Chapter 10.54.
   (B)   Each space shall measure a minimum of nine feet in width and 20 feet
in depth. All parking spaces and driveways shall be surfaced with asphalt
concrete, chip seal, or other suitable all-weather surfacing. Where a carport
or garage is open to a public street, a driveway length of at least 20 feet
shall be provided between the parking structure and the front property line.
   (C)   Required parking spaces may not be provided within any front, side, or
rear building setback area except that garages or carports opening onto an
alley shall be set back five feet, provided that the structure, including roof
overhang, shall not extend into the alley right-of-way. Each garage facing a
courtyard shall have an apron of not less than six feet or more than 18 feet.
   (D)   No recreation vehicle, including, without limitation, a camping
trailer, boat trailer, utility trailer, boat, pickup camper, motor home, dune
buggy, or similar vehicle/trailer shall be stored or parked, except within an
enclosed side or rear yard or within a garage or carport.
   (E)   No recreational vehicle or trailer shall be used as a residence.
   (F)   All motor vehicles incapable of movement under their own power, other
than in cases of emergency, shall be stored in an entirely enclosed space,
garage, or carport.
   (G)   Repair of vehicles owned by the resident of the property and storage
of parts shall be within an enclosed garage or carport if no garage exists.
Vehicle repair and storage of parts are prohibited in a driveway and the front
or street side building setback areas.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.16.140 Usable open space.
   Each lot shall provide for a usable open space area of a minimum of 300
square feet per dwelling unit. Each open space area shall be a minimum of 15
feet wide.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.16.150 Landscaping.
   (A)   Landscaping shall be provided for each use as prescribed in
Chapter 10.52 Landscape Standards.
   (B)   Except for driveways and approved parking areas, all yard areas and
setback areas visible from the street(s) shall be landscaped with live plant
materials and ornamentation common to the area or with artificial turf and
other permeable surfaces.
   (C)   Required landscaping is to be installed prior to occupancy of the
residence, apartment, or office and continually maintained pursuant to
Chapter 10.52. The Director may grant an exception to this section to avoid
planting in inclement weather.
   (D)   Landscaped areas are not to be used or converted to parking areas or
any other use which results in the damage or removal of the landscaping.
However, the widening of an existing paved driveway perpendicular to the street
is permitted if the total width of the existing paving and the new paving does
not exceed 40% of the lot frontage along the street.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.16.160 Screening, fences, and walls.
   Fences, walls, and hedges in the R-M zone shall conform to the design
standards in §
10.50.040 and the following:
   (A)   These regulations do not apply to fences or walls required by
regulations of a state or federal agency, or by the city for reasons of public
safety, or to retaining walls that adjoin land uses.
   (B)   Fences, walls, and hedges may be erected and properly maintained to
the heights identified below and measured from the highest adjoining finish
grade:
      (1)   Fences, walls, and hedges shall not exceed four feet in height in a
required front yard and in the street side yard of a corner lot, provided that
the top one foot shall be of a see-through material such as wrought iron.
Hedges up to three feet tall are also permitted in a required front yard.
      (2)   Fences and walls shall not exceed seven feet in height in any rear
or side yard or other areas outside a required front yard.
      (3)   On corner lots, a fence may not exceed four feet in height in the
street corner area of the parcel formed by a right triangle with the right
angle at the street corner property lines and its right-angle sides measuring
25 feet. The top one foot of the fence shall be of a see-through material (such
as wrought iron).
      (4)   Walls along arterial and collector streets shall be installed and
maintained equal to a minimum of six feet and a maximum of seven feet in
height.
      (5)    Walls greater than seven feet in height may be permitted, if
approved by the Planning Commission, to mitigate noise impacts identified in
the Tulare General Plan.
   (C)   Allowable fence materials. All fences constructed or installed within
the city shall be limited to the following materials or a combination of
materials:
      (1)   Front and street side yards:
         (a)   Concrete/block.
         (b)   Latticework fencing.
         (c)   Wood (excluding plywood, OSB, or other wood not typically
designed or used for fencing).
         (d)   Wrought iron.
         (e)   Vinyl.
         (f)   Chain-link fencing.
      (2)   Rear and interior side yards:
         (a)   Concrete/block.
         (b)   Latticework fencing.
         (c)   Wood (excluding plywood, OSB, or other wood not typically
designed or used for fencing).
         (d)   Vinyl.
   (D)   Perimeter walls around residential subdivisions shall be of neutral
color and shall be textured with stone, brick, stucco, or other surface finish.
Walls shall incorporate vertical elements (e.g., pilasters, indentations) of
differing colors and/or materials at least every 50 feet.
   (E)   Walls for residential developments along arterial or collector
roadways shall be designed to provide pedestrian access between the arterial or
collector to the residential development.
   (F)   Temporary fencing may be necessary to protect archaeological or
historic resources and/or trees during site preparation and construction.
Temporary fencing for these purposes shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Director.
   (G)   Swimming pools shall be entirely enclosed by structures, fences, or
walls in compliance with Cal. Gov’t Code § 115920 - The Swimming Pool Act.
      (1)   Pool fences shall have a minimum height of five feet. Such fences
shall be substantial and shall be constructed so there are no openings greater
than four inches when all gates are closed. All gates, five feet or less in
width, in enclosing fences shall be self-closing and self-latching. All gates
greater than five feet in width shall be provided with a means of latching said
gate closed. All latches on gates in enclosing fences shall be a minimum of 60
inches above grade. No pool shall be filled with water until the enclosing
fence has been constructed and approved by the building inspector. Surrounding
structures, existing fences, and gates shall suffice for this requirement if
they comply with all requirements of this section as determined by the building
inspector.
   (H)   The city reserves the right to remove, at the expense of the owner of
the property or properties enclosed by the fence, any fence in a public
easement in any emergency.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.16.170 Signs.
   Signs placed in the R-M zone shall be subject to the requirements and
standards prescribed in
Chapter 10.56.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.16.180 General provisions and design standards.
   The following standards apply to all development occurring within the RM
district and are intended to promote high standards of design.
   (A)   All multiple-family dwellings shall provide one storage area per unit,
including a minimum of 50 square feet of area per unit, devoted to secured
storage space, exclusive of habitable area. The space may be located within a
garage if parking and driveway access are not encumbered.
   (B)   An on-site manager shall be required for all multiple-family projects
of 16 or more dwelling units.
   (C)   An annual inspection by the City of Tulare shall be conducted on all
multiple-family dwellings of four units or more to ascertain compliance with
fire and building codes and city standards and conditions, including conditions
of approval of the applicable planning permit.
   (D)   Residential developments over 50 units shall be designed with at least
two points of access to connect with arterials, collectors, or other
neighboring developments.
   (E)   Building facades shall be designed utilizing varying setbacks,
projections, and balconies, and by varying the pattern and location of windows
and doors on the building face. Requirements include:
      (1)   The primary exterior siding material for buildings shall be wood,
stone, brick, stucco, fiber cement, composite wood, or stone.
      (2)   For every 100 feet of building length, there shall be a plane break
along the facade comprised of an offset of at least five feet in depth by 25
feet in length. The offset shall extend from grade to the highest story.
      (3)   All sides of a building shall include at least two forms of
architectural detailing. Architectural detailing includes railings, trellises,
trim, cornices, or similar architectural elements. One or more accent
materials, such as glass, tile, brick, stone, concrete, or plaster, which
differs from the primary exterior siding material, shall be incorporated to
highlight building features.
      (4)   Windows shall either be recessed at least two inches from the plane
of the surrounding exterior wall or shall have a trim or windowsill at least
two inches in depth.
      (5)   Individual residential unit entrances located on the ground floor
shall include a porch, stoop, patio, terrace, forecourt, or courtyard.
Entrances shall have either a projected sheltering element or be recessed from
the facade; the projection or recess shall have a minimum depth of 24 inches.
      (6)   Exterior stairways shall be designed as an integral part of the
overall structure and shall incorporate materials used in the main building.
      (7)   Where residential units are designed as townhomes or rowhomes,
individual units shall be distinguished. This may be accomplished through the
use of at least two of the following:
         (a)   Change in wall plane.
         (b)   Change in color.
         (c)   Change in roof form.
   (F)   Parking lots, driveways, and entries should be designed to blend in
with the overall project:
      (1)   Parking rows shall be broken up with a landscape island every eight
spaces.
      (2)   Project entryways for developments of 16 units or more shall be
delineated and enhanced with the incorporation of at least two of the
following:
         (a)   Enhanced paving treatment with patterned and/or colored pavers,
brick, or decorative colored and scored concrete a minimum of 12 feet deep and
spanning the width of the driveway.
         (b)   A monument sign or place name incorporated into a wall.
         (c)   Enhanced landscaping that incorporates features such as arbors,
trellises, and hedges.
         (d)   An expansion of the landscaped area by a minimum of five feet in
depth, spanning a minimum of ten feet on each side of the driveway or
pedestrian entrance.
      (3)   Parking areas shall be screened from view from adjoining properties
and street rights-of-way by means of a solid fence, wall, landscaping, or
architectural feature.
   (G)   A children's play yard with play equipment shall be required for all
multiple-family projects of ten units or more and must be reviewed and approved
by the Director. This condition shall not apply to senior citizen housing.
   (H)   Wherever multiple-family residential uses abut commercial uses,
industrial uses, or other undesirable features such as freeways, a solid seven-
foot-tall block wall and at least five feet of dense landscaping shall be
provided along abutting property lines. The location and orientation of the
residential structures shall be placed to minimize any harmful effects created
by nearby non-residential uses. Along streets designated as arterial or primary
thoroughfares, the Planning Commission may require proposed uses to back up to
the roadway.
   (I)   Adequate on-site lighting shall be required for safety and security.
All on-site lighting shall be directed away from abutting properties to reduce
glare. Adjustment of lighting fixtures may be required after they have been
installed.
   (J)   All trash disposal containers shall be surrounded and screened by a
solid six-foot-tall fence, wall, or similar architectural feature. The
enclosure shall incorporate the same materials and colors as the primary
building design. Additional treatments, such as landscaping, a trellis, or an
arbor are encouraged.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.18: HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ZONE
Section
   
10.18.010   Purpose and application.
   
10.18.020   Permitted uses.
   
10.18.030   Lot area.
   
10.18.040   Lot dimensions.
   
10.18.050   Site area per dwelling unit.
   
10.18.060   Coverage.
   
10.18.070   Building setback areas.
   
10.18.080   Distance between structures.
   
10.18.090   Height of structures.
   
10.18.100   Driveways.
   
10.18.110   Accessory structures.
   
10.18.120   Other setback standards.
   
10.18.130   Off-street parking.
   
10.18.140   Usable open space.
   
10.18.150   Landscaping.
   
10.18.160   Screening, fences, and walls.
   
10.18.170   Signs.
   
10.18.180   General provisions and standards.
§ 10.18.010 Purpose and application.
   This chapter shall apply to all land within the High Density Residential (R-
H) zone. The purpose of the R-H zone is to encourage a variety of multi-family
residential uses in a density range from 14.1 to 29 dwelling units per gross
acre. In order to adequately plan for multi-family development of various
densities, the R-H zone is further subdivided into the following sub-districts:
R-H-14 and R-H-20.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.18.020 Permitted uses.
   Uses shall be permitted or not permitted, conditionally permitted,
administratively permitted, or temporarily permitted as prescribed in the land
use table in §
10.08.020.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.18.030 Lot area.
   (A)   The minimum lot area shall be 6,000 square feet.
   (B)   Existing lots of less than 6,000 square feet may be developed in
accordance with the specifications of this section.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.18.040 Lot dimensions.
   (A)   The minimum lot frontage shall be 20 feet on a public street.
   (B)   The minimum lot width shall be 30 feet for interior lots and 40 feet
for corner lots.
   (C)   The minimum lot depth shall be 50 feet.
   (D)   Lots developed adjacent to an arterial or collector street are to be
designed as walled back-on or side-on lots.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.18.050 Site area per dwelling unit.
   (A)   The minimum site area per dwelling unit shall be 2,000 square feet for
the R-H-14 district.
   (B)   Multi-family residential uses in the R-H-14 district shall be
developed with a minimum density of 14.1 dwelling units per gross acre.
   (C)   The minimum site area per dwelling unit shall be 1,500 square feet for
the R-H-20 district.
   (D)   Multi-family residential uses in the R-H-20 district shall be
developed with a minimum density of 20 dwelling units per gross acre.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.18.060 Coverage.
   The maximum coverage of a lot shall be determined by the combined building
setback area requirements, accessory structure limitations, open space
requirements, and off-street parking requirements. These requirements shall not
reduce the maximum lot coverage below 60% of the overall lot.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.18.070 Building setback areas.
   (A)   No structure utilized as living space shall be placed within a
building setback area.
   (B)   The front building setback area shall be a minimum of 15 feet from the
front lot line for livable building space and 20 feet for garages, carports,
and other non-livable building space.
   (C)   The rear building setback area and interior side setback area shall be
a minimum of five feet per story.
   (D)   The side building setback area shall be ten feet from a street side
property line. For a reverse corner lot, the street side setback shall be one-
half the required front yard setback of the lot to the rear.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.18.080 Distance between structures.
   The minimum distance between structures shall be ten feet, except as
provided by the building code.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.18.090 Height of structures.
   (A)   The maximum structure height shall be 50 feet. No portion of a
structure that is within 30 feet of an interior property line adjacent to a
single-family zoned property shall be higher than 25 feet.
   (B)   Buildings over 50 feet may be erected upon approval of a conditional
use permit in accordance with
Chapter 10.80.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.18.100 Driveways.
   (A)   The width of a driveway and any paved area shall not cumulatively
exceed 40% of the width of the lot's street frontage on which the driveway and
any paved area faces. In the case of "L" or "U" shaped driveways or other
configurations besides perpendicular driveways, the paved area of these
driveways shall not exceed 50% of the front building setback area.
   (B)   Driveways shall be designed so that vehicles are not required to back
out onto collector or arterial streets.
   (C)   On corner lots, the driveway shall be located on the side of the lot
adjacent to the interior lot line.
   (D)   On key lots, the driveway shall be located on the side of the lot,
which is not adjacent to the rear lot line of the adjacent reverse corner lot.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.18.110 Accessory structures.
   Accessory structures may be located with a required rear or side building
setback area subject to all of the following:
   (A)   The floor area shall be a maximum of 300 square feet.
   (B)   The walls shall be at least three feet from the rear and side lot
lines.
   (C)   The roof eaves shall be at least two feet from the rear and side lot
lines.
   (D)   The accessory structure shall be separated from other structures by a
minimum of ten feet.
   (E)   The maximum height shall be 20 feet.
   (F)   This section does not apply to an accessory dwelling unit (as defined
in Cal. Gov’t Code § 65852.2) which is instead regulated by §
10.60.030.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.18.120 Other setback standards.
   (A)   Mechanical equipment shall be located a minimum of five feet from an
interior side lot line.
   (B)   Above- or below-ground swimming pools shall be set back three feet
from all lot lines.
   (C)   Architectural features, including eaves, sills, chimneys, and
cornices, may extend up to 30 inches into a required side yard or space between
structures and up to 36 inches into a required front or rear yard.
   (D)   Uncovered, unenclosed porches, platforms, or landing places that do
not extend above the level of the first floor of the building may extend up to
six feet into a required front, side, or rear yard, or into a space between
buildings. Railing up to 30 inches tall may be installed on any such porch,
platform, or landing.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.18.130 Off-street parking.
   (A)   Off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be provided
on the site for each use as prescribed in
Chapter 10.54.
   (B)   Each space shall measure a minimum of nine feet in width and 20 feet
in depth. All parking spaces and driveways shall be surfaced with asphalt
concrete, chip seal, or other suitable all-weather surfacing. Where a carport
or garage is open to a public street, a driveway length of at least 20 feet
shall be provided between the parking structure and the front property line.
   (C)   Required parking spaces may not be provided within any front setback
area. Parking shall be setback a minimum of ten feet from any side or rear
property line except that garages or carports opening onto an alley shall be
set back five feet,
provided that the structure, including roof overhang, shall not extend into the
alley right-of-way. Each garage facing a courtyard shall have an apron of not
less than six feet or more than 18 feet.
   (D)   No recreation vehicle, including, without limitation, a camping
trailer, boat trailer, utility trailer, boat, pickup camper, motor home, dune
buggy, or similar vehicle/trailer shall be stored or parked in a location
visible from the street so as not to detract from the neighborhood. All
recreational vehicles must be operable.
   (E)   No recreational vehicle or trailer shall be used as a residence.
   (F)   All motor vehicles incapable of movement under their own power, other
than in cases of emergency, shall be stored in an entirely enclosed space,
garage, or carport. Vehicles with custom-fitted covers may be stored in an open
area when it does not create a nuisance or safety problem as determined by the
Director, cause complaints from neighbors, or violate any section of this code.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.18.140 Usable open space.
   (A)   Lots with four or fewer dwelling units shall provide for a usable open
space area of a minimum of 200 square feet per dwelling unit. The open space
shall be a minimum of 15 feet wide.
   (B)   Lots with five or more dwelling units shall provide for a usable open
space area equal to 5% of the lot area. Where multiple lots together make up a
single development site, the required open space may be combined into common
open space areas that are accessible to all residents of the site.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.18.150 Landscaping.
   (A)   Landscaping shall be provided for each use as prescribed in
Chapter 10.52 Landscape Standards.
   (B)   Except for driveways and approved parking areas, all yard areas and
setback areas visible from the street(s) shall be landscaped with live plant
materials and ornamentation common to the area or with artificial turf and
other permeable surfaces.
   (C)   Required landscaping is to be installed prior to occupancy of the
residence, apartment, or office and continually maintained pursuant to
Chapter 10.52. The Director may grant an exception to this section to avoid
planting in inclement weather.
   (D)   Landscaped areas are not to be used or converted to parking areas or
any other use which results in the damage or removal of the landscaping.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.18.160 Screening, fences, and walls.
   Fences, walls, and hedges in the R-H zone shall conform to the design
standards in §
10.50.040 and the following:
   (A)   These regulations do not apply to fences or walls required by
regulations of a state or federal agency, or by the city for reasons of public
safety, or to retaining walls that adjoin land uses.
   (B)   Fences, walls, and hedges may be erected and properly maintained to
the heights identified below and measured from the highest adjoining finish
grade:
      (1)   Fences, walls, and hedges shall not exceed four feet in height in a
required front yard and in the street side yard of a corner lot, provided that
the top one foot shall be of a see-through material such as wrought iron.
Hedges up to three feet tall are also permitted in a required front yard.
      (2)   Fences and walls shall not exceed seven feet in height in any rear
or side yard or other areas outside a required front yard.
      (3)   On corner lots, a fence may not exceed four feet in height in the
street corner area of the parcel formed by a right triangle with the right
angle at the street corner property lines and its right-angle sides measuring
25 feet. The top one foot of the fence shall be of a see-through material (such
as wrought iron).
      (4)   Walls along arterial and collector streets shall be installed and
maintained equal to a minimum of six feet and a maximum of seven feet in
height.
      (5)   Walls greater than seven feet in height may be permitted, if
approved by the Planning Commission, to mitigate noise impacts identified in
the Tulare General Plan.
   (C)   Allowable fence materials. All fences constructed or installed within
the city shall be limited to the following materials or a combination of
materials:
      (1)   Front and street side yards:
         (a)   Concrete/block.
         (b)   Latticework fencing.
         (c)   Wood.
         (d)   Wrought iron.
      (2)   Rear and interior side yards:
         (a)   Concrete/block.
         (b)   Latticework fencing.
         (c)   Wood.
   (D)   Perimeter walls around residential developments shall be of neutral
color and shall be textured with stone, brick, stucco, or other surface finish.
A wrought-iron fence is also acceptable. Walls and/or fences shall incorporate
vertical elements (e.g., pilasters, indentations) of differing colors and/or
materials at least every 50 feet.
   (E)   Walls for residential developments along arterial or collector
roadways shall be designed to provide pedestrian access between the arterial or
collector to the residential development. Access points shall be provided no
more than 200 feet apart.
   (F)   Temporary fencing may be necessary to protect archaeological or
historic resources and/or trees during site preparation and construction.
Temporary fencing for these purposes shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Director.
   (G)   Swimming pools shall be entirely enclosed by structures, fences, or
walls in compliance with Cal. Gov’t Code § 115920 - The Swimming Pool Act.
      (1)   Pool fences shall have a minimum height of five feet. Such fences
shall be substantial and shall be constructed so there are no openings greater
than four inches when all gates are closed. All gates, five feet or less in
width, in enclosing fences shall be self-closing and self-latching. All gates
greater than five feet in width shall be provided with a means of latching said
gate closed. All latches on gates in enclosing fences shall be a minimum of 60
inches above grade. No pool shall be filled with water until the enclosing
fence has been constructed and approved by the building inspector. Surrounding
structures, existing fences, and gates shall suffice for this requirement if
they comply with all requirements of this section as determined by the building
inspector.
   (H)   The city reserves the right to remove, at the expense of the owner of
the property or properties enclosed by the fence, any fence in a public
easement in any emergency.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.18.170 Signs.
   Signs placed in the R-H zone shall be subject to the requirements and
standards prescribed in
Chapter 10.56.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.18.180 General provisions and standards.
   The following standards apply to all development occurring within the R-
H district and are intended to promote high standards of design.
   (A)   All multiple-family dwellings shall provide one storage area per unit,
including a minimum of 50 square feet of area per unit devoted to secured
storage space, exclusive of habitable area. The space may be located within a
garage if parking and driveway access are not encumbered.
   (B)   An on-site manager shall be required for all multiple-family projects
of 16 or more dwelling units.
   (C)   An annual inspection by the City of Tulare shall be conducted on all
multiple-family dwellings of four units or more to ascertain compliance with
fire and building codes and city standards and conditions, including conditions
of approval of the applicable planning permit.
   (D)   Residential developments over 50 units shall be designed with at least
two points of access to connect with arterials, collectors, or other
neighboring developments.
   (E)   Building facades shall be designed utilizing varying setbacks,
projections, and balconies, and by varying the pattern and location of windows
and doors on the building face. Requirements include:
      (1)   The primary exterior siding material for buildings shall be wood,
stone, brick, stucco, fiber cement, composite wood, or stone.
      (2)   For every 100 feet of building length, there shall be a plane break
along the facade comprised of an offset of at least five feet in depth by 25
feet in length. The offset shall extend from grade to the highest story.
      (3)   All sides of a building shall include at least two forms of
architectural detailing. Architectural detailing includes railings, trellises,
trim, cornices, or similar architectural elements. One or more accent
materials, such as glass, tile, brick, stone, concrete, or plaster, which
differs from the primary exterior siding material, shall be incorporated to
highlight building features.
      (4)   Windows shall either be recessed at least two inches from the plane
of the surrounding exterior wall or shall have a trim or windowsill at least
two inches in depth.
      (5)   Individual residential unit entrances located on the ground floor
shall include a porch, stoop, patio, terrace, forecourt, or courtyard.
Entrances shall have either a projected sheltering element or be recessed from
the facade; the projection or recess shall have a minimum depth of 24 inches.
      (6)   Exterior stairways shall be designed as an integral part of the
overall structure and shall incorporate materials used in the main building.
      (7)   Where residential units are designed as townhomes or rowhomes,
individual units shall be distinguished. This may be accomplished through the
use of at least two of the following:
         (a)   Change in wall plane.
         (b)   Change in color.
         (c)   Change in roof form.
   (F)   Parking lots, driveways, and entries should be designed to blend in
with the overall project:
      (1)   Parking rows shall be broken up with a landscape island every eight
spaces.
      (2)   Project entryways for developments of 16 units or more shall be
delineated and enhanced with the incorporation of at least two of the
following:
         (a)   Enhanced paving treatment with patterned and/or colored pavers,
brick, or decorative colored and scored concrete a minimum of 12 feet deep and
spanning the width of the driveway.
         (b)   A monument sign or place name incorporated into a wall.
         (c)   Enhanced landscaping that incorporates features such as arbors,
trellises, and hedges.
         (d)   An expansion of the landscaped area by a minimum of five feet in
depth spanning a minimum of ten feet on each side of the driveway or pedestrian
entrance.
      (3)   Parking areas shall be screened from view from adjoining properties
and street rights-of-way by means of a solid fence, wall, landscaping, or
architectural feature.
   (G)   A children's play yard with play equipment shall be required for all
multiple-family projects of ten units or more and must be reviewed and approved
by the Director. This condition shall not apply to senior citizen housing.
   (H)   Wherever multiple-family residential uses abut commercial uses,
industrial uses, or other undesirable features such as freeways, a solid seven-
foot-tall block wall and at least five feet of dense landscaping shall be
provided along abutting property lines. The location and orientation of the
residential structures shall be placed to minimize any harmful effects created
by nearby non-residential uses. Along streets designated as arterial or primary
thoroughfares, the Planning Commission may require proposed uses to back up to
the roadway.
   (I)   Adequate on-site lighting shall be required for safety and security.
All on-site lighting shall be directed away from abutting properties to reduce
glare. Adjustment of lighting fixtures may be required after they have been
installed.
   (J)   All trash disposal containers shall be surrounded and screened by a
solid six-foot-tall fence, wall, or similar architectural feature. The
enclosure shall incorporate the same materials and colors as the primary
building design. Additional treatments, such as landscaping, a trellis, or an
arbor are encouraged.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.20: NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL ZONE
Section
   
10.20.010   Purpose and application.
   
10.20.020   Permitted uses.
   
10.20.030   Site area.
   
10.20.040   Lot dimensions.
   
10.20.050   Coverage.
   
10.20.060   Building setback areas.
   
10.20.070   Distance between structures.
   
10.20.080   Height of structures.
   
10.20.090   Driveways.
   
10.20.100   Off-street parking.
   
10.20.110   Usable open space.
   
10.20.120   Landscaping.
   
10.20.130   Screening, fences, and walls.
   
10.20.140   Signs.
   
10.20.150   General provisions and standards.
§ 10.20.010 Purpose and application.
   This chapter shall apply to all land within the Neighborhood Commercial (C-
1) zone. The purpose of the C-1 zone is to provide for areas of primarily
small-scale, low-intensity neighborhood commercial uses and services that serve
surrounding, adjacent residential neighborhoods throughout the community. The
objectives of the C-1 zone are:
   (A)   The development of a limited range of commercial uses that cater to
the daily needs of residents.
   (B)   The development of commercial buildings that are compatible with the
aesthetic character and quality of residential neighborhoods.
   (C)   Attractive, tree-lined streets, which emphasize and encourage walking
and bicycling as well as efficient automobile transit, to serve the commercial
developments. In such neighborhoods, the sidewalk will be setback from the
street, providing space for a tree-lined parking strip.
   (D)   Commercial buildings designed in a manner that encourages human
activity on the street, by placing main entrances facing the street, and
reducing the dominance of parking facilities as a prominent visual street
feature. Where possible and practicable, parking lots shall be placed to the
rear or to the side of buildings.
   (E)   To ensure that commercial buildings are designed in a manner that
minimizes the impact to the adjacent residential development through sensitive
design that considers the impacts of noise, traffic, and lighting sources.
   (F)   To minimize traffic congestion, while providing an efficient
circulation system.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.20.020 Permitted uses.
   (A)   Uses shall be permitted or not permitted, conditionally permitted,
administratively permitted, or temporarily permitted as prescribed in the land
use table in §
10.08.030.
   (B)   Residential uses shall be subject to the development and design
standards of the residential zone that are consistent with the density of the
residential development. Thus, a multi-family development with a density of 12
units per acre would be subject to the development and design standards of the
R-M zone. These standards include but are not limited to setbacks, height
limitations, and open space.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.20.030 Site area.
   (A)   The minimum site area shall be 6,000 square feet. The site area may be
divided into multiple separate lots of less than 6,000 square feet each if a
reciprocal use agreement for shared street access and parking is recorded in
conjunction with the subdivision of the lots.
   (B)   Existing sites of less than 6,000 square feet may be developed in
accordance with the specifications of this section.
   (C)   The maximum site area shall be three acres.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.20.040 Lot dimensions.
   The minimum lot frontage shall be 40 feet unless a reciprocal use agreement
for shared access and parking is recorded.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.20.050 Coverage.
   The maximum coverage of a lot shall be 60%.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.20.060 Building setback areas.
   (A)   No structure shall be placed within a building setback area.
   (B)   The minimum front building setback shall be five feet.
   (C)   The minimum rear building setback shall be ten feet.
   (D)   The minimum side building setback area shall be five feet.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.20.070 Distance between structures.
   There is no minimum distance between structures required, except that all
building code requirements shall be met.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.20.080 Height of structures.
   The maximum structure height shall be 30 feet.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.20.090 Driveways.
   (A)   Wherever possible, developments shall share driveways to minimize the
number of access points on public streets.
   (B)   New driveways near street corners shall be located a minimum of 50
feet from the radius curve of the curb unless otherwise specifically approved
by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.20.100 Off-street parking.
   Off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be provided on
the site for each use as prescribed in
Chapter 10.54.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.20.110 Usable open space.
   There is no minimum requirement for usable open space.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.20.120 Landscaping.
   (A)   Landscaping shall be provided for each use as prescribed in
Chapter 10.52 Landscape Standards.
   (B)   A minimum of 5% of the gross lot area shall be landscaped. All
exterior areas not devoted to parking, storage, driveways, walkways or loading
areas shall be landscaped.
   (C)   Required landscaping shall be installed prior to final occupancy and
continually maintained pursuant to
Chapter 10.52.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.20.130 Screening, fences, and walls.
   Fences, walls, and hedges in the C-1 zone shall conform to the design
standards provided in §
10.50.040 and to the following standards:
   (A)   A seven-foot solid masonry wall shall be required along any side or
rear property line abutting residential zone district, except in required front
and corner side yards where the maximum height shall be three feet. On a
reversed corner lot where the district boundary line is adjacent to the front
yard of a neighboring property, the required wall shall be reduced in height to
four feet within 15 feet of a street property line.
   (B)   The Director may allow fence and wall heights to be increased to
mitigate noise problems documented by a noise study.
   (C)   Allowable fence materials. All fences, constructed or installed within
the city shall be limited to the following materials or a combination of
materials:
      (1)   Front and street side yards:
         (a)   Concrete/block/brick.
         (b)   Latticework fencing.
         (c)   Wood.
         (d)   Wrought iron.
      (2)   Rear and interior side yards:
         (a)   Concrete/block/brick.
         (b)   Latticework fencing.
         (c)   Wood.
         (d)   Wrought iron
   (D)   The outdoor storage of materials and equipment attendant to a use
shall be permitted only within an area surrounded or screened with a six-foot
solid wall or chain-link fence with slats and landscaping, except as may be
modified under site plan review. Such storage shall not be visible above the
fence or wall.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.20.140 Signs.
   Signs placed in the C-1 zone shall be subject to the requirements and
standards prescribed in
Chapter 10.56.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.20.150 General provisions and standards.
   (A)   All businesses, services, and processes shall be conducted entirely
within a completely enclosed permanently fixed structure, except where
specifically permitted by this title.
   (B)   Mechanical equipment shall be located a minimum of 15 feet from a rear
or side lot line abutting a residential zone district unless there is a parapet
wall that shields the mechanical equipment.
   (C)   New development shall be required to install public infrastructure
necessary to adequately serve the project, based on requirements of the City
Engineer, including sewer, water, storm drainage lines, curbs, gutters and
sidewalks, street paving, street lighting, and trash enclosure. These
improvements shall be constructed consistent with requirements shown in the
City of Tulare Standards and Specifications and shall be installed prior to
occupancy of any structures on the site.
   (D)   All development in the C-1 zone shall be designed consistent with the
requirements and standards prescribed in
Chapter 10.50 Development Standards.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.22: OFFICE COMMERCIAL ZONE
Section
   
10.22.010   Purpose and application.
   
10.22.020   Permitted uses.
   
10.22.030   Site area.
   
10.22.040   Lot dimensions.
   
10.22.050   Coverage.
   
10.22.060   Building setback areas.
   
10.22.070   Distance between structures.
   
10.22.080   Height of structures.
   
10.22.090   Driveways.
   
10.22.100   Off-street parking.
   
10.22.110   Usable open space.
   
10.22.120   Landscaping.
   
10.22.130   Screening, fences, and walls.
   
10.22.140   Signs.
   
10.22.150   General provisions and standards.
§ 10.22.010 Purpose and application.
   This chapter shall apply to all land within the Office Commercial (C-2)
zone. The purpose of the C-2 zone is to provide areas for professional and non-
retail commercial offices and businesses in close relationship with one
another. The objectives of the C-2 zone are:
   (A)   The development of a variety of office uses including professional,
administrative, business, finance, and medical.
   (B)   The development of office buildings and complexes that exhibit high
standards of design, including:
      (1)   Attractive, tree-lined streets, which emphasize and encourage
walking and bicycling as well as efficient automobile transit, to serve the
office
developments. In such neighborhoods, the sidewalk may be setback from the
street, providing space for a tree-lined landscaped area.
      (2)   Office buildings and complexes that include generous amounts of
landscaping, including parking lots designed so that they do not dominate the
street scene and buildings that complement one another with tasteful design
features.
   (C)   To ensure that office buildings are designed in a manner that
minimizes the impact to the adjacent residential development through sensitive
design that considers the impacts of noise, traffic, and lighting sources.
   (D)   To provide for the sensitive conversion of single-family homes into
offices, with special attention being given to facade elevations, parking lots,
signage, and lighting.
   (E)   To minimize traffic congestion, while providing an efficient
circulation system.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.22.020 Permitted uses.
   (A)   Uses shall be permitted or not permitted, conditionally permitted,
administratively permitted, or temporarily permitted as prescribed in the land
use table in §
10.08.030.
   (B)   Residential uses shall be subject to the development and design
standards of the residential zone that are consistent with the density of the
residential development. Thus, a multi-family development with a density of 12
units per acre would be subject to the development and design standards of the
R-M zone. These standards include but are not limited to setbacks, height
limitations, and open space.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.22.030 Site area.
   The minimum site area shall be 3,000 square feet.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.22.040 Lot dimensions.
   The minimum lot frontage shall be 40 feet, except that where there is a
recorded reciprocal use agreement for shared common access and parking areas,
no minimum frontage is required.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.22.050 Coverage.
   The maximum building coverage of a lot shall be 80%.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.22.060 Building setback areas.
   (A)   No structure shall be placed within a building setback area.
   (B)   The front building setback area shall be a minimum of ten feet, except
where an office is being developed within an existing residential neighborhood
between existing residences and buildings on the block have a front yard
setback greater than ten feet, the setback for the unit being converted shall
be average of the other buildings on the block.
   (C)   There shall be no required rear building setback, except where a site
abuts a residentially zoned parcel in which case the setback shall be ten feet.
   (D)   There shall be no required side building setback, except where a site
abuts a residentially zoned parcel in which case the setback shall be five
feet.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.22.070 Distance between structures.
   There is no minimum distance between structures required, except that all
building code requirements shall be met.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.22.080 Height of structures.
   The maximum structure height shall be 30 feet.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.22.090 Driveways.
   (A)   Wherever possible, developments shall share driveways to minimize the
number of driveways on public streets.
   (B)   New driveways near street corners shall be located a minimum of 150
feet from the radius curve of the curb unless otherwise specifically approved
by the City Engineer.
   (C)   Sites with alleys shall utilize alley access to minimize driveways on
streets as long as it is possible and practicable.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.22.100 Off-street parking.
   (A)   Off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be provided
on the site for each use as prescribed in
Chapter 10.54.
   (B)   Parking areas shall not be closer than 15 feet to any front or street
side lot line. The area between the lot line and the parking area shall be
landscaped.
   (C)   New parking areas shall be located behind or to the side of buildings,
not between buildings and the street unless it is not possible or practicable.
Refer to
Chapter 10.52 for Landscape Standards for parking areas.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.22.110 Usable open space.
   There is no minimum requirement for usable open space.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.22.120 Landscaping.
   (A)   Landscaping shall be provided for each use as prescribed in
Chapter 10.52 Landscape Standards.
   (B)   A minimum of 5% of the gross lot area shall be landscaped. All
exterior areas not devoted to parking, storage, driveways, walkways or loading
areas shall be landscaped.
   (C)   Required landscaping shall be installed prior to final occupancy and
continually maintained pursuant to
Chapter 10.52.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.22.130 Screening, fences, and walls.
   Fences, walls, and hedges in the C-2 zone shall conform to the design
standards provided in §
10.50.040 and to the following standards:
   (A)   These regulations do not apply to fences or walls required by
regulations of a state or federal agency, or by the city for reasons of public
safety, or to retaining walls that adjoin land uses.
   (B)   A seven-foot solid masonry wall shall be required along any side or
rear property line abutting residential zone district, except in required front
and street side yards where the maximum height shall be three feet. On a
reversed corner lot where the district boundary line is adjacent to the front
yard of a neighboring property, the required wall shall be reduced in height to
four feet within 15 feet of a street property line.
   (C)   Walls along arterial and collector streets. If a wall is required, or
if the developer of a site located along either an arterial or collector street
chooses to install a wall, the wall shall be installed and maintained equal to
a minimum of six feet and a maximum of seven feet in height.
   (D)   Allowable fence materials. All fences, constructed or installed within
the city shall be limited to the following materials or a combination of
materials:
      (1)   Front and street side yards:
         (a)   Concrete/block/brick.
         (b)   Latticework fencing.
         (c)   Wood.
         (d)   Wrought iron.
      (2)   Rear and interior side yards:
         (a)   Concrete/block.
         (b)   Latticework fencing.
         (c)   Wood.
         (d)   Wrought iron
   (E)   Temporary fencing. Temporary fencing may be necessary to protect
archaeological or historic resources and/or trees during site preparation and
construction. Temporary fencing for these purposes shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Director.
   (F)   The city reserves the right to remove, at the expense of the owner of
the property or properties enclosed by the fence, any fence in a public
easement in any emergency.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.22.140 Signs.
   Signs placed in the C-2 zone shall be subject to the requirements and
standards prescribed in
Chapter 10.56.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.22.150 General provisions and standards.
   (A)   All businesses, services, and processes shall be conducted entirely
within a completely enclosed permanently fixed structure, except where
specifically permitted by this title.
   (B)   Mechanical equipment shall be located a minimum of 15 feet from a rear
or side lot line that abuts a residential zone district unless there is a
parapet wall that shields the mechanical equipment.
   (C)   New development shall be required to install public infrastructure
necessary to adequately serve the project, based on requirements of the City
Engineer, including sewer, water, storm drainage lines, curbs, gutters and
sidewalks, street paving, street lighting, and trash enclosure. These
improvements shall be constructed consistent with requirements shown in the
City of Tulare Standards and Specifications and shall be installed prior to
occupancy of any structures on the site.
   (D)   All development in the C-2 zone shall be designed consistent with the
requirements and standards prescribed in
Chapter 10.60 Development Standards.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.24: RETAIL COMMERCIAL ZONE
Section
   
10.24.010   Purpose and application.
   
10.24.020   Permitted uses.
   
10.24.030   Site area.
   
10.24.040   Lot dimensions.
   
10.24.050   Coverage.
   
10.24.060   Building setback areas.
   
10.24.070   Distance between structures.
   
10.24.080   Height of structures.
   
10.24.090   Driveways.
   
10.24.100   Off-street parking.
   
10.24.110   Usable open space.
   
10.24.120   Landscaping.
   
10.24.130   Screening, fences, and walls.
   
10.24.140   Signs.
   
10.24.150   General provisions and standards.
§ 10.24.010 Purpose and application.
   This chapter shall apply to all land within the Retail Commercial (C-3)
zone. The purpose of the C-3 zone is to provide for a wide variety of
commercial and office uses that serve the general commercial needs of the
residents of Tulare. The objectives of the C-3 zone are:
   (A)   The development of a variety of retail commercial uses in buildings
and complexes that exhibit high standards of design, including:
      (1)   Attractive, tree-lined streets, that emphasize and encourage
walking and bicycling as well as efficient automobile transit. In such
districts, the sidewalk may be setback from the street, providing space for a
tree-lined landscaped area.
      (2)   Commercial buildings and complexes that include generous amounts of
landscaping, including parking lots designed so that they do not dominate the
street scene and buildings that complement one another with tasteful design
features.
   (B)   To provide areas for the development of shopping facilities that:
      (1)   Are convenient to all members of the community.
      (2)   Aid in building Tulare's sales tax base and prevent leakage of
sales tax revenues to other communities.
   (C)   To ensure that commercial buildings are designed in a manner that
minimizes the impact to the adjacent residential development through sensitive
design that considers the impacts of noise, traffic, and lighting sources.
   (D)   To minimize traffic congestion, while providing an efficient
circulation system.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.24.020 Permitted uses.
   (A)   Uses shall be permitted or not permitted, conditionally permitted,
administratively permitted, or temporarily permitted as prescribed in the land
use table in §
10.08.030.
   (B)   Residential uses shall be subject to the development and design
standards of the residential zone that are consistent with the density of the
residential development. Thus, a multi-family development with a density of 12
units per acre would be subject to the development and design standards of the
R-M zone. These standards include but are not limited to setbacks, height
limitations, and open space.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.24.030 Site area.
   There is no minimum site area.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.24.040 Lot dimensions.
   The minimum lot frontage shall be 40 feet unless a reciprocal use agreement
for shared access and parking is recorded.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.24.050 Coverage.
   The maximum coverage of a lot shall be 80%.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.24.060 Building setback areas.
   (A)   No structure shall be placed within a building setback area.
   (B)   The minimum front building setback shall be ten feet, except where a
parcel fronts on a major arterial or a residential zone district then the
minimum setback shall be 20 feet.
   (C)   There shall be no required rear building setback, except where the
rear lot line abuts a major arterial or a residentially zoned parcel then the
minimum rear building setback shall be ten feet.
   (D)   There shall be no required side building setback, except where the
side lot line abuts a major arterial or a residentially zoned parcel then the
minimum side building setback area shall be ten feet.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.24.070 Distance between structures.
   There is no minimum distance between structures required, except that all
building code requirements shall be met.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.24.080 Height of structures.
   (A)   The maximum structure height shall be 30 feet.
   (B)   Structures up to 60 feet may be erected upon approval of a conditional
use permit in accordance with
Chapter 10.80.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.24.090 Driveways.
   (A)   Wherever possible, developments shall share driveways to minimize the
number of access points on public streets.
   (B)   New driveways near street corners shall be located a minimum of 150
feet from the radius curve of the curb unless otherwise specifically approved
by the City Engineer.
   (C)   Sites with alleys shall utilize alley access to minimize driveways on
streets as long as it is possible and practicable.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.24.100 Off-street parking.
   Off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be provided on
the site for each use as prescribed in
Chapter 10.54.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.24.110 Usable open space.
   New developments over one acre in size shall provide a common outdoor,
shaded sitting area for use by customers. The size of the shaded sitting area
shall be a minimum of 250 square feet per acre of site area.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.24.120 Landscaping.
   (A)   Landscaping shall be provided for each use as prescribed in
Chapter 10.52 Landscape Standards.
   (B)   A minimum of 5% of the gross lot area shall be landscaped. All
exterior areas not devoted to parking, storage, driveways, walkways or loading
areas shall be landscaped.
   (C)   Required landscaping shall be installed prior to final occupancy and
continually maintained pursuant to
Chapter 10.52.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.24.130 Screening, fences, and walls.
   (A)   The fences in the C-3 zone shall conform to the design standards
provided in §
10.50.040.
   (B)   These regulations do not apply to fences or walls required by
regulations of a state or federal agency, or by the city for reasons of public
safety, or to retaining walls that adjoin land uses.
   (C)   Fences, walls, and hedges may be erected and properly maintained to
the heights identified below and measured from the highest adjoining finish
grade:
      (1)   Fences, walls, and hedges shall not exceed three feet in height in
the front yard area unless otherwise specifically required by this title.
      (2)   Where a commercially-zoned site adjoins a site that is
residentially zoned, a seven-foot-tall solid wall and a ten-foot landscape
buffer shall separate the commercial development from the adjoining residential
district.
   (D)   Walls along arterial and collector streets. If a wall is required, or
if the developer of a site located along either an arterial or collector street
chooses to install a wall, the wall shall be installed and maintained equal to
a minimum of six feet and a maximum of seven feet in height.
   (E)   Allowable fence materials. All fences, constructed or installed within
the city shall be limited to the following materials or a combination of
materials:
      (1)   Front and street side yards:
         (a)   Concrete/block/brick.
         (b)   Latticework fencing.
         (c)   Wood.
         (d)   Wrought iron.
      (2)   Rear and interior side yards:
         (a)   Concrete/block.
         (b)   Latticework fencing.
         (c)   Wood.
         (d)   Wrought iron.
   (F)   Temporary fencing. Temporary fencing may be necessary to protect
archaeological or historic resources and/or trees during site preparation and
construction. Temporary fencing for these purposes shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Director.
   (G)   The city reserves the right to remove, at the expense of the owner of
the property or properties enclosed by the fence, any fence in a public
easement in any emergency.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.24.140 Signs.
   Signs placed in the C-3 zone shall be subject to the requirements and
standards prescribed in
Chapter 10.56.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.24.150 General provisions and standards.
   (A)   All businesses, services, and processes shall be conducted entirely
within a completely enclosed permanently fixed structure, except where
specifically permitted by this title.
   (B)   Mechanical equipment shall be located a minimum of 15 feet from a rear
or side lot line that abuts a residential zone district unless there is a
parapet wall that shields the mechanical equipment.
   (C)   New development shall be required to install public infrastructure
necessary to adequately serve the project, based on requirements of the City
Engineer, including sewer, water, storm drainage lines, curbs, gutters and
sidewalks, street paving, street lighting, and trash enclosure. These
improvements shall be constructed consistent with requirements shown in the
City of Tulare Standards and Specifications and shall be installed prior to
occupancy of any structures on the site.
   (D)   All development in the C-3 zone shall be designed consistent with the
requirements and standards prescribed in
Chapter 10.60 Development Standards.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.26: SERVICE COMMERCIAL ZONE
Section
   
10.26.010   Purpose and application.
   
10.26.020   Permitted uses.
   
10.26.030   Site area.
   
10.26.040   Lot dimensions.
   
10.26.050   Coverage.
   
10.26.060   Building setback areas.
   
10.26.070   Distance between structures.
   
10.26.080   Height of structures.
   
10.26.090   Driveways.
   
10.26.100   Off-street parking.
   
10.26.110   Usable open space.
   
10.26.120   Landscaping.
   
10.26.130   Screening, fences, and walls.
   
10.26.140   Signs.
   
10.26.150   General provisions and standards.
§ 10.26.010 Purpose and application.
   This chapter shall apply to all land within the Service Commercial (C-4)
zone. The purpose of the C-4 zone is to provide areas primarily for wholesale
and heavy commercial uses and service establishments that are not suited for
other commercial zones. It also provides areas for certain light industrial
uses that manufacture, assemble, or package products within buildings and which
do not emit fumes, odor, dust, smoke, or gas. The objectives of the C-4 zone
are:
   (A)   The development of a variety of wholesale and heavy commercial and
service uses, which are not suited to other commercial zones.
   (B)   Service commercial uses shall be developed in buildings and complexes
that exhibit high standards of design, including:
      (1)   Attractive, tree-lined streets, which accommodate a variety of
vehicles typically involved in service commercial activities.
      (2)   Commercial buildings and complexes that include generous amounts of
landscaping, including parking lots designed so that they do not dominate the
street scene and buildings that complement one another with tasteful design
features.
      (3)   Outdoor storage of materials and outdoor repair activities
conducted in screened areas.
   (C)   To ensure that commercial buildings are designed in a manner that
minimizes the impact to the adjacent residential development through sensitive
design that considers the impacts of noise, traffic, and lighting sources.
   (D)   To minimize traffic congestion, while providing an efficient
circulation system.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.26.020 Permitted uses.
   (A)   Uses shall be permitted or not permitted, conditionally permitted,
administratively permitted, or temporarily permitted as prescribed in the land
use table in §
10.08.030.
   (B)   Residential uses shall be subject to the development and design
standards of the residential zone that are consistent with the density of the
residential development. Thus, a multi-family development with a density of 12
units per acre would be subject to the development and design standards of the
R-M zone. These standards include but are not limited to setbacks, height
limitations, and open space.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.26.030 Site area.
   (A)   The minimum site area for new lots that are created by subdivision map
or parcel map shall be 6,000 square feet unless a smaller site is approved with
a conditional use permit in accordance with
Chapter 10.80.
   (B)   Existing sites of less than 6,000 square feet may be developed in
accordance with the specifications of this section.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.26.040 Lot dimensions.
   The minimum lot frontage shall be 40 feet unless a reciprocal use agreement
for shared access and parking is recorded.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.26.050 Coverage.
   The maximum coverage of a lot shall be 80%.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.26.060 Building setback areas.
   (A)   No structure shall be placed within a building setback area.
   (B)   The minimum front building setback shall be ten feet, except where a
parcel fronts on a major arterial or a residential zone district then the
minimum setback shall be 20 feet. Except that driveways, canopies, parking
lots, and roof overhangs may extend into a front yard by 50%.
   (C)   There shall be no required rear building setback, except where the
rear lot line abuts a major arterial or a residentially zoned parcel then the
minimum rear building setback shall be ten feet.
   (D)   There shall be no required side building setback, except where the
side lot line abuts a major arterial or a residentially zoned parcel then the
minimum side building setback area shall be ten feet.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.26.070 Distance between structures.
   There is no minimum distance between structures required, except that all
building code requirements shall be met.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.26.080 Height of structures.
   (A)   The maximum structure height shall be 30 feet.
   (B)   Structures up to 60 feet may be erected upon approval of a conditional
use permit in accordance with
Chapter 10.80.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.26.090 Driveways.
   (A)   Wherever possible developments shall share driveways to minimize the
number of driveways on public streets.
   (B)   New driveways near street corners shall be located a minimum of 150
feet from the radius curve of the curb unless otherwise specifically approved
by the City Engineer.
   (C)   Sites with alleys shall utilize alley access to minimize driveways on
streets as long as it is possible and practicable.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.26.100 Off-street parking.
   Off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be provided on
the site for each use as prescribed in
Chapter 10.54.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.26.110 Usable open space.
   There is no minimum requirement for usable open space.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.26.120 Landscaping.
   (A)   Landscaping shall be provided for each use as prescribed in
Chapter 10.52 Landscape Standards.
   (B)   A minimum of 5% of the gross lot area shall be landscaped. All
exterior areas not devoted to parking, storage, driveways, walkways or loading
areas shall be landscaped.
   (C)   Required landscaping is to be installed prior to occupancy and
continually maintained pursuant to
Chapter 10.52.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.26.130 Screening, fences, and walls.
   (A)   Fences in the C-4 zone shall conform to the design standards provided
in §
10.50.040.
   (B)   These regulations do not apply to fences or walls required by
regulations of a state or federal agency, or by the city for reasons of public
safety, or to retaining walls that adjoin land uses.
   (C)   Fences, walls, and hedges may be erected and properly maintained to
the heights identified below and measured from the highest adjoining finish
grade:
      (1)   Fences, walls, and hedges shall not exceed three feet in height in
the front yard area unless otherwise specifically required by this title.
      (2)   Where a commercially-zoned site adjoins a site that is
residentially zoned, a seven-foot-tall solid wall and a ten-foot landscape
buffer shall separate the commercial development from the adjoining residential
district.
   (D)   Walls along arterial and collector streets. If a wall is required, or
if the developer of a site located along either an arterial or collector street
chooses to install a wall, the wall shall be installed and maintained equal to
a minimum of six feet and a maximum of seven feet in height.
   (E)   Allowable fence materials. All fences, constructed or installed within
the city shall be limited to the following materials or a combination of
materials:
      (1)   Front and street side yards:
         (a)   Concrete/block.
         (b)   Latticework fencing.
         (c)   Wood.
         (d)   Wrought iron.
      (2)   Rear and interior side yards:
         (a)   Concrete/block.
         (b)   Latticework fencing.
         (c)   Wood.
         (d)   Wrought iron
         (e)   Chain link
   (F)   Temporary fencing. Temporary fencing may be necessary to protect
archaeological or historic resources and/or trees during site preparation and
construction. Temporary fencing for these purposes shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Director.
   (G)   The city reserves the right to remove, at the expense of the owner of
the property or properties enclosed by the fence, any fence in a public
easement in any emergency.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.26.140 Signs.
   Signs placed in the C-4 zone shall be subject to the requirements and
standards prescribed in
Chapter 10.56.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.26.150 General provisions and standards.
   (A)   All businesses, services, and processes shall be conducted entirely
within a completely enclosed permanently fixed structure, except where
specifically permitted by this title.
   (B)   Mechanical equipment shall be located a minimum of 15 feet from a rear
or side lot line that abuts a residential zone district unless there is a
parapet wall that shields the mechanical equipment.
   (C)   New development shall be required to install public infrastructure
necessary to adequately serve the project, based on requirements of the City
Engineer, including sewer, water, storm drainage lines, curbs, gutters and
sidewalks, street paving, street lighting, and trash enclosure. These
improvements shall be constructed consistent with requirements shown in the
City of Tulare Standards and Specifications and shall be installed prior to
occupancy of any structures on the site.
   (D)   All development in the C-4 zone shall be designed consistent with the
requirements and standards prescribed in
Chapter 10.60 Commercial District Design Standards.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.28: LIGHT INDUSTRIAL ZONE
Section
   
10.28.010   Purpose and application.
   
10.28.020   Permitted uses.
   
10.28.030   Site area.
   
10.28.040   Lot dimensions.
   
10.28.050   Coverage.
   
10.28.060   Building setback areas.
   
10.28.070   Distance between structures.
   
10.28.080   Height of structures.
   
10.28.090   Driveways.
   
10.28.100   Off-street parking.
   
10.28.110   Usable open space.
   
10.28.120   Landscaping.
   
10.28.130   Screening, fences, and walls.
   
10.28.140   Signs.
   
10.28.150   General provisions and standards.
§ 10.28.010 Purpose and application.
   This chapter shall apply to all land within the Light Industrial (M-1) zone.
The purpose of the M-1 district is to provide areas for light manufacturing,
wholesale, and storage activities; protect industrial areas from the intrusion
of incompatible types of land uses; adhere to performance standards provided
for the protection of Tulare residents and the environment, and to provide
industrial employment opportunities for residents of the City of Tulare. The
objectives of the M-1 district are:
   (A)   The development of a variety of light industrial and service
commercial and service uses, which are not suited to other commercial zones, in
buildings and complexes that exhibit high standards of design, including:
      (1)   Industrial buildings and complexes that include generous amounts of
landscaping, and buildings that complement one another with tasteful design
features.
      (2)   Outdoor storage of materials and outdoor repair activities
conducted in screened areas.
      (3)   To ensure that commercial buildings are designed in a manner that
minimizes the impact to adjacent non-industrial uses through sensitive design
that considers the impacts of noise, traffic, and lighting sources.
      (4)   To minimize traffic congestion, while providing an efficient
circulation system.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.28.020 Permitted uses.
   Uses shall be permitted or not permitted, conditionally permitted,
administratively permitted, or temporarily permitted as prescribed in the land
use table in §
10.08.030.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.28.030 Site area.
   (A)   The minimum site area for new lots shall be 10,000 square feet except
for city water well sites which shall have a minimum parcel size of 1,000
square feet. A conditional use permit for smaller lots may be approved, in
accordance with
Chapter 10.80.
   (B)   Existing sites of less than 10,000 square feet may be developed in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.28.040 Lot dimensions.
   The minimum lot frontage shall be 80 feet, except that where there is a
recorded reciprocal use agreement for shared common access and parking areas,
no minimum frontage is required.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.28.050 Coverage.
   The maximum building coverage of a lot shall be 75%.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.28.060 Building setback areas.
   (A)   No structure shall be placed within a building setback area.
   (B)   The front building setback area shall be a minimum of ten feet.
   (C)   There shall be no required rear building setback except where the rear
lot line abuts a residentially zoned parcel or sensitive receptor then the
setback shall be a minimum of 250 feet.
   (D)   There shall be no required interior side building setback, except
where the side lot line abuts a residentially zoned parcel or sensitive
receptor then the minimum side building setback area shall be 250 feet.
   (E)   The street side building setback area shall be a minimum of ten feet
except within a corner cutoff area.
   (F)   Truck loading bays shall be located a minimum of 500 feet from the
property line of the nearest sensitive receptor to the nearest truck loading
bay opening using a direct straight-line method.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.28.070 Distance between structures.
   There is no minimum distance between structures required, except that all
building code requirements shall be met.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.28.080 Height of structures.
   The maximum structure height shall be 75 feet, except that accessory
structures up to a height of 120 feet may be permitted in accordance with
Chapter 10.60.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.28.090 Driveways.
   (A)   Wherever possible, developments shall share driveways to minimize the
number of driveways on public streets.
   (B)   New driveways near street corners shall be located a minimum of 150
feet from the radius curve of the curb unless otherwise specifically approved
by the City Engineer.
   (C)   Gated entrances shall be set back at least 100 feet from the public
right-of-way unless a shorter distance is approved by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.28.100 Off-street parking.
   Off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be provided on
the site for each use as prescribed in
Chapter 10.54.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.28.110 Usable open space.
   There is no minimum requirement for usable open space.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.28.120 Landscaping.
   (A)   Landscaping shall be provided for each use as prescribed in
Chapter 10.52 Landscape Standards.
   (B)   A minimum of 5% of the gross lot area shall be landscaped. All setback
areas visible from a public right-of-way, not devoted to parking, storage,
driveways, walkways or loading areas shall be landscaped.
   (C)   Required landscaping is to be installed prior to occupancy and
continually maintained pursuant to
Chapter 10.52.
   (D)   Any new logistics use facility (warehouse or distribution center)
within 250 feet of a sensitive receptor shall include landscape trees as solid-
screen buffering treatment and planted in two rows along the length of the
property line adjacent to the sensitive receptor. Trees used for this purpose
shall be evergreen, drought tolerant, to the extent feasible, composed of
species with low biogenic emissions, of a minimum 36-inch box size at planting,
and spaced at no greater distance than 40 feet on center. Palm trees shall not
be utilized.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.28.130 Screening, fences, and walls.
   (A)   Fences and walls in the M-1 zone shall conform to the design standards
provided in §
10.50.040.
   (B)   Fences, walls, and hedges in the M-1 zone shall conform to the
following standards:
      (1)   Where an industrially-zoned site adjoins a site that is
residentially zoned, a minimum seven-foot-tall solid wall shall separate the
industrial development from the adjoining residential district. The Director
may allow fence and wall heights to be increased in order to mitigate noise
problems documented by a noise study.
      (2)   No fence or wall shall be placed in front of or within any
landscaped area located next to a street.
      (3)   The open storage of materials and equipment attendant to a use
shall be permitted only within an area surrounded or screened from view with a
seven-foot-tall solid wall or fence, except as may be modified under site plan
review. Such storage shall not be visible above the fence or wall.
      (4)   Razor wire, monitored electrified security fences, and similar
security devices are only allowed on a permanent basis in the M-1 zone district
with approval by the Director, provided that it is not located adjacent to a
residence or residential district, subject to the design guidelines set forth
in §
10.50.100.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.28.140 Signs.
   Signs placed in the M-1 zone shall be subject to the requirements and
standards prescribed in
Chapter 10.56.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.28.150 General provisions and standards.
   (A)   Mechanical equipment shall be located a minimum of 250 feet from a
rear or side lot line that abuts a residentially zoned property or sensitive
receptor.
   (B)   All open and non-landscaped portions of any lot shall be maintained in
good condition free from weeds, dust, trash, and debris.
   (C)   New development may be required to install public infrastructure
necessary to adequately serve the project, based on requirements of the City
Engineer, including sewer, water, and storm drainage lines, curbs, gutters and
sidewalks, street paving, street lighting, and trash enclosures. These
improvements shall be constructed consistent with requirements shown in the
City of Tulare Standards and Specifications Manual and shall be installed prior
to occupancy of any structures on the site.
   (D)   No use shall be permitted and no process, equipment, or material shall
be employed that is found by the city to be injurious to persons residing or
working in the vicinity by reason of odor, fumes, dust, smoke, cinders, dirt,
refuse, noise, vibrations, illumination, glare or heavy truck traffic, or to
involve any hazard of fire, explosion, hazardous or toxic waste, or
radioactivity or to emit electrical disturbances which adversely affect
commercial or electronic equipment outside the boundaries of the site.
   (E)   No solid or liquid waste shall be discharged into a natural
watercourse, nor into a public or private sewage disposal system except in
compliance with the applicable regulations of the Central Valley Regional Water
Quality Control Board and city ordinances and policies.
   (F)   Structures and the use of structures or land shall be subject to the
requirements and standards prescribed in
Chapter 10.50.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.30: HEAVY INDUSTRIAL ZONE
Section
   
10.30.010   Purpose and application.
   
10.30.020   Permitted uses.
   
10.30.030   Site area.
   
10.30.040   Lot dimensions.
   
10.30.050   Coverage.
   
10.30.060   Building setback areas.
   
10.30.070   Distance between structures.
   
10.30.080   Height of structures.
   
10.30.090   Driveways.
   
10.30.100   Off-street parking.
   
10.30.110   Usable open space.
   
10.30.120   Landscaping.
   
10.30.130   Screening, fences, and walls.
   
10.30.140   Signs.
   
10.30.150   General provisions and standards.
§ 10.30.010 Purpose and application.
   This chapter shall apply to all land within the Heavy Industrial (M-2) zone.
The purpose of the M-2 district is to provide locations for heavy industrial
uses unsuited to other locations in the community; protect industrial areas
from the intrusion of incompatible types of land uses; adhere to performance
standards provided for the protection of Tulare residents and the environment,
and to provide industrial employment opportunities for residents of the City of
Tulare. The objectives of the M-2 district are:
   (A)   The development of a variety of heavy industrial uses, which are not
suited to other commercial zones, in buildings and complexes that exhibit high
standards of design, including:
      (1)   Industrial buildings and complexes that include generous amounts of
landscaping; complexes that include generous amounts of landscaping, and
buildings that complement one another with tasteful design features.
      (2)   Outdoor storage of materials and outdoor repair activities
conducted in screened areas.
   (B)   To ensure that industrial buildings are designed in a manner that
minimizes the impact to adjacent non-industrial uses through sensitive design
that considers the impacts of noise, traffic, and lighting sources.
   (C)   To minimize traffic congestion, while providing an efficient
circulation system.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.30.020 Permitted uses.
   Uses shall be permitted or not permitted, conditionally permitted,
administratively permitted, or temporarily permitted as prescribed in the land
use table in §
10.08.030.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.30.030 Site area.
   (A)   The minimum site area for new lots shall be 40,000 square feet except
for city water well sites which shall have a minimum parcel size of 1,000
square feet. A conditional use permit for smaller lots may be approved, in
accordance with
Chapter 10.80.
   (B)   Existing sites of less than 40,000 square feet may be developed in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.30.040 Lot dimensions.
   The minimum lot frontage shall be 80 feet, except that where there is a
recorded reciprocal use agreement for shared common access and parking areas,
no minimum frontage is required.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.30.050 Coverage.
   The maximum building coverage of a lot shall be 75%.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.30.060 Building setback areas.
   (A)   No structure shall be placed within a building setback area.
   (B)   The front building setback area shall be a minimum of 25 feet.
   (C)   There shall be no required rear building setback except where the rear
lot line abuts a residentially zoned parcel or sensitive receptor then the
setback shall be a minimum of 250 feet.
   (D)   There shall be no required interior side building setback, except
where the side lot line abuts a residentially zoned parcel or sensitive
receptor then the minimum side building setback area shall be 250 feet.
   (E)   The street side building setback area shall be a minimum of 15 feet.
   (F)   Truck loading bays shall be located a minimum of 500 feet from the
property line of the nearest sensitive receptor to the nearest truck loading
bay opening using a direct straight-line method.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.30.070 Distance between structures.
   There is no minimum distance between structures required, except that all
building code requirements shall be met.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.30.080 Height of structures.
   The maximum structure height shall be 75 feet, except that accessory
structures up to a height of 120 feet may be permitted in accordance with
Chapter 10.60.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.30.090 Driveways.
   (A)   Wherever possible, developments shall share driveways to minimize the
number of driveways on public streets.
   (B)   New driveways near street corners shall be located a minimum of 150
feet from the radius curve of the curb unless otherwise specifically approved
by the City Engineer.
   (C)   Gated entrances shall be set back at least 100 feet from the public
right-of-way unless a shorter distance is approved by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.30.100 Off-street parking.
   Off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be provided on
the site for each use as prescribed in
Chapter 10.54.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.30.110 Usable open space.
   There is no minimum requirement for usable open space.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.30.120 Landscaping.
   (A)   Landscaping shall be provided for each use as prescribed in
Chapter 10.52 Landscape Standards.
   (B)   A minimum of 5% of the gross lot area shall be landscaped. All setback
areas visible from a public right-of-way, not devoted to parking, storage,
driveways, walkways or loading areas shall be landscaped.
   (C)   Required landscaping shall be installed prior to final occupancy and
continually maintained pursuant to
Chapter 10.52.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.30.130 Screening, fences, and walls.
   (A)   Fences and walls in the M-2 zone shall conform to the design standards
provided in §
10.50.040.
   (B)   Fences, walls, and hedges in the M-2 zone shall conform to the
following standards:
      (1)   Where an industrially-zoned site adjoins a site that is
residentially zoned, a minimum seven-foot-tall solid wall shall separate the
industrial development from the adjoining residential district. The Director
may allow fence and wall heights to be increased in order to mitigate noise
problems documented by a noise study.
      (2)   No fence or wall shall be placed in front of or within any
landscaped area located next to a street.
      (3)   The open storage of materials and equipment attendant to a use
shall be permitted only within an area surrounded or screened from view with a
seven-foot-tall solid wall or fence, except as may be modified under site plan
review. Such storage shall not be visible above the fence or wall.
      (4)   Razor wire, monitored electrified security fences, and similar
security devices are only allowed on a permanent basis in the M-2 zone district
with approval by the Director, provided that it is not located adjacent to a
residence or residential district, subject to the design guidelines set forth
in §
10.50.100.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.30.140 Signs.
   Signs placed in the M-2 zone shall be subject to the requirements and
standards prescribed in
Chapter 10.56.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.30.150 General provisions and standards.
   (A)   Mechanical equipment shall be located a minimum of 250 feet from a
rear or side lot line that abuts a residentially zoned property or sensitive
receptor.
   (B)   All open and non-landscaped portions of any lot shall be maintained in
good condition free from weeds, dust, trash, and debris.
   (C)   New development may be required to install public infrastructure
necessary to adequately serve the project, based on requirements of the City
Engineer, including sewer, water, and storm drainage lines, curbs, gutters and
sidewalks, street paving, street lighting, and trash enclosures. These
improvements shall be constructed consistent with requirements shown in the
City of Tulare Standards and Specifications Manual and shall be installed prior
to occupancy of any structures on the site.
   (D)   No use shall be permitted and no process, equipment, or material shall
be employed that is found by the city to be injurious to persons residing or
working in the vicinity by reason of odor, fumes, dust, smoke, cinders, dirt,
refuse, noise, vibrations, illumination, glare or heavy truck traffic, or to
involve any hazard of fire, explosion, hazardous or toxic waste, or
radioactivity or to emit electrical disturbances which adversely affect
commercial or electronic equipment outside the boundaries of the site.
   (E)   No solid or liquid waste shall be discharged into a natural
watercourse, nor into a public or private sewage disposal system except in
compliance with the applicable regulations of the Central Valley Regional Water
Quality Control Board and city ordinances and policies.
   (F)   Structures and the use of structures or land shall be subject to the
requirements and standards prescribed in
Chapter 10.50.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.32: PUBLIC LANDS ZONE
Section
   
10.32.010   Purpose and application.
   
10.32.020   Permitted uses.
   
10.32.030   Site area.
   
10.32.040   Lot dimensions.
   
10.32.050   Coverage.
   
10.32.060   Building setback areas.
   
10.32.070   Distance between structures.
   
10.32.080   Height of structures.
   
10.32.090   Driveways.
   
10.32.100   Other setback standards.
   
10.32.110   Off-street parking.
   
10.32.120   Usable open space.
   
10.32.130   Landscaping.
   
10.32.140   Screening, fences, and walls.
   
10.32.150   Signs.
   
10.32.160   General provisions and standards.
§ 10.32.010 Purpose and application.
   This chapter shall apply to all land within the Public Lands (PL) zone. The
purpose of the PL zone is to provide locations for public and private
institutional uses, including, but not limited to, community facilities, school
facilities, libraries, cemeteries, wastewater treatment facilities, storm
drainage basins, water recharge areas, public safety facilities (fire and
police), public transportation and public works facilities, the Tulare Airport,
and other similar public uses and facilities on property owned and/or operated
by a local, state or federal agency.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.32.020 Permitted uses.
   Uses shall be permitted or not permitted, conditionally permitted,
administratively permitted, or temporarily permitted as prescribed in the land
use table in §
10.08.030.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.32.030 Site area.
   The minimum site area is 3,000 square feet.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.32.040 Lot dimensions.
   There are no minimum lot dimensions.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.32.050 Coverage.
   There is no maximum coverage requirement.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.32.060 Building setback areas.
   (A)   No structure shall be placed within a building setback area.
   (B)   The front building setback area shall be a minimum of ten feet from
the front lot line when located in a residential neighborhood.
   (C)   The rear building setback shall be a minimum of five feet from the
rear lot line, except where the rear lot line abuts an R-1, R-M, or R-H zone
district, the rear building setback shall be a minimum of ten feet.
   (D)   The side building setback area shall be a minimum of five feet from an
interior side lot line and a minimum of ten feet from a street side property
line.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.32.070 Distance between structures.
   The minimum distance between structures shall be five feet, except as
provided by the building code.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.32.080 Height of structures.
   The maximum structure height shall be 35 feet, except that a height up to
100 feet may be permitted in accordance with
Chapter 10.60 Conditional Use Permits.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.32.090 Driveways.
   (A)   Wherever possible, developments shall share driveways to minimize the
number of driveways on public streets.
   (B)   New driveways near street corners shall be located a minimum of 150
feet from the radius curve of the curb unless otherwise specifically approved
by the City Engineer.
   (C)   Gated entrances shall be set back at least 30 feet from the public
right-of-way unless a shorter distance is approved by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.32.100 Other setback standards.
   Mechanical equipment shall be located a minimum of five feet from every lot
line, except the setback shall be a minimum of ten feet from a lot line
abutting a residential or commercial zone, or a shall be a minimum of 25 feet
when the mechanical equipment is not enclosed to mitigate noise on adjacent
uses.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.32.110 Off-street parking.
   (A)   Off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be provided
on the site for each use as prescribed in
Chapter 10.54.
   (B)   Required parking spaces may not be provided within any front, side, or
rear building setback area.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.32.120 Usable open space.
   There is no required usable open space.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.32.130 Landscaping.
   (A)   Landscaping shall be provided for each use as prescribed in
Chapter 10.52 Landscape Standards.
   (B)   All building setback areas visible from a public street shall be
landscaped, except for driveways and approved parking areas.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.32.140 Screening, fences, and walls.
   (A)   The fences in the PL zone shall conform to the design standards
provided in §
10.50.040.
   (B)   Fences, walls, and hedges in the PL zone shall conform to the
following standards:
      (1)   Fences, walls, and hedges not exceeding seven feet in height shall
be permitted except that in a required front yard, or a required side yard on a
corner or side on a cul-de-sac lot, a fence, wall, or hedge shall not exceed
four feet in height except as allowed by divisions (B)(2) and (B)(3) below.
      (2)   A block wall with a minimum height of seven feet shall be provided
along any side or rear lot line that abuts any residential zone.
      (3)   The open storage of materials and equipment attendant to a use
shall be permitted only within an area surrounded or screened from view with a
seven-foot-tall solid wall or fence, except as may be modified under site plan
review. Such storage shall not be visible above the fence or wall.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.32.150 Signs.
   Signs placed in the PL zone shall be subject to the requirements and
standards prescribed in
Chapter 10.56.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.32.160 General provisions and standards.
   Structures and the use of structures or land shall be subject to the
requirements and standards prescribed in
Chapter 10.50.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.34: PARKS AND RECREATION ZONE
   Section
   
10.34.010   Purpose and application.
   
10.34.020   Permitted uses.
   
10.34.030   Lot area.
   
10.34.040   Lot dimensions.
   
10.34.050   Coverage.
   
10.34.060   Building setback areas.
   
10.34.070   Distance between structures.
   
10.34.080   Height of structures.
   
10.34.090   Driveways.
   
10.34.100   Other setback standards.
   
10.34.110   Off-street parking.
   
10.34.120   Usable open space.
   
10.34.130   Landscaping.
   
10.34.140   Screening, fences, and walls.
   
10.34.150   Signs.
   
10.34.160   General provisions and standards.
§ 10.34.010 Purpose and application.
   This chapter shall apply to all land within the Parks and Recreation (PR)
zone. The purpose of the PR zone is to provide areas for outdoor recreation
facilities that serve local and regional users, including, but not limited to,
pocket, neighborhood, community, regional, and natural parks, as well as other
outdoor recreation facilities such as golf courses, trails, and habitat
preserves.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.34.020 Permitted uses.
   Uses shall be permitted or not permitted, conditionally permitted,
administratively permitted, or temporarily permitted as prescribed in the land
use table in §
10.08.030.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.34.030 Lot area.
   There is no minimum lot area.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.34.040 Lot dimensions.
   There are no minimum lot dimensions.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.34.050 Coverage.
   There is no maximum coverage requirement.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.34.060 Building setback areas.
   (A)   No structure shall be placed within a building setback area.
   (B)   The front building setback area shall be a minimum of 20 feet from the
front lot line.
   (C)   The rear building setback shall be a minimum of ten feet from the rear
lot line.
   (D)   The side building setback area shall be a minimum of ten feet from an
interior side or street side property line.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.34.070 Distance between structures.
   The minimum distance between structures shall be ten feet, except as
provided by the building code.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.34.080 Height of structures.
   The maximum structure height shall be 30 feet, except that a height up to
100 feet may be permitted in accordance with
Chapter 10.60 Conditional Use Permits.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.34.090 Driveways.
   Driveways should be minimized to protect the maximum amount of open space.
Driveways shall be the minimum width and length necessary to support the use,
as determined by the Director.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.34.100 Other setback standards.
   Mechanical equipment shall be located a minimum of five feet from every lot
line, except the setback shall be a minimum of 25 feet from a lot line abutting
a residential or commercial zone.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.34.110 Off-street parking.
   (A)   Off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be provided
on the site for each use as prescribed in
Chapter 10.54.
   (B)   No parking spaces shall be provided within any front, side, or rear
building setback area.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.34.120 Usable open space.
   There is no required usable open space.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.34.130 Landscaping.
   Areas around buildings and parking areas that have been disturbed from their
natural state shall be landscaped with natural landscape plants and materials
that blend in with the natural environment on the site.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.34.140 Screening, fences, and walls.
   (A)   A minimum six-foot-tall solid wood or masonry fence shall be provided
along any lot line that abuts any residential zoned property to separate the
site development from the adjoining residential district. A three-foot wall
shall be permitted in the front yard area.
   (B)   The outdoor storage of equipment or materials shall be screened from
view from any adjoining public right-of-way with a seven-foot-tall solid fence,
wall, or chain-link fence with slats and landscaping.
   (C)   Fences and walls shall be provided on the site for each use in
accordance with §
10.50.040.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.34.150 Signs.
   Signs placed in the OS zone shall be subject to the requirements and
standards prescribed in
Chapter 10.56.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.34.160 General provisions and standards.
   Structures and the use of structures or land shall be subject to the
requirements and standards prescribed in
Chapter 10.50.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.36: AGRICULTURE/OPEN SPACE ZONE
   Section
   
10.36.010   Purpose and application.
   
10.36.020   Permitted uses.
   
10.36.030   Lot area.
   
10.36.040   Lot dimensions.
   
10.36.050   Coverage.
   
10.36.060   Building setback areas.
   
10.36.070   Distance between structures.
   
10.36.080   Height of structures.
   
10.36.090   Driveways.
   
10.36.100   Other setback standards.
   
10.36.110   Off-street parking.
   
10.36.120   Accessory structures.
   
10.36.130   Usable open space.
   
10.36.140   Landscaping.
   
10.36.150   Screening, fences, and walls.
   
10.36.160   Signs.
   
10.36.170   General provisions and standards.
§ 10.36.010 Purpose and application.
   This chapter shall apply to all land within the Agriculture/Open Space (A)
zone. The purpose of the A zone is to provide areas for agriculture and
agriculture-related uses. The objectives of the A zone are:
   (A)   To prevent the intrusion of urban development into undeveloped/
agricultural areas.
   (B)   To provide appropriate areas for certain predominately open space uses
of land that are not injurious to agricultural/open space uses but which may
not be harmonious with urban uses.
   (C)   To preserve in agricultural use/open space land suited for eventual
development into other uses until such time as streets, utilities, and other
infrastructure may be provided in order to ensure the orderly conversion of the
lands from agriculture to urban use.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.36.020 Permitted uses.
   Uses shall be permitted or not permitted, conditionally permitted,
administratively permitted, or temporarily permitted as prescribed in the land
use table in §
10.08.030.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.36.030 Lot area.
   The minimum lot area is ten acres.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.36.040 Lot dimensions.
   There are no minimum lot dimensions.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.36.050 Coverage.
   The maximum coverage of a lot shall be no more than 10% for permitted uses
and no more than 20% for conditional uses.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.36.060 Building setback areas.
   (A)   No structure shall be placed within a building setback area.
   (B)   The front building setback area shall be a minimum of 35 feet from the
front lot line.
   (C)   The rear building setback shall be a minimum of 15 feet from the rear
lot line.
   (D)   The side building setback area shall be a minimum of 15 feet from an
interior side or street side property line.
   (E)   Any structure used to contain animals or fowl shall be set back at
least 200 feet from any residential or commercial zoned parcel or any school or
institution used for human care.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.36.070 Distance between structures.
   The minimum distance between structures shall be ten feet, except as
provided by the building code.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.36.080 Height of structures.
   The maximum structure height shall be 35 feet, except that a height up to 75
feet may be permitted in accordance with
Chapter 10.60 Conditional Use Permits.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.36.090 Driveways.
   Driveways should be minimized to protect the maximum amount of open space.
Driveways shall be the minimum width and length necessary to support the use,
as determined by the Director.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.36.100 Other setback standards.
   Mechanical equipment shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from every lot
line.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.36.110 Off-street parking.
   Off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be provided on
the site for each use as prescribed in
Chapter 10.54.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.36.120 Accessory structures.
   (A)   Agricultural accessory structures shall, unless otherwise regulated by
this title, be permitted in the agriculture and rural residential zone
districts and these same districts when attached to an overlay zone.
   (B)   Development standards:
      (1)   Maximum height: 80 feet.
      (2)   Setback: The following are setback standards for agriculture
accessory structures unless otherwise stipulated in this chapter:
         (a)   Front yard setback: same as front yard setback for the district
in which the accessory structure is being placed.
         (b)   Rear yard setback: accessory structures that do not exceed six
feet in height may be located in any rear yard area so long as the area of the
structure does not exceed 50 square feet. In the case where the accessory
structure will not exceed 12 feet in height, the rear yard setback shall be
three feet.
         (c)   Side yard setback: same as the side yard setback for the
district in which the accessory structure is being placed, except in the case
where the accessory structure will not exceed 12 feet in height, the side yard
setback shall be three feet.
         (d)   Side yard, street side setback: accessory structures that do not
exceed six feet in height may be located in any street side yard area so long
as the area of the structure does not exceed 50 square feet.
   (C)   Distance between structures: the distance between a structure used for
human habitation and a structure used for livestock shall be 40 feet.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.36.130 Usable open space.
   There is no required usable open space.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.36.140 Landscaping.
   Areas around buildings and parking areas that have been disturbed from their
natural state shall be landscaped with natural landscape plants and materials
that blend in with the natural environment on the site.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.36.150 Screening, fences, and walls.
   Fences and walls shall be provided on the site for each use in accordance
with §
10.50.040.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.36.160 Signs.
   Signs placed in the A zone shall be subject to the requirements and
standards prescribed in
Chapter 10.56.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.36.170 General provisions and standards.
   Structures and the use of structures or land shall be subject to the
requirements and standards prescribed in
Chapter 10.50.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.38: HISTORIC SITE AND HISTORIC NEIGHBORHOOD OVERLAY ZONE
   Section
   
10.38.010   Purpose.
   
10.38.020   Definitions.
   
10.38.030   Duties and powers of the Planning Commission.
   
10.38.040   Designation criteria.
   
10.38.050   Designation process.
   
10.38.060   Historic resources.
   
10.38.070   Local historic districts.
   
10.38.080   National Register historic districts or structures.
   
10.38.090   Adoption by Council.
   
10.38.100   Amendment or rescission of designation.
   
10.38.110   Local Register of Historic Resources.
   
10.38.120   Deletion of demolished, relocated, or rescinded designated historic
resources.
   
10.38.130   Historic resource permit review process.
   
10.38.140   Historic district permit review process.
   
10.38.150   Conditional uses.
   
10.38.160   Appeal procedure.
   
10.38.170   Finality of decision.
   
10.38.180   Substandard buildings.
   
10.38.190   Advice and guidance to property owners.
   
10.38.200   Property owned by public agencies.
   
10.38.210   Fire and building codes.
   
10.38.220   Minimum maintenance.
   
10.38.230   Status of properties previously designated.
   
10.38.240   Civil and criminal penalties.
   
10.38.250   Severability.
§ 10.38.010 Purpose.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to continue to preserve, promote, and
enhance the historic resources and designated historic districts of the city
for the educational, cultural, economic, and general welfare of the public; to
continue to protect and review changes to these resources and districts which
have a distinctive character or a special historic, architectural, aesthetic or
cultural value to this city, state, and nation; to continue to safeguard the
heritage of this city by preserving and regulating its historic buildings,
structures, objects, sites, and districts which reflect elements of the city's
historic, cultural, social, economic, political and architectural history; to
continue to preserve and enhance the environmental quality and safety of these
landmarks and districts; to continue to establish, stabilize and improve
property values and to foster economic development.
   (B)   The Council finds that the city has played an important role in the
development of the San Joaquin Valley of California and that this history is
evidenced today through its historic buildings, structures, objects, and
districts representing the commercial, industrial, social, economic, political
and architectural development of the city. The Council finds that the
distinctive and significant character of the city can best be maintained by
protecting and enhancing its historic, architectural, aesthetic, and cultural
heritage and by preventing unnecessary injury or destruction of its historic
resources and districts which are important community assets.
   (C)   The Council finds that this chapter benefits all of the residents of
the city and all owners of the property and declares as a matter of public
policy that the preservation, protection, and use of historic resources and
districts are a public necessity because of their character and their value as
visible reminders of the history and heritage of this city and state. The
Council declares as a matter of public policy that this chapter is required in
the interest of the health, prosperity, safety, welfare, and economic well-
being of the people. The designation and preservation of historic resources and
districts and the regulation of alterations, additions, repairs, signs,
removal, demolition, or new construction to ensure the perpetuation of their
historic character is hereby designated to be a public purpose.
§ 10.38.020 Definitions.
   Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, the
definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the
construction, meaning, and application of words and phrases used in this
chapter, and, except to the extent that a particular word or phrase is
otherwise specifically defined in this section, the definitions, and provisions
contained in
Chapter 10.98 shall also govern the construction, meaning, and application of
words and phrases used in this chapter. The definition of each word or phrase
shall constitute, to the extent applicable, the definition of each word or
phrase which is derivative from it, or from which it is a derivative, as the
case may be.
   ALTERATION. Any change or modification requiring a city permit, through
public or private action, of any designated historic resource or any property
located within a designated historic district, including, but not limited to,
exterior changes to or modification of structural details, architectural
details or visual characteristics such as doors, windows, surface materials and
texture, grading or surface paving; addition of new structures; cutting or
removal of important landscape features such as mature trees or other natural
features; and the placement or removal of any exterior objects such as signs,
plaques, light fixtures, street furniture, walls, fences, steps, plantings and
landscape accessories compromising the exterior visual qualities of the
resource or property.
   ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE. The entity created to make
recommendations to the Planning Commission regarding new development,
modifications, or alterations to resources within the district.
   BUILDING. Any construction created primarily to shelter any form of human
activity, including accessory structures and garages.
   CALIFORNIA REGISTER OF HISTORICAL RESOURCES. The authoritative guide in
California to be used by state and local agencies, private groups, and citizens
to identify the state's historical resources and to indicate what properties
are to be protected, to the extent prudent and feasible, from substantial
change.
   COMMISSION. The City of Tulare Planning Commission.
   CONTRIBUTOR TO A LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT. An individual historic resource
that contributes to the significance of a Locally Designated Historic District
(LHD) under the criteria set forth in this chapter.
   CONTRIBUTOR TO A NATIONAL REGISTER HISTORIC DISTRICT. An individual historic
resource that contributes to the significance of a National Register Historic
District (NRD) under the criteria set forth in this chapter.
   CULTURAL. Shall include traditional cultures, including, but not limited to,
Native American or other identifiable ethnic groups.
   DEMOLITION. The act that destroys in whole or in part a designated historic
resource.
   EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE. The architectural elements embodying style,
design, general arrangement, and components of all of the outside surfaces of a
building, structure, or object, including, but not limited to, the type of
building materials and the type and style of all windows, doors, lights, signs
and other fixtures appurtenant to such building, structure or object.
   FEASIBLE. Capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a
reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, legal,
social, and technological factors.
   Historic Site and Historic Neighborhood Overlay Zone105
   HISTORIC RESOURCE. Any building, structure, object, or site that has been in
existence for more than 45 years and possesses integrity of location, design,
setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association, and is associated
with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of
our history, or is associated with the lives of persons significant in our
past, or embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method
of construction, or represents the work of a master or possesses high artistic
values; or has yielded, or may be likely to yield, important information in
prehistory or history; and has been designated as such by the Council pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter.
   LANDSCAPING. Designed and non-designed landscapes, including vegetation,
natural features, structures, objects, roads, or waterways, designed, shaped,
or modified by human activity. Such landscaping is recognized as significant or
identified within a nomination as significant in reference to the primary
resource; and has been designated as such by the Council pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
   LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT (LHD). Any finite group of resources related to one
another in a clearly distinguishable way or any geographically definable area
that possesses a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites,
buildings, structures, or objects united historically or aesthetically by plan
or physical development. The Local Historic District must be significant as
well as identifiable and it must meet the criteria of the California Register
of Historic Resources.
   LOCAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC RESOURCES. The inventory of buildings,
structures, objects, sites, and districts designated by the Council as historic
resources or historic districts pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
   NATIONAL REGISTER HISTORIC DISTRICT (NRD). Any finite group of resources
related to one another in a clearly distinguishable way or any geographically
definable area that possesses a significant concentration, linkage, or
continuity of sites, buildings, structures, or objects united historically or
aesthetically by plan or physical development. The National Register Historic
District must be significant as well as identifiable and it must meet National
Register criteria for listing on that Register.
   NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES. The official federal list of
districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects significant in American
history, architecture, engineering, and culture as authorized by the National
Historic Preservation Act of 1966.
   NON-CONTRIBUTOR. Any building, structure, object, or site that does not
contribute to the significance of the historic district in which it is located.
   OBJECT. Any construction that is primarily artistic in nature or is
relatively small in scale and simply constructed. Although an object may be, by
nature or design, movable, it is associated with a specific site or
environment, such as a fountain or sign.
   PRESERVATION. The act or process of applying measures to sustain the
existing form, integrity, and material of a historic property. It may include
initial stabilization work, where necessary, as well as ongoing maintenance of
the historic building materials.
   PRESERVATION/DISTRICT PLAN. The plan adopted after the formation of a
historic district, which shall govern the manner in which the preservation
objectives of the district will be attained.
   RECONSTRUCTION. The act or process of reproducing by new construction the
exact form and detail of a vanished building, structure, or object, or a part
thereof, as it appeared at a specified period of time.
   REGULATED PERMITS. Any permit issued for any work on a historic resource or
within any historic district.
   REHABILITATION. The act or process of making a compatible use of a property
through repair, alterations, and additions while preserving those portions or
features that convey its historical, cultural, or architectural values.
   RESTORATION. The act or process of accurately recovering the form and
details of a property and its setting as it appeared at a particular period of
time by means of the removal of later work or by the replacement of missing
earlier work.
   SECRETARY. The Director or his or her designee.
   SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR'S STANDARDS. The Secretary of the Interior's
Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties published by the U.S.
Department of the Interior.
   SITE. The location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic
occupation, or an activity where the location itself possesses historical,
cultural, or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing
structure, including, but not limited to, a designed landscape or the ruins of
a building or structure.
   SPECIALIST. A person or person designated by the Director to serve as a
preservation specialist to assist the city.
   STABILIZATION. The act or process of applying measures designed to
reestablish a weather-resistant enclosure or the structural stability of an
unsafe or deteriorated property while maintaining the essential form as it
exists at present.
   STATE HISTORIC BUILDING CODE. Title 24, Building Standards, Part 8, Cal.
Code of Regulations.
   STRUCTURE. Any construction created for purposes other than creating human
shelter, including, but not limited to, a bridge or water tower.
   SURVEY. Historic resource surveys conducted under the auspices of the city.
   UNREASONABLE ECONOMIC HARDSHIP. Facts and circumstances that establish that
there are no feasible measures that can be taken that will enable the property
owner to make reasonable beneficial use of the property or derive a reasonable
economic return from the property in its current form.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.38.030 Duties and powers of the Planning Commission.
   (A)   In regard to this chapter, the primary duties of the Planning
Commission shall be:
      (1)   The identification, designation, and preservation of historic
resources and historic districts owned by the city or located within the city
limits.
      (2)   The regulation of exterior alterations visible from a public right-
of-way, including demolition, relocation, new construction, and interior
alterations, which would affect the significance of historic resources or
historic districts.
   (B)   The Commission shall have the following additional duties and powers:
      (1)   Conduct studies and evaluations of applications requesting the
designation of historic districts and make determinations and recommendations
as appropriate for consideration of such applications in order to effectuate
the purposes of this chapter.
      (2)   Adopt specific guidelines for the designation of historic
resources, historic districts, and heritage properties as it deems necessary to
effectuate the purposes of this chapter.
      (3)   Maintain a current listing and description of designated historic
resources and historic districts and transmit copies and updates of such
listings to all appropriate city agencies and departments as determined by the
Secretary to the Commission.
      (4)   Develop and recommend the adoption of a Historic Preservation
Element for the General Plan of the city.
      (5)   Participate in environmental review procedures called for under
this chapter or under the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) or under
the National Environmental Protection Act (NEPA) by providing review and
comments on permit actions affecting designated historic resources and historic
districts as the Commission deems appropriate.
   Historic Site and Historic Neighborhood Overlay Zone107
      (6)   Review and comment upon the conduct of land use, housing,
redevelopment, municipal improvement, and other types of planning and programs
undertaken by any agency or department of the city, county, or state as they
relate to designated historic resources and historic districts as the
Commission deems appropriate.
      (7)   Establish criteria and conduct or cause to be conducted historical
resource surveys of properties within the city limits in accordance with state
survey standards and procedures; submit completed surveys to the Council for
official adoption; and submit adopted surveys to the Office of Historic
Preservation for integration into the Historic Property Data File for Tulare
County maintained by that office.
      (8)   Recommend internal procedures to facilitate the use of such adopted
historical resource surveys in planning and development processes by all
relevant city agencies and departments.
      (9)   Publicize, maintain, and periodically update such historical
resource surveys in accordance with state survey standards and procedures.
      (10)   Adopt procedural rules for the systematic review of such
historical resource surveys to determine if designation proceedings should be
initiated on appropriate sites. Provide for the removal of sites not found
qualified for designation from the survey and from the Historic Property Data
File for the City of Tulare maintained by the State Office of Historic
Preservation if included therein.
      (11)   Review and make recommendations on nominations for inclusion in
the California Register of Historical Resources.
      (12)   Review and make recommendations on any applications to participate
in local historic preservation incentive programs established in order to
effectuate the purposes of this chapter.
      (13)   Adopt, promulgate, amend, and rescind, from time to time, such
rules, guidelines, and regulations as the Commission may deem necessary to
effectuate the purposes of this chapter.
      (14)   Provide a suitable sign, plaque, or other marker at public or
private expense on or near the historic resource or district (LHD or NRD),
indicating that the resource or district (LHD or NRD)
has been so designated. The sign, plaque, or other marker shall contain
information and data deemed appropriate by the Commission, and its placement
shall be at the discretion of the owner.
      (15)   Keep minutes and records of all meetings and proceedings,
including voting records, attendance, resolutions, findings, determinations,
and decisions as a matter of public record.
      (16)   Render advice and guidance, upon the request of a property owner
or tenant, on the financial and physical aspects of the restoration,
alteration, rehabilitation, landscaping, or maintenance of any historic
resource or any contributor to any historic district (LHD or NRD).
      (17)   Investigate and report to the Council on the use of various
federal, state, local, or private funding sources and mechanisms available to
promote historic resource preservation in the city.
      (18)   Participate in, promote, and conduct public information,
educational, and interpretive programs pertaining to historic resources and
provide for public participation in all aspects of the city's historic
preservation programs.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.38.040 Designation criteria.
   (A)   Historic resources. Any building, structure, object, or site may be
designated as a historic resource if it is found by the Commission and Council
to meet the following criteria:
      (1)   It has been in existence for more than 50 years, and it possesses
integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and
association, and:
         (a)   It is associated with events that have made a significant
contribution to the broad patterns of our history.
         (b)   It is associated with the lives of persons significant in our
past.
         (c)   It embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or
method of construction, or represents the work of a master, or possesses high
artistic values.
         (d)   It has yielded or may be likely to yield, information important
in prehistory or history.
      (2)   It has been in existence less than 50 years; it meets the criteria
of division (A)(1) above and is of exceptional importance within the
appropriate historical context, local, state, or national.
   (B)   Local historic districts. Any finite group of resources (buildings,
structures, objects, or sites) may be designated as a local historic district
if it meets the definition set forth in §
10.38.020, its designation is consented to by the majority of the property
owners within the local historic district, at least 50% of the resources within
the proposed local historic district are 50 years of age or older, and it is
found by the Commission and Council to meet one or more of the following
criteria:
      (1)   It exemplifies or reflects special elements of the city's cultural,
social, economic, political, aesthetic, engineering, or architectural heritage.
      (2)   It is identified with a person or group that contributed
significantly to the culture and development of the city.
      (3)   It embodies distinctive characteristics of a style, type, period,
or method of construction or is a valuable example of the use of indigenous
materials or craftsmanship.
      (4)   Structures within the area exemplify a particular architectural
style or way of life important to the city.
      (5)   The area is related to a designated historic resource or district
in such a way that its preservation is essential to the integrity of the
designated resource or local historic district.
      (6)   The area has the potential to yield information of archaeological
interest.
   (C)   National Register historic districts. The nomination of any finite
group of resources (buildings, structures, objects, or sites), including any
local historic district, to the National Register of Historic Places as a
National Register historic district may be recommended under this chapter if
the nomination is supported by more than 50% of the property owners within the
proposed National Register historic district.
   (D)   Contributors to historic districts. Any building, structure, object,
or site may be designated as a contributor to a local historic district or a
proposed National Register historic district if it contributes to the
significance of the specific historic district under the criteria set forth
above in this section.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.38.050 Designation process.
   (A)   Buildings, structures, objects, sites, and districts may be considered
for designation as historic resources, local historic districts, or National
Register historic district under this chapter as set forth in §§
10.38.060,
10.36.070, and
10.38.080.
   (B)   Historic resources and districts shall be adopted by ordinance
pursuant to
Chapter 10.86, Zoning Ordinance Amendments. In the case of historic resources,
the resource shall be designated on the Official Zoning Map with the base zone
district followed by the Historic Site And Historic Neighborhood Overlay zone
notation (H). For example, a single-family property that is designated a
historic resource shall have the notation R-1-6(H).
   (C)   In the case of the historic districts, the boundaries of the district
will be adopted by ordinance but will not be designated with the H overlay. In
the historic district, all historic resources, and contributing resources shall
be subject to the historic district permit review process.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.38.060 Historic resources.
   (A)   Requests for designation. Designation of a historic resource may be
initiated by the Council, the Commission, the Secretary, the property owner, or
an authorized representative of the owner. The application for designation
consideration shall be filed with the city, using a form approved by the
Secretary and shall include the following information:
      (1)   The assessor's parcel number for the property containing the
building, structure, object, or site proposed for designation, along with the
name and address of the current owner(s) of record and a copy of the deed
granting title to the owner(s).
   Historic Site and Historic Neighborhood Overlay Zone109
      (2)   Whether the proposed historic resource takes the form of a
building, structure, object, or site, as defined in this chapter.
      (3)   A description of the specific building, structure, object, or site
proposed for designation, including, but not limited to, its dates of
construction, significant alterations, and architectural style.
      (4)   The manner in which the proposed building, structure, object, or
site meets the criteria for designation contained in §
10.38.040.
      (5)   Current photographs of all aspects of the proposed historic
resource, supplemented by sketches, drawings, or other descriptive materials.
      (6)   A description of the physical condition and appearance of the
proposed historic resource.
      (7)   If the designation proposal is not being submitted by the owner, a
statement acknowledging whether the owner has consented to submission of the
proposal is in opposition to the submission or has declined to state a position
on the issue; however, this language shall not be interpreted as requiring
owner consent to the designation of an individual resource under this section.
      (8)   Completed California Department of Parks and Recreation Primary
Record and Building, Structure, and Object #523 forms for the proposed historic
resource.
   (B)   Procedural requirements in advance of the hearing.
      (1)   The application and supporting information shall be reviewed by the
Department for adequacy and completeness under the requirements of this
section. A hearing on the application will be scheduled when the Department
determines that the application is complete.
      (2)   Notice of the time, place, and purpose of such hearing will be
mailed to the owner of the property proposed for designation at the address
shown on the latest assessment roll and published once in a local newspaper of
general circulation not less than ten days prior to the date of the hearing.
The Secretary may also give such additional notices as he or she deems
desirable and practicable.
      (3)   The property owner and/or any authorized representative shall be
prohibited from undertaking any alteration, construction, grading, demolition,
or removal of such property, and no permit to undertake such work shall be
issued by the city for 90 days from the date the Department mails the notice of
hearing to determine historic resource designation to the property owner and/or
any authorized representative. If no final action has been taken as to the
historic resource designation within the 90-day period, said restrictions shall
be removed unless the Commission, with the consent of the property owner and/or
any authorized representative, elects to continue its consideration of the
property for historic resource designation. If the Commission, with the consent
of the owner and/or any authorized representative, makes such an election, said
restrictions shall remain against the property until final action and the
Department shall notify the appropriate city officials of said restrictions.
Nothing in this provision shall be construed as a prohibition or infringement
on the legal use of a property pending consideration by the Commission.
      (4)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the construction,
grading, alteration, demolition, or removal of any structure or other feature,
where a permit for the performance of such work was issued prior to the date of
notice of hearing to consider the designation of the historic resource, and
where such permit has not expired or been canceled or revoked, provided that
construction is started and diligently pursued to completion in accordance with
the building code.
      (5)   Prior to the Commission's hearing on the designation of the
property, upon application by the property owner and/or any authorized
representative, the Secretary may approve a permit for alterations,
construction, or reconstruction consistent with the ordinary maintenance and
repair of the property, to the extent that such work does not adversely affect
the exterior architectural features of the property.
   (C)   Commission hearing.
      (1)   The Commission shall review all materials prepared and submitted
and vote on the designation recommendation.
      (2)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Commission shall make a
recommendation to the City Council for approval, disapproval, or modification
of the historic designation and make findings in support of that
recommendation; or the Commission may continue the hearing.
      (3)   An affirmative roll call vote of a majority of the Commission is
required for a recommendation to the City Council.
      (4)   Within 45 days of the final Commission action, the Secretary shall
send a copy of the recommendation, findings, and all submitted materials to the
City Clerk. The City Clerk shall place the Commission's recommendation for
Council consideration on the agenda of the Council. The owner of the property
shall thereafter be given notice of the time and place of the Council hearing
at least ten days prior to the hearing date.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.38.070 Local historic districts.
   (A)   Requests for designation. Designation of a local historic district may
be initiated by the Council, the Commission, or property owners within the
proposed district and shall consist of an initial, preliminary submission and
if recommended by the Commission, a subsequent, formal submission.
   (B)   Initial application.
      (1)   The initial application shall be filed with the Secretary using the
form(s) approved by the Secretary and shall include the following information:
         (a)   Proposed district boundaries.
         (b)   A statement of how the proposed local historic district meets
the designation criteria of §
10.36.040.
      (2)   The initial application shall be the subject of a staff report and
will be scheduled for a determination by the Commission as to whether the
initial application should proceed to a formal application. If the Commission
so recommends, a formal application shall be developed and submitted for
Commission consideration at a future meeting. If the Commission does not so
recommend, no further action shall be taken with respect to the proposed local
historic district.
   (C)   Formal application. The formal application for local historic district
designation consideration must have written consent from a majority of the
property owners within the proposed district for the application to be
considered complete. For purposes of determining whether a majority of property
owners have consented, each property owner is entitled to one vote. Owners of
more than one property within the proposed district are entitled to one vote
per property, and multiple owners of a single property are collectively
entitled to one vote. A formal application shall be filed by the applicant with
form(s) approved by the Secretary, which shall include the following
information:
      (1)   A clearly defined and explained boundary for the proposed district
is shown on an assessor's map or maps.
      (2)   A concise description of the general physical or historical
elements (buildings, structures, objects, and sites) and qualities that make
this area a local historic district with a description of building types,
architectural styles, and periods represented in the proposed district.
      (3)   A concise statement that clearly documents why the proposed
district has significance (areas of significance that reflect the proposed
district's historic importance), the period of time for which it is
significant, why it substantially meets local historic district criteria for
listing as set forth in §
10.38.040(B) and, if applicable, why it substantially meets National Register
historic district criteria for listing as set forth in §
10.38.040(C).
      (4)   A definition of what types of buildings contribute and do not
contribute to the significance of the proposed local historic district as well
as an estimate of the percentage of buildings within the proposed district that
do not contribute to its significance.
      (5)   A map illustrating all buildings in the proposed district with an
identification of contributing and non-contributing resources.
      (6)   Photographs of streetscapes in the proposed district and the
contributing and non-contributing resources.
      (7)   Completed Department of Parks and Recreation #523 forms for each
building, structure, object, or site within the proposed local historic
district, which also identify the potential contributors and non-contributors
to the district.
      (8)   Whether the application is seeking the designation of a National
Register historic district or only the designation of a local historic
district.
      (9)   The signed property owners' consent form, which shall clearly
indicate the name, district property address, district property parcel number,
and mailing address of each consenting property owner.
   (D)   Procedural requirements in advance of the hearing.
      (1)   The formal application and all supporting information shall be
reviewed by the Secretary for adequacy and completeness under the requirements
of this section. The Commission shall be responsible for determining whether
the formal application has been consented to by a majority of the property
owners within the proposed district as required by this chapter. A hearing on
the application will be scheduled by the Secretary after it has been determined
that the application is adequate and complete.
      (2)   A hearing notice shall be mailed to the owners of all properties
within the proposal district at the addresses shown on the latest assessment
roll and published once in a local newspaper of general circulation not less
than ten days prior to the date of the hearing. The Secretary may also give
such additional notices as he or she deems desirable and practicable.
      (3)   No permit shall be issued by the city for the undertaking of any
alteration, construction, grading, demolition, or removal of any property
within a proposed historic district, and all property owners and/or their
representatives shall be prohibited from undertaking any such work for 90 days
from the date the Commission Secretary mails the initial notice of hearing to
determine local historic district designation to the property owners and/or
their authorized representatives. If no final action has been taken as to the
proposed local historic district designation within the 90-day period, said
restrictions shall be removed, unless the Commission, with the consent of the
property owners and/or their authorized representatives, elects to continue its
consideration of the local historic district designation. If the Commission,
with the consent of the property owners and/or their authorized
representatives, makes such an election, said restrictions shall remain against
the properties in the proposed local historic district until final action.
Nothing in this provision shall be construed as a prohibition or infringement
on the legal use of properties within the proposed historic district pending
consideration by the Commission.
   (E)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the construction,
grading, alteration, demolition, or removal of any structure or other feature,
where a permit for the performance of such work was issued prior to the date of
notice of hearing to consider the designation of the local historic district,
and where such permit has not expired or been canceled or revoked, provided
that construction is started and diligently pursued to completion in accordance
with the building code.
   (F)   Commission hearing.
      (1)   The Commission shall review all materials prepared and submitted
and may vote on the designation recommendation.
      (2)   Any property owner or his or her representative may make a
presentation to the Commission on the issue of whether his or her property
should be considered as a contributor or non-contributor to the proposed
district and on the issue of whether or not the district should be formed.
      (3)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Commission shall recommend to
the Council approval, disapproval, or modification of the proposal for local
historic district designation; make findings in support of that recommendation;
make findings on issues or concerns raised by any individual property owner;
identify any property owner objecting to the inclusion of their property within
the district; or the Commission may continue the hearing.
      (4)   An affirmative roll call vote of a majority of the Commission is
required for a recommendation to the Council.
      (5)   Within 45 days of the final Commission action, the Secretary shall
send a copy of the recommendation, findings, and all submitted materials to the
City Clerk. The City Clerk shall place the Commission's recommendation for
Council consideration on the agenda of the Council. The owners and/or
authorized representatives of all of the properties within the proposed local
historic district boundaries shall thereafter be given notice of the time and
place of the Council hearing at least ten days prior to the hearing date.
   (G)   Adoption of a Preservation/District Plan. After the adoption of the
designation for a historic district by the Council pursuant to §
10.36.080, the applicant(s) shall have 90 days to develop a Preservation/
District Plan which will set forth the manner in which the preservation
objectives of the local historic district will be met. The Plan must include
but is not limited to:
      (1)   A statement of significance that includes a description of
contributing resources and significant elements.
      (2)   The goals and objectives of the proposed district.
      (3)   The means by which preservation objectives will be enforced:
         (a)   A proposed Design Review Committee with all conditions for
formation, membership, and operations specified.
         (b)   The Planning Commission serving as the Design Review Committee
for the local historic district.
         (c)   An Architectural Plan Design Review Committee with all
conditions for formation, membership, and operations specified.
      (4)   Identification of the standards and guidelines that will be applied
to design review within the district.
      (5)   The activities regulated by the Preservation/District Plan that
shall exclude activities determined exempt under this chapter.
      (6)   The provision of an annual report to the Commission on compliance
with and implementation of the Preservation/District Plan.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.38.080 National Register of historic districts or structures.
   (A)   Requests for recommendation. Recommendation to designate a local
historic district or a structure to the National Register of Historic Places
may be requested by more than 50% of the property owners within such historic
district or by the Commission or Council.
   (B)   Procedural requirements in advance of the hearing.
      (1)   An application and all supporting information shall be reviewed by
the Secretary for adequacy and completeness under the requirements of this
chapter and the National Register of Historic Places.
      (2)   Notice of the time, place, and purpose of such hearing will be
mailed to the owners of all properties within the designated local historic
district or structure proposed for recommendation as a National Register
Historic District at the addresses shown on the latest assessment roll and
published once in a local newspaper of general circulation not less than ten
days prior to the date of the hearing. The Secretary may also give such
additional notices as deemed necessary.
      (3)   The Secretary shall prepare a staff report addressing the
consequences and procedural requirements of listing a local historic district
or structure on the National Register of Historic Places.
   (C)   Commission hearing.
      (1)   The Commission shall review all materials prepared and submitted
and may vote on the district recommendation.
      (2)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Commission shall recommend to
the Council approval, disapproval, or modification of the proposal for the
National Register historic district or structure and make findings in support
of that recommendation.
      (3)   Within 30 days of the final Commission action, the Secretary shall
send a copy of the recommendation, findings, and all submitted materials to the
City Council.
      (4)   The owners of all properties within the proposed National Register
historic district boundaries shall thereafter be given notice of the time and
place of the Council hearing at least ten days prior to the hearing date.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.38.090 Adoption by Council.
   (A)   The sole authority to declare historic resources or historic districts
and to endorse local historic districts or structures to the National Register
of Historic Places shall be vested in the City Council and shall be exercised
only after completion of the Commission's responsibilities under the
designation process set forth above in §
10.38.050.
   (B)   Within 30 days following receipt by the City Clerk of the Commission's
recommendations or as soon thereafter as is practicable, a hearing shall be set
by the Clerk and held by the City Council. Following such hearing, the City
Council shall adopt, modify, or reject the designation recommended by the
Commission and, in the instance of a district designation, make findings as to
which properties shall be considered contributors and non-contributors to the
district. In the alternative, the City Council may continue its consideration
of the matter or, in the event that new information is presented, refer the
proposed designation to the Commission for further hearings, consideration, or
study within a period of time designated by the City Council. Adoption of the
designation shall be made by resolution, which shall contain findings of fact.
   (C)   Within ten days of the Council's decision, notice thereof shall be
mailed by the Secretary to the owner of record of each property proposed for
designation at the address shown on the latest assessment roll and to such
other persons that the Secretary may deem appropriate.
   (D)   No proposal for designation once considered and disapproved by the
Council shall be reconsidered except upon the affirmative vote of four Council
members. Any decision to reconsider shall be treated as a new proposal for
designation pursuant to §§
10.36.060,
10.36.070, or
10.36.080.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.38.100 Amendment or rescission of designation.
   The City Council may amend or rescind any designation of a historic
resource, a historic district, a contributor to a historic district, or a non-
contributor to a historic district in the same manner and procedure as was
followed in the original designation. This action shall result from new
information, the discovery of earlier misinformation, or a change of
circumstances, conditions, or factors that justified the change in the
designation of the resource or district.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.38.110 Local Register of Historic Resources.
   Ordinances adopting designations of historic resources and local historic
districts shall collectively be known as the Local Register of Historic
Resources. The local register shall be kept on file with the Secretary, who
shall transmit copies to the various city officers.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.38.120 Deletion of demolished, relocated, or rescinded designated historic
resources.
   When a designated historic resource has been demolished or relocated outside
the city limits or when its designation has been rescinded pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, the Secretary, upon notice thereof, shall cause
such resource to be deleted from the Local Register of Historic Resources and
from the Historic Property Data File for the City of Tulare maintained by the
State Office of Historic Preservation (SHPO). Upon such deletions and such
rescission, the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to encumber or
otherwise restrict the use of such property.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.38.130 Historic resource permit review process.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, association,
partnership, or other legal entity to directly or indirectly alter, remodel,
demolish, grade, remove, construct, reconstruct, or restore any historic
resource without first obtaining a city permit and the approval of the Planning
Commission.
   (B)   Upon receipt of an application or proposal for a demolition, grading,
removal, or building permit for any historic resource, the city department or
agency receiving same shall, within five calendar days, notify the Secretary
and forward said permit application or proposal and accompanying documentation
to the Secretary and shall not process the application or proposal without the
authorization of the Commission. The Commission may approve non-substantial
alterations to the historic resource based on the application presented.
   (C)   Any application or proposal that proposes the substantial alteration
of a historic resource shall also be referred to the Secretary or his or her
designee for review.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the ordinary
maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on any
historic resource covered by this chapter that does not involve a change in
design, materials, or external appearance.
   (E)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the Secretary
from issuing a building permit if he or she determines that demolition,
removal, or substantial alteration of the historic resource is immediately
necessary to protect the public health, safety, or general welfare.
   (F)   After consideration of all evidence and testimony, the Commission
shall have the authority to approve, deny or approve with modifications, any
application or proposal.
   (G)   No application or proposal shall be approved or approved with
modifications unless the Commission makes the following findings:
      (1)   The proposed work is found to be consistent with the purposes of
this chapter and the Secretary of the Interior's Standards, and not detrimental
to the special historical, architectural, or aesthetic interest or value of the
historic resource.
      (2)   The action proposed is necessary to correct an unsafe or dangerous
condition on the property.
      (3)   Denial of the application will result in unreasonable economic
hardship to the owner. In order to approve the application, the Commission must
find facts and circumstances, not of the applicant's own making, which
establish that there are no feasible measures that can be taken that will
enable the property owner to make a reasonable, economically beneficial use of
the property or derive a reasonable economic return from the property in its
current form.
      (4)   The site is required for public use, which will directly benefit
the public health, safety, and welfare and will be of more benefit to the
public than the historic resource.
      (5)   For applications for relocation of a historic resource, the
Commission shall find that one or more of the above conditions exist, that
relocation will not destroy the historical, architectural, or aesthetic value
of the resource, and that the relocation is part of a definitive series of
actions which will assure the preservation of the resource.
   (H)   Any finding that denial of the application or proposal will result in
unreasonable economic hardship to the owner, pursuant to this section, may be
based on the following factors:
      (1)   An economic feasibility analysis conducted pursuant to this section
shall include the determination of an "after-rehabilitation" value of the
property calculated on an income approach utilizing the capitalization rate
determined appropriate by the city. This "after-rehabilitation" value shall be
determined in the following manner:
         (a)   The potential residential or commercial rental rate(s) that the
property could generate after an appropriate rehabilitation shall be determined
by a review of current market rates for comparable properties within comparable
neighborhoods.
         (b)   The potential annual net income that could be generated by the
property after an appropriate rehabilitation, taking into consideration
standard vacancy and expense factors, shall be determined.
         (c)   The appropriate capitalization rate shall be applied to the
potential annual net income to determine the "after-rehabilitation" value of
the property.
      (2)   The fair market value of the land, exclusive of improvements and
without development restrictions pursuant to this chapter, shall be determined
by a standard appraisal.
      (3)   The monetary cost of an appropriate rehabilitation of the resource,
in accordance with the standards of this chapter, shall be determined by
professionals qualified to make such a determination.
      (4)   If the fair market value of the land, combined with the costs of
rehabilitation, exceeds the "after-rehabilitation" value of the property by
more than 20%, the Commission shall find that denial of the application will
result in an unreasonable economic hardship to the owner.
   (I)   If the Commission determines a permit should not be issued for the
demolition, alteration, relocation, or new construction, or the Council on
appeal concurs, a new application affecting the same property may be submitted
during the 12-month period after the disapproval only if a substantial change
is made in the plans for the project.
   (J)   The Commission shall give written notice of the decision regarding the
regulated permit to the property owner/applicant and to the city. The notice
shall contain the Commission's findings in support thereof.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.38.140 Historic district permit review process.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, association,
partnership, or other legal entity to directly or indirectly alter, remodel,
demolish, grade, remove, construct, reconstruct, or restore any property within
any historic district without first obtaining a city permit and written
approval of the Planning Commission.
   (B)   Upon receipt of an application or proposal for a demolition, grading,
removal, or building permit for any property within any historic district, the
city department or agency receiving same shall, within five calendar days,
notify the Secretary and forward said permit application or proposal and
accompanying documentation to the Secretary and shall not process the permit or
proposal without the authorization of the Commission. The Commission may
approve non-substantial alterations to the property based on the application
presented.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the ordinary
maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on any
property covered by this chapter that does not involve a change in design,
materials, or external appearance.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the Director
from issuing a building permit if it is determined that demolition, removal, or
substantial alteration of a property within any historic district is
immediately necessary to protect the public health, safety, or general welfare.
   (E)   After consideration of the final environmental document, all evidence,
and testimony, the Commission shall have the authority to approve, deny, or
approve, with modifications, any proposed application or permit application.
   (F)   No application shall be approved with modifications unless the
Commission makes the following findings:
      (1)   For a contributor to any historic district, the proposed work is
found to be consistent with the general purposes of this chapter and the
Secretary of the Interior's Standards, not detrimental to the special
historical, architectural, or aesthetic interest or value of the Contributor or
the respective historic district in general and consistent with the district's
adopted design standards.
      (2)   For a non-contributor to any historic district, the proposed work
is found not detrimental to the historical or architectural values of the
respective historic district in general and consistent with the district's
adopted design standards.
      (3)   For new in-fill construction within any historic district, the
proposed work is found not detrimental to the historical or architectural
values of the respective historic district in general and consistent with the
district's adopted design standards.
      (4)   The action proposed is necessary to correct an unsafe or dangerous
condition on the property.
      (5)   Denial of the application will result in unreasonable economic
hardship to the owner. In order to approve the application, the Commission must
find facts and circumstances, not of the applicant's own making, which
establish that there are no feasible measures that can be taken that will
enable the property owner to make a reasonable, economically beneficial use of
the property or derive a reasonable economic return from the property in its
current form.
      (6)   For applications for relocation of a contributor from any historic
district, the Commission shall find that one or more of the above conditions
exist, that relocation will not destroy the historical, architectural, or
aesthetic value of the resource, and that the relocation is part of a
definitive series of actions which will assure the preservation of the
resource.
   (G)   Any finding that denial of the permit application will result in
unreasonable economic hardship to the owner, pursuant to division (F)(5) above,
may be based upon the application of the following factors:
      (1)   An economic feasibility analysis conducted pursuant to this section
shall include the determination of an "after-rehabilitation" value of the
property calculated on an income approach utilizing the capitalization rate
determined appropriate by the Development Services. This "after-rehabilitation"
value shall be determined in the following manner:
         (a)   The potential residential or commercial rental rate(s) that
could be generated by the property after an appropriate rehabilitation shall be
determined by a review of current market rates for comparable properties within
comparable neighborhoods.
         (b)   The potential annual net income that could be generated by the
property after an appropriate rehabilitation, taking into consideration
standard vacancy and expense factors, shall be determined.
         (c)   The appropriate capitalization rate shall be applied to the
potential annual net income to determine the "after-rehabilitation" value of
the property.
      (2)   The fair market value of the land, exclusive of improvements and
without development restrictions pursuant to this chapter, shall be determined
by a standard appraisal.
      (3)   The monetary cost of an appropriate rehabilitation of the resource,
in accordance with the standards of this chapter, shall be determined by
professionals qualified to make such a determination.
      (4)   If the fair market value of the land, combined with the costs of
rehabilitation, exceeds the "after-rehabilitation" value of the property by
more than 20%, the Commission shall find that denial of the application will
result in an unreasonable economic hardship to the owner.
   (H)   A decision relating to the approval with modifications or disapproval
of an application for any permit may be appealed pursuant to §
10.36.160.
   (I)   If the Commission determines a permit should not be issued for the
demolition, alteration, relocation, or new construction, or the City Council on
appeal concurs, a new application affecting the same property may be submitted
during the 12-month period after the disapproval only if a substantial change
is made in the plans for the project.
   (J)   The Secretary shall give written notice of the decision regarding the
regulated permit to the property owner/applicant. The notice shall contain the
Commission's findings in support thereof.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.38.150 Conditional uses.
   (A)   Conditional uses in the Historic Site and Historic Neighborhood
Overlay zone shall include all uses that are conditional in the base zoning
district or are listed as follows:
      (1)   Art and antique shops.
      (2)   Art and craft schools.
      (3)   Art supply and hobby shops.
      (4)   Bed and breakfast establishments.
      (5)   Beauty salons and barber shops.
      (6)   Floral shops.
      (7)   Gift and souvenir stores.
      (8)   Meeting halls.
      (9)   Multi-family dwellings, not exceeding one unit per 3,000 square
feet.
      (10)   Music or dance studios.
      (11)   Photography studios.
      (12)   Offices.
      (13)   Restaurants.
      (14)   Stamp and coin stores.
      (15)   Shoe repair shop.
      (16)   Travel bureaus.
      (17)   Any other use deemed appropriate by the Planning Commission.
   (B)   The above conditional uses are allowed in residential zones subject to
securing a conditional use permit pursuant to
Chapter 10.80.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.38.160 Appeal procedure.
   All appeals shall be considered pursuant to
Chapter 10.70.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.38.170 Finality of decision.
   Any decision of the Council under this chapter shall be final. Any decision
of the Commission under §§
10.36.130 or
10.36.140 shall become final if no appeal is taken from such order or decision
within the time limits prescribed by the applicable appeal provision of this
chapter. No permit regulated by the provisions of this chapter shall be issued,
nor shall any rights vest therein, until the decision of the Commission is
final or any appeal therefrom is disposed of in the manner prescribed by this
chapter.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.38.180 Substandard buildings.
   (A)   The Building Official shall notify the Secretary whenever such
official declares a historic resource or any structure within a historic
district to be substandard or unsafe pursuant to the California Building Code.
   (B)   Where any historic resource has been declared substandard and must be
demolished for health and safety reasons, the Secretary shall notify the
Planning Commission and cause such resource to be removed from any historic
list.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.38.190 Advice and guidance to property owners.
   (A)   The Commission may render advice and guidance with respect to any
proposed work not requiring a city permit on any designated historic resource
or any property within any historic district.
   (B)   Examples of work referred to above are painting and repainting of
exterior surfaces, fencing, landscaping, and installation of lighting fixtures.
In rendering such advice and guidance, the Commission shall be guided by the
purposes and standards of this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.38.200 Property owned by public agencies.
   (A)   The Commission shall take appropriate steps to notify all public
agencies and public utilities that own or may acquire property, including
easements and public rights-of-way, in the city about the existence and
character of designated historic resources and historic districts, and the
Commission shall cause a current record of such resources and districts to be
maintained with each such public agency and public utility. All such designated
resources and districts shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter
regardless of ownership.
   (B)   In the case of publicly owned properties that are not subject to the
permit review procedures of the city, including this chapter, but are more than
50 years of age or are located within any historic district, the agency owning
the said property is encouraged to seek the advice of the Commission prior to
approval or authorization of any construction, alteration, or demolition
thereon, including the use and placement of street furniture, signs, lighting,
and landscaping; and, the Commission shall render a report to the owner as
expeditiously as possible, based on the purposes and standards in this chapter.
If the Commission review of a public project involving construction,
alteration, or demolition of any building, structure, object, or site is
required under any other law, the Commission may render the report referred to
in this section to such public agencies without specific request therefor.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.38.210 Fire and building codes.
   Issuance of a permit in conformance with this chapter shall not alter
conformance requirements with the other standards and requirements of this
chapter. The Director and the Fire Marshal shall liberally construe and apply
all pertinent codes, including the State Historical Building Code and the
California Building Code so as to effectuate the purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.38.220 Minimum maintenance.
   (A)   All designated historic resources, including contributors to any
historic district, shall be preserved against decay and deterioration, kept in
a state of good repair, and free from structural defects. The purpose of this
section is to prevent an owner or other person having legal custody and control
over a property from facilitating the demolition of a historic resource by
neglecting it and by permitting damage to it by weather and vandalism.
   (B)   Consistent with all other state and city codes requiring that
buildings and structures be kept in good repair, the owner or other person
having legal custody and control of a property shall repair such building or
structure if it is found to have any of the following defects:
      (1)   Building elements so attached that they may fall and injure members
of the public or property.
      (2)   Deteriorated or inadequate foundation.
      (3)   Defective or deteriorated flooring.
      (4)   Members of walls, partitions, or other vertical supports that
split, lean, list, or buckle due to defective material or deterioration.
      (5)   Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling or roof supports, or other
horizontal members that sag, split, or buckle due to defective materials or
deterioration.
      (6)   Fireplaces or chimneys that list, bulge, or settle due to defective
material or deterioration.
      (7)   Deteriorated, crumbling, or loose exterior plaster.
      (8)   Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs,
foundations, or floors, including broken windows or doors.
      (9)   Defective or lack of weather protection for exterior wall
coverings, including lack of paint, or weathering due to lack of paint or other
protective covering.
      (10)   Any fault, defect, or deterioration in the building that renders
it structurally unsafe or not properly watertight.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.38.230 Status of properties previously designated.
   (A)   All historic properties previously designated under this chapter shall
remain unless otherwise removed as a historic property.
   (B)   All existing "H" overlay properties shall be considered historic
resources.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.38.240 Civil and criminal penalties.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or maintain violations of any
of the provisions of this chapter by undertaking the alteration, grading,
removal, demolition, or partial demolition of a historic resource or a
building, structure, object, or site within a historic district without first
obtaining the written approval of the Secretary, Commission or Council as
provided in this chapter, or to defy any order or decision rendered by the
Commission or Council. Any violations of this chapter may be enforced as
provided in this code, except in the case of administrative citations issued
pursuant to
Chapter 1.61 of the Municipal Code. As part of any enforcement proceeding,
violators may be required to reasonably restore the building, structure,
object, or site to its appearance or condition prior to the violation under the
guidance of the Community Development Department.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.38.250 Severability.
   If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is for any
reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portion of this chapter. The Council hereby declares that it would
have passed this chapter and adopted this chapter and each section, sentence,
clause, or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more
sections, divisions, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared invalid or
unconstitutional.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.40: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONE
   Section
   
10.40.010   Purpose.
   
10.40.020   Application procedure.
   
10.40.030   Allowed planned unit developments.
   
10.40.040   Prohibited planned unit developments.
   
10.40.050   Site area.
   
10.40.060   Small Lot Residential PUD.
   
10.40.070   Findings.
   
10.40.080   Conditions of approval.
   
10.40.090   Notice of decision.
   
10.40.100   Appeals.
   
10.40.110   Life of permits and extensions of time.
   
10.40.120   Revocation.
§ 10.40.010 Purpose.
   A planned unit development (PUD) can achieve a more functional,
aesthetically pleasing, and harmonious living and working environment within
the city that otherwise might not be possible by strict adherence to the
provisions of this title. The Planned Unit Development Overlay zone is designed
to produce a comprehensive development that is equal to or better than that
resulting from residential development developed under more traditional zoning
regulations.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.40.020 Application procedure.
   (A)   Applications for a planned unit development shall be processed
consistent with
Chapter 10.86, Zoning Ordinance Amendments. Any single-family residential zone
district contained in this chapter may be combined with the Planned Unit
Development Overlay zone. The tentative subdivision map or residential
development plan that accompanies an application for reclassification shall be
reviewed by the Director to determine consistency with the provisions of this
chapter. The map or plan shall include the following information:
      (1)   Legal description and boundary survey map of the exterior
boundaries of the parcel to be developed.
      (2)   Plot plan of land to be developed, showing residential uses by
type, number and size; residential lots by type, number and size; open space
uses; streets, rights-of-way and easements; and proposed on-site and off-site
improvements, including landscaping, walls and fences, street and sidewalk
improvements, lighting and infrastructure.
      (3)   A grading and drainage plan, showing elevations, directions of
water flow, and storm drainage improvements.
      (4)   Concept plans that demonstrate the overall scope of the residential
development.
      (5)   A preliminary utilities and title report.
      (6)   The anticipated timing of each development phase.
      (7)   Elevation drawings of residential structures in the development.
   (B)   Zone districts that are combined with the Planned Unit Development
Overlay zone shall be designated on the Official Zoning Map with the base zone
district followed by the Planned Unit Development Overlay zone notation (PUD).
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.40.030 Allowed planned unit developments.
   A planned unit development may be utilized to achieve one or more of the
following objectives:
   (A)   To permit development intensity greater than would otherwise be
permitted by the implementation of the standards of the zone district in which
the site is located.
   (B)   To permit the lot patterns of size, shape, and layout that would
otherwise not be permitted by the standards of the zone district in which the
site is located and allow for averaging of lot sizes to create greater
flexibility in subdivision design.
   (C)   To modify the required building setbacks, distances between
structures, and landscaped areas that would otherwise be required by this
title.
   (D)   To permit Small Lot Residential developments in accordance with §
10.40.060 below.
   (E)   To permit a site within more than one zone district to mix the
permitted or conditionally permitted land uses of both zones within the site
without regard to the zone district boundary.
   (F)   Allow for the placement of duplexes on corner lots within single-
family residential developments.
   (G)   Provide for the integration of neighborhood parks.
   (H)   To permit variations to the standard local street cross-sections
within private gated neighborhoods subject to the review and approval of the
City Engineer.
   (I)   To permit private streets, residential lots fronting on a private
street, and gated neighborhoods.
   (J)   To reduce the amount of required parking spaces when spaces are shared
among multiple land uses.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.40.040 Prohibited planned unit developments.
   A planned unit development is prohibited from being used to achieve one or
more of the following:
   (A)   To add land uses that are not otherwise permitted in the zone district
in which the PUD is located.
   (B)   To increase residential densities beyond the maximum allowed by the
General Plan.
   (C)   To modify sign standards or provisions in
Chapter 10.56.
   (D)   To modify parking and loading standards or provisions in
Chapter 10.54, except as stated in §
10.40.030.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.40.050 Site area.
   (A)   The minimum site area for a planned unit development shall be four
acres, except that there shall be no minimum site area requirements if the site
is an infill development site.
   (B)   The site area may be made up of more than one parcel, however, all
parcels in the site area shall be contiguous.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.40.060 Small Lot Residential PUD.
   (A)   The purpose of the Small Lot Residential PUD is to provide living
areas within the city where development is proposed to achieve compact
development with lot sizes in the range of 3,200 square feet to 4,000 square
feet.
   (B)   The objectives of the Small Lot Residential PUD are:
      (1)   The development of compact single-family residential neighborhoods
at densities typically in the six to eight units per acre range.
      (2)   The development of compact residential neighborhoods that exhibit
high standards of design and are within close proximity to private or public
parks or amenities.
      (3)   To provide for a compact development with narrow lot widths that
minimize the dominant characteristics of garages on the streetscape.
      (4)   To provide for an additional housing type and address issues of
affordability.
   (C)   A Small Lot Residential development may be located on any land
designated R-1-4, low density residential, on the Official Zoning Map.
   (D)   Each small lot residential development shall submit a PUD application
for approval by the Planning Commission.
   (E)   Development standards shall be as follows:
      (1)   Minimum site area: 3,200 square feet.
      (2)   Minimum lot width: 40 feet if there is no alley, but 30 feet if
there is an alley.
      (3)   Minimum lot depth: 65 feet.
      (4)   Density: no more than one dwelling shall be located on each parcel
with the exception of ADUs consistent with §
10.60.030.
      (5)   Lot coverage: 60% maximum including the dwelling and the garage.
Porches, driveways, patios, and other non-landscaped areas are excluded.
      (6)   Front building setback: no less than seven feet and no more than 12
feet. Garages. Porches cannot encroach into the minimum front setback area.
      (7)   Rear building setback: a minimum of four feet, except no rear yard
is required if the rear property line abuts an ally.
      (8)   Interior side building setback: a minimum of four feet on each side
to provide a minimum of eight feet of separation between buildings. Zero lot
lines can be approved with an eight-foot separation. An additional two feet of
setback shall be provided for each additional story of building height.
      (9)   Street side yard setbacks on corner lots shall comply with front
yard setbacks.
      (10)   Building height: the maximum height of a permitted use and its
accessory structures is 30 feet. A maximum height of 40 feet may be approved
through a conditional use permit.
      (11)   Fences, walls, and hedges shall be the same as required in the R-
1-4 zone.
      (12)   Off-street parking:
         (a)   Each unit shall provide for a two-car garage. Each garage shall
have a minimum depth of 20 feet and a minimum width of 18 feet. All parking
spaces and driveways shall be paved in accordance with
Chapter 10.54.
         (b)   A garage facing an alley shall have a four-foot apron.
         (c)   A garage facing a courtyard shall have an apron of not less than
six feet or more than 18 feet.
         (d)   A garage facing a street shall be setback 20 feet from the
property line and shall be recessed at least five feet from the front building
elevation (including porches). If development establishes private streets or
sidewalks, garages facing a street shall provide a 20-foot apron. The 20-foot
apron shall not include any part of the sidewalk. The garage shall not extend
more than 50% of the lot width.
      (13)   New development is required to install the public infrastructure
necessary to adequately serve the project, based on requirements of the City
Engineer, including sewer, water, storm drainage facilities lines, curbs,
gutters, sidewalks, street paving, and street lighting. These improvements
shall be constructed consistent with requirements shown in the City of Tulare
Standards and Specifications and shall be installed prior to occupancy of any
structures on the site.
      (14)   Alley/driveways: each alley or private driveway shall be 20 feet
in width with an approved turning radius to accommodate garbage trucks. Each
alley/driveway shall be designed to allow for the exiting of garbage trucks.
   (F)   Design standards shall be as follows:
      (1)   Horizontal and vertical relief shall be provided for the second and
third floors. Acceptable elements include recessed stories, awnings, recessed
wall planes, and architectural details that break up flat elevation expanses.
      (2)   Mirror house plans shall not be provided on consecutive lots.
      (3)   Guest parking shall be provided on-site for the development of 20
units or more at a ratio of one guest space per five units. Parking areas in
driveways shall not be counted as guest parking.
      (4)   No carports are allowed as garages.
      (5)   If off-street parking is provided on the driveways, parking shall
be designed as to not interfere with pedestrian circulation along the sidewalk.
      (6)   Each unit that proposes a "common" wall with an adjacent unit shall
have attic separation and independent water meters and sewer laterals.
      (7)   Utility infrastructure shall be located in areas that are not
highly visible from public streets.
      (8)   Private streets may be allowed with 36 feet curb to curb and a six-
foot adjacent sidewalk for a total right-of-way of 48 feet.
      (9)   Where private streets and common areas are proposed, a Home Owners
Association (HOA) or similar entity shall be established.
      (10)   Small lot residential developments accessing a central courtyard
area serving no more than six units shall provide a driveway width of 20 feet
in addition to any garage apron and landscape setback.
      (11)   When the garage is provided in the front, two houses shall not be
designed to have their garages abutting each other and therefore having a
common wall. Mirror house plans shall never be provided in consecutive lots.
      (12)   The garage, whether located in the front or the rear, shall always
be designed as an enclosed building unit, with a designed door that has a
similar architectural detail as the main elevation's theme.
      (13)   The garage roof design shall have a similar architectural
appearance and the same building materials as the house roof.
      (14)   All garages in the rear shall be provided with automatic doors to
facilitate security of residents.
   (G)   Open space design standards shall be as follows:
      (1)   An area of 325 square feet per dwelling unit is required, with a
minimum size of one-half acre. When the overall development area is elongated
or otherwise very irregular, the required open space can be split into two or
more small open spaces.
      (2)   Open space areas shall be centrally located and accessible through
pedestrian trails, bike paths, streets, etc. Average walking distance for
amenities shall be a quarter mile or less.
      (3)   Areas of open space shall be regular and geometrically defined
areas that are usable and where the community can locate tot lots, picnic
areas, recreational activities, etc. Areas leftover of subdivision design
(corner areas, areas otherwise not usable for residential, etc.) do not count
as open space. Lots that were designed for residential use cannot be eliminated
and simply assumed as open space to meet the open space criteria.
      (4)   Water retention basins and drainage retention areas may be
incorporated as controlled recreational-visual areas within the open space when
designed accordingly and not as squared-fenced isolated water bodies.
      (5)   Required open space may be either private or public open space
maintained by an HOA or through the creation of a Landscape/Lighting District
or other city approved maintenance entity.
      (6)   All developments shall provide open space as required by this
section and shall provide in-lieu fees for any remaining Quimby requirement.
Open space provided as part of the development will be credited toward
fulfillment of the subdivision's Quimby Act requirement.
   (H)   Street design standards shall be as follows:
      (1)   Street design shall foster the interconnectivity of streets and
blocks to favor both automobile and pedestrian circulation.
      (2)   All streets shall be provided with sidewalks.
      (3)   The right-of-way of local streets shall meet the adopted city
standard.
      (4)   Travel lanes shall be in compliance with adopted city standards.
      (5)   Landscape provided along local roads shall be designed with trees
specified in the adopted street tree species list.
   (I)   Alley design standards shall be as follows:
      (1)   Alleys shall be designed with a minimum clearance of 20 feet for
free circulation of utility trucks.
      (2)   Alleys may have a landscape and apron area with access to the
garage that shall not exceed four-feet-wide.
      (3)   Landscape provided in the alley shall be of species whose foliage
grows vertically so the free access of utility trucks and cars is not impeded.
      (4)   On-street parking in the alley is prohibited.
      (5)   A lighting plan shall be provided with alley design submittals.
   (J)   Streetscape design standards shall be as follows:
      (1)   Each subdivision shall have at least three different floor plans
with three elevations each.
      (2)   Not two identical elevations can be adjacent to each other, and
elevations that mirror to each other shall not be placed consecutively.
      (3)   The roof design of each house shall include various volumetric
elements that compose the entire elevation.
      (4)   The landscape strip along streets shall be provided with at least
one tree per dwelling unit.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.40.070 Findings.
   (A)   Before a planned unit development can be approved, all of the
following findings shall be made by the reviewing authority identified in
Chapter 10.70:
      (1)   That the proposed project is consistent with the purpose and
objectives of this chapter and the zone district in which the project is
located.
      (2)   That the proposed project is consistent with the Tulare General
Plan.
      (3)   The PUD is being proposed to achieve one or more of the objectives
identified in §
10.40.030.
      (4)   The location and design of the PUD and the conditions under which
it would be operated or maintained will not be detrimental to the public
health, safety, or welfare, or materially injurious to properties or
improvements in the vicinity.
      (5)   The location and design of the PUD will not generate more traffic
than the streets in the vicinity can carry without congestion, and will not
overload utilities.
      (6)   That PUD's population density, site area and dimensions, site
coverage, yard spaces, height of structures, distances between structures, off-
street parking and off-street loading facilities, landscaped areas, and street
design will produce an environment of stable and desirable character consistent
with the purpose of this title.
      (7)   The combination of different dwelling types, architectural
appearance, and/or varieties of land uses in the development will complement
each other and will harmonize with the existing and proposed land uses in the
vicinity.
   (B)   A PUD may be denied if the reviewing authority finds one or more of
the findings in this section cannot be made.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.40.080 Conditions of approval.
   The reviewing authority may place conditions of approval on the planned unit
development that promote well-planned neighborhoods, protect the public
interests, health, safety, convenience, or welfare of the city, or that
mitigate any impacts to surrounding properties.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.40.090 Notice of decision.
   A notice of decision of a planned unit development permit shall be processed
consistent with
Chapter 10.70.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.40.100 Appeals.
   Appeals to a decision of the reviewing authority of a planned unit
development permit shall be submitted and processed consistent with the
procedures in
Chapter 10.70.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.40.110 Life of permits and extensions of time.
   The initial life and subsequent extensions of time for a PUD shall be per
Chapter 10.70, except that when any PUD is approved in conjunction with a
tentative subdivision map or parcel map pursuant to Title 16, the PUD shall not
expire unless the tentative subdivision map or parcel map also expires, and an
extension of the tentative subdivision map or parcel shall be deemed to be an
extension of the PUD.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.40.120 Revocation.
   Revocation of an approved PUD shall be conducted consistent with procedures
and notice requirements in
Chapter 10.70.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.42: DOWNTOWN OVERLAY ZONE
   Section
   
10.42.010   Purpose.
   
10.42.020   Application.
   
10.42.030   Permitted and conditional uses.
   
10.42.040   Development standards.
   
10.42.050   Off-street parking.
   
10.42.060   Landscaping.
   
10.42.070   Screening, fences, and walls.
   
10.42.080   Signs.
   
10.42.090   Design standards.
§ 10.42.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of the Downtown Overlay zone is to ensure that Tulare's Downtown
can attract and retain businesses that appeal to residents and visitors alike
and create a welcoming and unique environment that represents the community of
Tulare. The objectives of the Downtown Overlay zone are:
   (A)   Enhance efforts aimed at economic development by fostering an
environment conducive to business success in the downtown area.
   (B)   Generate pride and confidence in the downtown area.
   (C)   Create an attractive environment that is active throughout the day and
evening.
   (D)   Establish downtown development and design standards that will create a
unified, yet distinctive, and attractive urban character that respects the
historical context that has been established and serves the city for the long
term.
   (E)   Present a recognizable, cohesive theme within the downtown with
enhanced streetscapes, distinct landscaping, wayfinding features, and branding
to define the identity of the downtown.
   (F)   Encourage pedestrian activity by facilitating building design that
places retail, restaurant, and entertainment uses on the ground floor.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.42.020 Application.
   (A)   This chapter shall apply to all land within the Downtown Overlay zone,
as defined on the Zoning Map.
   (B)   The requirements of this chapter shall be considered in conjunction
with the requirements of any base zone district. If a conflict exists between
the requirements of the base zone district and this chapter, the requirements
of this chapter shall apply.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.42.030 Permitted and conditional uses.
   (A)   Permitted uses in the Downtown Overlay zone shall include all uses
that are permitted in the base zoning district. The following uses are
permitted in the Downtown Overlay zone, regardless of the base zoning:
      (1)   A combination of permitted uses on one parcel or in shared
buildings.
   (B)   Conditional uses in the Downtown Overlay zone shall include all uses
that are conditional in the base zoning district. The following uses are
allowed with the approval of a conditional use permit in the Downtown Overlay
zone, regardless of the base zoning:
      (1)   Multi-family housing development with an overall density of at
least eight but no more than 29 units per acre.
      (2)   Mixed-use developments that include both commercial and residential
uses on the same parcel.
      (3)   Adjoining parcels with differing base zoning districts or a single
parcel with existing split zoning may be developed as one project that includes
permitted and conditional uses from both base zoning districts without regard
to district boundaries.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.42.040 Development standards.
   The following development standards shall apply to all land and structures
within this district.
   (A)   There shall be no required minimum site area.
   (B)   There shall be no minimum frontage width or depth requirement.
   (C)   There shall be no maximum lot coverage.
   (D)   Setbacks. To the extent practical, new construction shall follow the
prevailing building pattern where buildings are constructed at the front of the
lot with parking situated to the rear or side, as follows:
      (1)   Buildings shall be designed so that at least one-half of the parcel
frontage shall abut a building wall.
      (2)   There shall be no required side building setback, except that
buildings located on corner lots shall be designed so that at least one-half of
the side lot line abuts a building wall.
      (3)   There shall be no required rear building setback.
      (4)   There is no minimum distance between structures required, except
that all building code requirements shall be met.
      (5)   The maximum structure height shall be 60 feet.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.42.050 Off-street parking.
   Off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be provided on
the site for each use as prescribed in
Chapter 10.54. Parking lots shall be developed as identified below:
   (A)   To the extent practical, parking lots shall be located as much as
possible to the rear of buildings.
   (B)   Parking lots located between the front property line and the primary
entrance are prohibited.
   (C)   Parking lots constructed adjacent to any street right-of-way shall be
set back a minimum of five feet from the property line. The parking lot shall
be screened by a minimum four-foot-tall solid wall and landscaping.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.42.060 Landscaping.
   (A)   Landscaping shall be provided for each new use as prescribed in
Chapter 10.52 Landscape Standards.
   (B)   Required landscaping shall be installed prior to final occupancy and
continually maintained pursuant to
Chapter 10.52.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.42.070 Screening, fences, and walls.
   (A)   The fences in the Downtown Overlay zone shall conform to the design
standards provided in §
10.50.040.
   (B)   These regulations do not apply to fences or walls required by
regulations of a state or federal agency, or by the city for reasons of public
safety, or to retaining walls that adjoin land uses.
   (C)   Fences, walls, and hedges may be erected and properly maintained to
the heights identified below and measured from the highest adjoining finish
grade:
      (1)   Maximum fence height shall be seven feet, except for walls
constructed in pedestrian plazas.
      (2)   Materials and colors used for fences and walls shall be
complementary to the materials and colors used in buildings located on the
site.
      (3)   Walls: walls up to 30 inches tall (which can be used for sitting)
may be located on the property line for restaurants or other uses utilizing the
plaza for retailing or other similar outdoor uses.
   (D)   The city reserves the right to remove, at the expense of the owner of
the property or properties enclosed by the fence, any fence in a public
easement in any emergency.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.42.080 Signs.
   Signs placed in the Downtown Overlay zone shall be subject to the
requirements and standards prescribed in
Chapter 10.56.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.42.090 Design standards.
   (A)   Storefront construction. Ground-floor storefronts should have a
minimum of 60% transparent space (windows).
   (B)   Side walls. Blank, solid end walls, or side walls visible from public
view are discouraged. If the walls are necessary (based on interior design),
the structure wall shall receive some form of articulation or "add-on" elements
such as awnings, cornice bands, murals, etc.
   (C)   Facade. The facade appearance of adjacent structures shall be
considered in the design of new buildings to avoid clashes in architectural
style and materials.
   (D)   Roofline. The roofline of buildings shall be considered an important
element in the overall building design. Decorative embellishments at the
roofline such as cornices, or changes in height, material, color, or shape are
encouraged.
   (E)   Canopies and awnings.
      (1)   Canopies and awnings shall respect the character and style of the
structure on which they are located, particularly in the material, color, and
size.
      (2)   Canopies shall be sized so that they do not obscure significant
architectural features or cover transom windows above the canopy.
      (3)   The minimum clearance of a canopy or awning (including any attached
hanging signs) shall be eight feet from the lowest point to the sidewalk.
   (F)   Doors and windows.
      (1)   The design and location of doors and windows shall consider the
architectural character of the surrounding area. The use of simple wood and
glass doors and windows is encouraged. Where aluminum is used, a dark anodized
or baked enamel finish shall be used.
      (2)   Clear glass should be used on ground floor windows to promote
window shopping, visual displays, and pedestrian activity. Tinted glass
allowing a minimum 50% light transmission will be considered only for use in
second-floor windows and above on an individual case basis. The use of
reflective glass is prohibited.
      (3)   Storefront windows should be as large as possible while maintaining
height standards for bulkheads. Maximum bulkhead height for new construction
shall be 42 inches, and minimum bulkhead height shall be 24 inches. Bulkheads
should be accented with decorative tile, finished stone, or other distinctive
material.
      (4)   Replacement windows must always fill the entire opening and
duplicate original patterns.
      (5)   Window patterns in new buildings shall respect existing window
patterns where a distinctive rhythm has been established.
   (G)   Plaza provisions. Plazas shall be developed as identified below:
      (1)   A plaza shall have a minimum size of ten feet deep and the width of
the entire storefront, or an area incorporating at least 650 square feet.
      (2)   A minimum of 80% of the area shall be paved in a decorative paver
or textured, colored concrete. Asphalt paving is prohibited as a plaza paving
material.
   (H)   Lighting.
      (1)   All exterior lighting fixtures shall be designed as part of the
overall architectural theme. Fixtures, standards, and all exposed accessories
shall be harmonious with the building design, the lighting design of adjacent
public spaces, and the overall visual environment of the downtown.
      (2)   Night lighting of buildings shall be selective and focused;
exterior lighting of entire building faces is generally not desirable. Lighting
should highlight entrances, dramatize special architectural features, keynote
repeated features, and use the play of light and shadow to articulate the
facade.
      (3)   Entrances of buildings and parking areas shall be well-illuminated
to enhance safety, identification, and convenience.
      (4)   Recessed building entryways should be illuminated by downlights.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.44: AIRPORT OVERLAY ZONE
   Section
   
10.44.010   Purpose and application.
   
10.44.020   Definitions.
   
10.44.030   Permitted uses.
   
10.44.040   Overlay zone formation.
   
10.44.050   Airport Overlay zones.
   
10.44.060   Airport Zoning Map.
   
10.44.070   Use restrictions.
   
10.44.080   Administration and enforcement.
   
10.44.090   Variances.
§ 10.44.010 Purpose and application.
   (A)   This chapter shall apply to all land within the Airport Overlay (AP)
zone, as defined on the Zoning Map. The purpose of this chapter is to protect
the public health, safety, and welfare in the vicinity of the airport by
minimizing exposure to potential airplane crashes and significant noise levels.
Further, to identify those uses that are compatible in the Airport Overlay zone
and to establish development standards to which development will conform. This
chapter is adopted pursuant to the Airport Approaches Zoning Law of the State
of California (commencing at Cal. Gov't Code § 50485) and the Planning and
Zoning Law of the State of California (commencing at Cal. Gov't Code § 65000).
   (B)   The requirements of this chapter shall be considered in conjunction
with the requirements of any base zone district. If a conflict exists between
the requirements of the base zone district and this chapter, the requirements
of this chapter shall apply.
   (C)   If there is a conflict between this chapter and any other regulations
contained in this title that are applicable to the same area or parcel of land,
whether the conflict is with respect to the height of structures or trees, the
use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement
shall govern and prevail.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.44.020 Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIRPORT. Any area of land designated and set aside for the landing and
taking off of aircraft and utilized or to be utilized in the interest of the
public for such purposes, a map of which has been or is hereafter included as a
part of the Zoning Map of the City of Tulare.
   AIRPORT ELEVATION. The elevation of the highest point on the usable or
designed runway as established by the City Engineer.
   AIRPORT HAZARD. Any structure, tree, or use of land that obstructs the
airspace required for the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at an
airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or taking off of aircraft.
   AIRPORT REFERENCE POINT. The point established at the approximate geographic
center of the airport landing area and so designated.
   HEIGHT. Used for the purpose of determining height limits in all zones set
forth in this chapter, the vertical elevation in feet above the established
airport elevation unless otherwise stated.
   HELIPORT PRIMARY SURFACE. The area of the primary surface coincides in size
and shape with the designated landing and takeoff area of a heliport (runway).
This surface is a horizontal plane at the elevation of the established heliport
elevation.
   LANDING AREA. The area of an airport used, or to be used, for the landing,
taking off, or taxiing of aircraft.
   NON-CONFORMING USE. Any structure, tree, or use of land that does not
conform to the provisions of this chapter at the time this chapter is made
applicable to a particular airport.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, company
association, joint stock association, city, county, or district, and includes
any trustee, receiver, assignee, or other similar representative thereof.
   PRIMARY SURFACE. A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the
runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 250
feet beyond each end of that runway; but when the runway has no specially
prepared hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The
width of the primary surface of a runway will be that width prescribed in Part
77 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) for the most precise approach
existing or planned for either end of that runway. The elevation of any point
on a primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the
runway centerline.
   RUNWAY. The paved surface of an airport landing area designated for the
landing or taking off of an aircraft.
   STOL PRIMARY SURFACE. Any imaginary plane, 300 feet wide, centered on the
runway. Its length extends 100 feet beyond each runway end. The elevation of
any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest
point on the runway centerline.
   STRUCTURE. Any object constructed, installed, or placed on real property by
humans including, but not limited to buildings, towers, smokestacks, and
overhead lines.
   UTILITY RUNWAY. A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by
propeller-driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and less.
   VISUAL RUNWAY. A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using
visual approach procedures with no straight-in instrument approach procedure
and no instrument designation indicated on an FAA approval airport layout plan,
a military service's approved military airport layout plan or by any planning
document submitted to the FAA by a competent authority.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.44.030 Permitted uses.
   (A)   Permitted uses in the Airport Overlay zone shall include all uses that
are permitted in the base zoning district.
   (B)   Conditional uses in the Airport Overlay zone shall include all uses
that are conditional in the base zoning district.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.44.040 Overlay zone formation.
   (A)   The Airport Overlay zone may be combined with any other zone district
contained on the Official Zoning Map. Zone districts that are combined with the
Airport District shall be designated on the Official Zoning Map with the base
zone district followed by the Airport Overlay zone notation (AP). For example,
land that is zoned Public Lands and is in the Airport Overlay zone will have
the notation PL-(AP).
   (B)   The Airport Zoning Map, which is a part of the Official Zoning Map,
will delineate the different zones that are associated with the Airport Overlay
zone. The classification of property to the Airport Overlay zone shall be
processed consistent with Chapter 10.86, Zoning Ordinance Amendments, with the
Airport Overlay zone. Any zone district contained in this title may be combined
with the Airport Overlay zone.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.44.050 Airport Overlay zones.
   (A)   In order to carry the provisions of this chapter, are hereby created
and established certain airport zones that include all of the land lying within
the Airport Overlay zone including, approach zones, transitional zones,
horizontal zones, and conical zones. An area located in more than one of the
following zones is considered to be only the zone with a more restrictive
height limitation.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no structure or tree
shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow, or be maintained in any zone
created by this chapter to a height in excess of the applicable height limits
herein established for the zone. The applicable height limitations are hereby
established for each zone in question as follows:
      (1)   Utility Runway Visual Approach zone. The inner edge of this
approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and shall have a
width as specified on the Airport Zoning Map. The approach zone expands outward
uniformly to a width of 1,250 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from
the primary surface at a slope upward of 25 feet horizontally for each foot
vertically. The slope begins at the end of and at the same elevation as the
primary surface and extends to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the
extended runway centerline.
      (2)   Heliport Visual Flight Rules (VFR) Approach zone. The inner edge of
this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and shall
have a width as specified on the Airport Zoning Map. The approach zone expands
outward uniformly to a width of 500 feet at a horizontal distance of 4,000
feet from the primary surface at a slope upward of 25 feet horizontally for
each foot vertically. The slope begins at the end of and at the same elevation
as the primary surface and extends to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along
the extended runway centerline.
      (3)   Transitional zones (LT). These zones are hereby established as the
area beneath the transitional surfaces. These surfaces extend outward and
upward at 90-degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline
extended at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically
beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and
the approach zones, extending to a height of 150 feet above the airport
elevation. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits
sloping upward and outward seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically
beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach zones, and
extending to where they intersect the conical surface. Where the precision
instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the conical zone, height limits
sloping upward and outward seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically
shall be maintained beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the
precision instrument runway approach surface and extending to a horizontal
distance of 5,000 feet measured at 90-degree angles to the extended runway
centerline.
      (4)   Heliport VFR Transitional zones. These zones extend from the sides
of the primary surface and the approach zones a horizontal distance of 250 feet
from the primary surface centerline and the extended primary surface centerline
and slope upward and outward two feet horizontally for each foot vertically.
The slope begins at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary
surface and the approach surfaces and extends a distance of 250 feet measured
horizontally from 90-degree angles to the primary surface centerline and
extended centerline.
      (5)   Horizontal zone (H). The horizontal zone is hereby established by
swinging arcs of radii specified on the Airport Zoning Map from the centerline
of each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting to the
adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone
extends at an elevation of 150 feet above the airport elevation, however, it
does not include the approach and transitional zones. The radius of each arc is
5,000 feet for all runways designated as utility or visual.
      (6)   Conical zone (C). The conical zone is hereby established as the
area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward
there from a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. The conical zone slopes upward
and outward 25 feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the
periphery of the horizontal zone and 150 feet above the airport elevation and
extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation. The conical zone
does not include the precision instrument approach zones and the transitional
zones.
      (7)   Primary Surface zone (L). The elevation of any point on the primary
surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway
centerline. The width of a primary surface is 250 feet for utility runways
having only visual approaches.
      (8)   Approach Surface zone (AA). An approach surface is applied to each
end of each runway based on the type of approach available or planned for that
runway end. The inner edge of the approach surface is the same width as the
primary surface and it expands uniformly to a width of 1,250 feet for that end
of a utility runway with only visual approaches. The approach surface extends
for a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet at a slope of 25 feet to one for all
utility and visual runways.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.44.060 Airport Zoning Map.
   The several zones established by this chapter shall be shown and delineated
on the Airport Zoning Map of the City of Tulare. This map, for convenience and
identification, is divided into parts corresponding to the operational areas of
the respective airports included within the provisions of this chapter.
Additional parts of the Airport Zoning Map may be adopted from time to time by
ordinance. Each part of the Airport Zoning Map shall be described by a
descriptive title sufficient to identify the subject and the location and shall
contain a map and diagrams including a plot plan of the subject airport showing
the location, direction, and dimensions of all runways, the locations and
dimensions of all zones described in this chapter and the specific values
applied to said zones in accordance with the formulas established for the
regulation of heights described in this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.44.070 Use restrictions.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no use may be made of
land or water within any zone established by this chapter in such a manner as
to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio
communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to
distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of
pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport or
otherwise in any way create a hazard or endanger the landing, takeoff, or
maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.44.080 Administration and enforcement.
   (A)   The Planning Commission is hereby designated as the agency for the
administration and enforcement of this chapter.
   (B)   The City's Building Inspector shall not issue building permits for the
construction, reconstruction or structural alteration of any structure within
any of the zones established by this chapter if the construction,
reconstruction, or structural alteration would result in violation of the
restrictions imposed on the zones by this chapter. Any building permit issued
in violation of the provisions of this division shall be null and void.
   (C)   The Planning Commission shall not take any actions regarding the
administration of this chapter without the prior review and recommendation by
the City of Tulare Aviation Commission.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.44.090 Variances.
   (A)   If practical difficulties, unnecessary hardship, or results
inconsistent with the general purpose of this chapter result through the strict
and literal interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, then the Planning
Commission shall have the authority to process a variance consistent with
Chapter 10.84, Variances.
   (B)   Any variance granted pursuant to
Chapter 10.84, Variances, may be allowed subject to any reasonable conditions
that the Planning Commission may deem necessary to effectuate the purpose of
this chapter and reasonable under the circumstances. Any such variance may be
so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree to permit the
appropriate airport management at its own expense, to install, operate, and
maintain thereon such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to
flyers the presence of an airport hazard. Any variance that is granted, subject
to any conditions, shall be deemed to be automatically revoked if any of the
conditions are violated.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.46: MIXED-USE OVERLAY ZONE
   Section
   
10.46.010   Purpose.
   
10.46.020   Application.
   
10.46.030   Definitions.
   
10.46.040   Mixed-Use Development Plan.
   
10.46.050   Required findings.
   
10.46.060   Permitted and conditional uses.
   
10.46.070   Development standards.
   
10.46.080   Design standards.
   
10.46.090   Architectural standards.
   
10.46.100   Maintenance of common areas.
   
10.46.110   Variances.
§ 10.46.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of the Mixed-Use Overlay (MU) zone is to provide a tool to
encourage and facilitate the development of certain areas by allowing a variety
of commercial and residential uses that can be developed in a compatible manner
within the same building or site. The objectives of the MU Overlay zone are:
   (A)   Provide for a set of regulations to allow for the integration of
commercial, office, and residential use in close proximity to one another.
   (B)   Provide for a set of standards that clearly show the relationship of
commercial, office, and residential within one developed site or building.
   (C)   Ensure that the mix of uses will be integrated successfully into a
desirable, cohesive district.
   (D)   Encourage medium to high-density residential development to occur in
areas in close proximity to the downtown area or the redevelopment of aging
outlying commercial areas.
   (E)   Establish sites of sufficient size to allow flexibility in achieving
the standards of this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.46.020 Application.
   (A)   The MU Overlay zone may be combined with any R-H, C-2, C-3, or C-
4 zone.
   (B)   The requirements of this chapter shall be considered in conjunction
with the requirements of any base zone district. If a conflict exists between
the requirements of the base zone district and this chapter, the requirements
of this chapter shall apply.
   (C)   Any parcel included in the city's housing element sites inventory must
be developed with the number of units identified within the housing element.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.46.030 Definitions
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT. A single building containing more than one type of
land use or a single development of more than one building and use, where the
different types of land uses are in close proximity, planned as a unified
complementary whole, and functionally integrated to the use of shared vehicular
and pedestrian access and parking areas.
   SPECIAL USE PERMIT. A permit issued to establish conditions of approval for
an otherwise permitted or conditional use within a Mixed-Use Overlay zone.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.46.040 Mixed-Use Development Plan.
   (A)   Applications for incorporation into the Mixed-Use Overlay zone shall
be processed consistent with
Chapter 10.86, Zoning Ordinance Amendments.
   (B)   Zone districts that are combined with the Mixed-Use Overlay zone shall
be designated on the Official Zoning Map with the base zone district followed
by the Mixed-Use Overlay zone notation (MU).
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.46.050 Required findings.
   A mixed-use development may be approved upon making the following findings:
   (A)   That the site for the proposed development is adequate in size and
shape to accommodate the uses, densities, and intensities of development and
all yards, open spaces, setbacks, walls and fences, parking areas, loading
areas, landscape, and other features required.
   (B)   That the traffic generated by the proposed development and the public
services and facilities required can be provided by existing and planned
infrastructure.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.46.060 Permitted and conditional uses.
   (A)   Permitted uses:
      (1)   Townhouses.
      (2)   Apartments.
      (3)   Condominiums.
      (4)   Bed and breakfast.
      (5)   Mixed-use building or development.
      (6)   Open space or plazas.
      (7)   Public parks.
      (8)   All permitted uses in the C-2 and C-3 Zone districts.
   (B)   Conditional uses:
      (1)   All conditional uses in the C-2 and C-3 Zone district.
      (2)   Sale of alcohol, on-sale or off-sale
   (C)   Uses not permitted:
      (1)   Automobile repair.
      (2)   Auto, boat and RV sales.
      (3)   Sale of gasoline.
      (4)   Single-family detached housing.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.46.070 Development standards.
   Development standards shall be as follows:
   (A)   Minimum site area: none.
   (B)   Minimum lot width: 18 feet.
   (C)   Minimum lot depth: none.
   (D)   Minimum residential density:
      (1)   If housing is a part of a mixed-use development, dwellings are
permitted on and above the second floor of commercial uses with no minimum
density.
      (2)   Freestanding residential building density of 12 dwelling units per
residential acre.
      (3)   Notwithstanding divisions (D)(1) and (D)(2), any parcel proposed
for mixed use development which is zoned RH-20 shall develop no less than 22
units per acre.
   (E)   Maximum residential density: 29 dwelling units per net residential
acre, either in freestanding residential buildings or in mixed-use buildings on
and above the second floor.
   (F)   Minimum front building setback: none for mixed-use, commercial uses,
or other. No less than five feet for residential uses.
   (G)   Maximum front building setback: ten feet.
   (H)   Minimum street side and rear building setback: five feet, except where
common walls for attached residential or commercial development are proposed,
or existing buildings that are already constructed to the property line.
   (I)   Interior side building setback: a minimum of four feet on each side to
provide a minimum of eight feet of separation between buildings. Zero lot lines
can be approved with an eight-foot separation. An additional two feet of
setback shall be provided for each additional story of building height.
   (J)   Building height: the maximum is five stories.
   (K)   Building height transition: development in the Mixed-Use Overlay zone
shall provide for a building height transition when adjacent to an existing
single-family residential zone district to provide compatible scale and privacy
between developments. Buildings in the Mixed-Use Overlay zone, taller than 22
feet exclusive of any parapet walls, shall provide one foot of separation from
the single-family zoned district for each foot of the building height.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.46.080 Design standards.
   The following design standards shall apply:
   (A)   All ground-floor tenant spaces with at least 25 feet of frontage
facing a public, or private streets shall have at least one building entrance
oriented to the adjacent street. Such an entrance shall open directly to the
outside and shall not require a pedestrian to first pass through a garage,
parking lot, or loading area to gain access to the entrance from the street,
but the entrance may include architectural features such as arcades, anti-
chambers, porticos, and the like without being in violation of this provision.
If a building has frontage on more than one street, the building shall provide
a main building entrance oriented to one of the streets or a single entrance to
the corner where the two streets intersect. Where one single tenant has 200
feet or more of frontage on public or private streets, one additional entrance
shall be provided for each 200 feet of frontage on one of the public or private
streets. Freestanding banking institutions and restaurants located in the
Mixed-Use Overlay zone are exempt from the provisions contained in this
division and may locate the primary building entrance on any facade of the
structure. A clear internal site pedestrian sidewalk or pathway shall be
provided to the building entrance from all public or private street sidewalks.
A building may have more building entrances than required by this section
oriented to a public or private street and may have secondary entrances facing
off-street parking areas and loading areas.
   (B)   Residential dwellings fronting on a public or private street shall
have a main entrance to the dwelling opening onto the front of the dwelling at
the ground floor lever. Such an entrance shall open directly to the outside and
shall not require passage through a garage to gain access to the doorway. The
doorway may be above the final grade where a porch, stoop, portico, anti-
chamber, wheelchair ramp, or similar architectural feature is included in the
design. Ground floor single-family attached housing or townhouse, condominium
residential units fronting on a public or private street shall have separate
entries directly from the major pedestrian route.
   (C)   Ground floor and upper story residential units in a multi-family
building fronting on a public or private street may share one or more entries
accessible directly from the street.
   (D)   Residential building facades over 150 feet in length facing a street
shall provide two or more main building entrances.
   (E)   Entryways into mixed-use buildings containing residential units shall
be clearly marked with a physical feature incorporated into the building or an
appropriately scaled element applied to the facade.
   (F)   Bicycle parking spaces shall be sited so as not to occupy space
within, reduce the size of, or impede the use of required sidewalks, pedestrian
ways, curbside landscape strips, landscape buffers, or unable open spaces. All
bicycle parking must be easily accessible and shall be equipped or located so
as to allow the bicycle to be conveniently and securely locked to a parking
device or within a secured bicycle parking area. Covered bicycle parking shall
be provided. Covered bicycle parking may be provided within a parking
structure, garage, under a separate roof within a bicycle locker, or in a
designated area within a building or residential complex. A covered bicycle
structure may occupy two of the required on-site parking spaces.
   (G)   Surface parking areas shall provide perimeter parking lot landscaping
adjacent to a street that meets one of the following standards: a five-foot
wide planting strip between the right-of-way and the parking area shall be
provided for streets designated collector or local. A ten-foot-wide planting
strip between the right-of-way and parking area shall be provided for streets
designated arterial.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.46.090 Architectural standards.
   (A)   The following design standards shall apply:
      (1)   Mixed-use buildings with ground-level commercial or office use
shall conform to the design standards in §
10.46.080.
      (2)   All development shall provide ground floor windows on the building
facade facing and adjacent to a public street, or facing onto a park, plaza, or
other public outdoor space. Required windows shall provide a lower sill no more
than three feet above grade; except where interior floor levels prohibit such
placement, the sill may be located not less than two feet above the finished
floor level to a maximum sill height of five feet above exterior grade.
      (3)   Darkly tinted windows and mirrored windows that block two-way
visibility are prohibited as ground-floor windows required under this provision
except where the closest face of the building to the nearest edge of the
sidewalk within a public right-of-way or private street parallel and adjacent
to the building is greater than 50 feet.
      (4)   Building frontages along streets shall break any flat, monolithic
facade by including architectural elements such as bay windows, recessed
entrances, or other articulation so as to provide pedestrian scale to the first
floor.
      (5)   Where ground floor windows are required by this section on public,
institutional office, and commercial structures, exterior walls facing a public
street, public open space, pedestrian walkway, and/or transit station shall
have windows, display areas, or doorways for at least 50% of the length and 50%
of the area of the ground level wall area, which is defined as the area to the
finished ceiling height of the fronting space or 15 feet above finished grade,
whichever is less.
   (B)   Building step-back requirements.
      (1)   Step-back requirements help assure a comfortable street environment
by preventing fortress-like facades, providing light and air at the street
level, and providing features of interest to pedestrians along streets in
mixed-use districts. The following design standards shall apply:
         (a)   Step-back requirements shall be achieved, at the option of the
applicant, by one of two methods:
            1.   Floors above the second floor shall be stepped back a minimum
of five feet for the first story above two, and an additional five feet for
floors above three. The maximum step-back under this method shall not exceed 15
feet.
            2.   A building shall be stepped back by an appropriate amount from
the plane of the street so as to maintain an angle not greater than 60 degrees
between the top of the building facade fronting onto the street and the back of
the sidewalk of the opposite side of the same street.
         (b)   Upon petition of the applicant, the Planning Commission may
waive the building step-back requirements of this section provided that the
applicant clearly demonstrates the proposed project:
            1.   Includes window treatments, entry placement, facade relief,
and other architectural treatments to provide visual interest and pedestrian-
sensitive design at the street level and to maintain a human scale in the
streetscape.
            2.   Extends the same architectural features above the ground floor
level through variations in design, detail, and proportion, and by avoiding
designs featuring a monolithic street facade.
      (2)   Where step-back requirements are not required, the above design
standards shall be adhered to for multi-story buildings.
   (C)   Architectural design requirements. The following design requirements
shall apply:
      (1)   Buildings shall promote and enhance a pedestrian scale and
orientation on the facade facing the public street. Street side building
facades and dwelling units within the Mixed-Use Overlay zone shall be varied
and articulated to provide visual interest to pedestrians and avoid a flat
appearance. In addition, development proposals shall make provisions and
include designs consistent with the following:
         (a)   All new commercial, public/institutional, mixed-use, and
residential buildings constructed within the Mixed-Use Overlay zone shall
demonstrate that it promotes and enhances a pedestrian scale and orientation on
any facade facing a public or private street and it incorporates discernible
and architecturally appropriate features; such as, but not limited to,
cornices, bases, fenestration, fluted masonry, bays, recesses, arcades, display
windows, unique entry areas or other treatments for visual interest, to create
community character and to promote a sense of pedestrian scale. The design
shall recognize that the simple relief provided by window cutouts or sills on
an otherwise flat facade, in and of themselves, does not meet the requirements
of this section.
         (b)   All residential dwellings, of any type, constructed within the
Mixed-Use Overlay zone shall be constructed with exterior building materials
and finishes of high quality to convey an impression of permanence durability.
Materials such as, including masonry, stucco, stone, terra cotta, tile, cedar
shakes and shingles, beveled or ship-lap or other narrow-course horizontal
boards or siding, authentic vertical board and batten siding/articulated
architectural concrete masonry units (CMU), and similar durable architectural
materials are allowed. Materials such as and including, T-111 siding, plain or
plain painted plywood and strandboard sheets, concrete or cinder block, smooth
surface concrete panels, and similar quality and non-durable material are
prohibited.
      (2)   Commercial buildings and sites shall be organized to group the
utilitarian functions away from the public view. Delivery and loading
operations, HVAC equipment, trash compacting collection, and other utility and
service functions shall be incorporated into the overall design of the building
(s) and the landscaping. The visual and acoustic impacts of these functions,
along with all wall- or ground-mounted mechanical, electrical, and
communications equipment shall be out of view from adjacent properties and
public streets, and screening materials and landscape screens shall be
architecturally with and not inferior to the principal materials of the
buildings and primary landscaping. The visual and acoustic aspects of roof-
mounted equipment behind parapets, within architectural screening, roof-top
screening, and deadening the sound of such equipment.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.46.100 Maintenance of common areas.
   Property owner association, a landscape and lighting district, or other
similar mechanism for the maintenance of common open space, private streets, or
other improvements shall be set up as a condition of approval.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.46.110 Variances.
   (A)   A variance may be granted to any development regulation or design
standard contained in this chapter provided the Planning Commission finds that
by granting the variance:
      (1)   The adjustment will equally or better meet the purposes of the
Mixed-Use Overlay zone and of the regulation to be modified.
      (2)   The variance or cumulative variance adjustments result in a project
that is still consistent with the overall purpose and intent of the district.
   (B)   The Planning Commission may approve a variance from the architectural
standards if the project meets the following criteria.
      (1)   Multiple main building entrances are required to be oriented to the
street. Variances may be granted to allow a single secured entrance to an
establishment upon a finding that the internal security measures, which are
standard operating procedures of the applicant would be irreparably harmed by
this requirement; except in no case shall there be less than one main entrance
oriented to a public or private street unless otherwise authorized by an
exception contained in this section.
      (2)   Ground floor windows. A variance to the percentage of window area
required for ground floor windows in building facades where required by this
section may be allowed upon findings that:
         (a)   Such windows would unavoidably compromise necessary personal
privacy or security within the building (for example, privacy in a clinic
examination room, security in a pharmacy storeroom, or security and privacy in
a research and development laboratory).
         (b)   Due to the design of the structure or other demonstrable
restrictions or constraints, the required personal privacy or security cannot
otherwise be provided.
         (c)   The loss of the window area cannot be recaptured elsewhere on
the facade.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.48: FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
   Section
   
10.48.010   Statutory authorization; findings of fact; statement of purpose.
   
10.48.020   Methods of reducing losses.
   
10.48.030   Definitions.
   
10.48.040   General provisions.
   
10.48.050   Administration.
   
10.48.060   Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
   
10.48.070   Variance procedures.
§ 10.48.010 Statutory authorization; findings of fact; statement of purpose.
   (A)   Statutory authorization. The Legislature of the State of California
has in Cal. Gov't Code §§ 65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local
government units authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public
health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City
Council of the City of Tulare does hereby adopt the following floodplain
management regulations.
   (B)   Findings of fact.
      (1)   The flood hazard areas of the City of Tulare are subject to
periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax
base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
      (2)   These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately
elevated, flood-proofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect
of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards that increase flood heights
and velocities also contributes to the flood loss.
   (C)   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote public health, safety,
and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
      (1)   Protect human life and health.
      (2)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects.
      (3)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
      (4)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions.
      (5)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains; electric, telephone, and sewer lines; and streets and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard.
      (6)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted
areas caused by flood damage.
      (7)   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that the property is in
an area of special flood hazard.
      (8)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazards
assume responsibility for their actions.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.48.020 Methods of reducing losses.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions to:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, and
property due to water or erosion hazards or which result in damaging increases
in erosion or flood heights or velocities.
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters.
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase flood damage.
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will
unnaturally divert flood waters or may increase flood hazards in other areas.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.48.030 Definitions.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to
give this chapter its most reasonable application.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure that is either:
      (1)   Solely for the parking of no more than two cars.
      (2)   A small, low-cost shed for limited storage, less than 150 square
feet, and $1,500 in value.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use that is incidental and subordinate to the principal use
of the parcel of land on which it is located.
   ALLUVIAL FAN. A geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan-shaped
deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded from
mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley
floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high-velocity flows, debris
flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration.
   APEX. The point of highest elevation on an alluvial fan, which on
undisturbed fans is generally the point where the major stream that formed the
fan emerges from the mountain front.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH zone on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly
defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and
indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. The flooding is characterized
by ponding or sheet flow.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. See SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA.
   BASE FLOOD. A flood that has a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year (also called the 100-year flood). BASE FLOOD is the term used
throughout this chapter.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map for zones AE, AH, and A1-30 that indicates the water surface elevation
resulting from a flood that has a 1% or greater chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade i.e., below
ground level on all sides.
   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
   ENCROACHMENT. The advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill,
excavation, buildings, permanent structures, or development into a floodplain
which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community (July 5, 1983).
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FLOOD, FLOODING, or FLOOD WATER.
      (1)   A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the
unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source;
and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows).
      (2)   The condition resulting from flood-related erosion.
   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP. The official map on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas
of flood hazards.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated
both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable
to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal Insurance
Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the
Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. An area susceptible to being inundated by
water from any source. See FLOODING.
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The individual appointed to administer and enforce
the floodplain management regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing,
where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited
to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management
regulations, and open space plans.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as grading and erosion control), and other applications of
police power that control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes
federal, state, or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide
standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improve real property, water, and sanitary facilities,
structures, and their contents. (Refer to FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB
3-93, and TB 7-93 for guidelines on dry and wet floodproofing.)
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation by more than one foot. Also
referred to as REGULATORY FLOODWAY.
   FLOODWAY FRINGE. The area of the floodplain on either side of the regulatory
floodway where encroachment may be permitted.
   FRAUD and VICTIMIZATION. As related to §
10.48.070 of this chapter, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud
on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the Tulare
City Council will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds
to government responsibilities and remains part of the community for 50 to 100
years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood
elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from
floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are
subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those
increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the
property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be
insured only at very high flood insurance rates.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use that cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
   GOVERNING BODY. The local governing unit, i.e., the City of Tulare, that is
empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health,
safety, and general welfare of its citizenry.
   HARDSHIP. As related to §
10.48.070 of this chapter, means the exceptional hardship that would result
from a failure to grant the requested variance. The City Council requires that
the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved.
Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience,
aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the
disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an
exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means
without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or
requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different
use than originally intended.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register.
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district.
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs that have been approved by the
Secretary of Interior.
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either
by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or
directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
   LEVEE. A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees,
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including the
basement (see BASEMENT).
      (1)   An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure below the lowest floor
that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in
an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor
provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements,
including, but not limited to:
         (a)   The wet floodproofing standard in §
10.48.060(A)(3)(c).
         (b)   The anchoring standards in §
10.48.060(A)(1).
         (c)   The construction materials and methods standards in §
10.48.060(A)(2).
         (d)   The standards for utilities in §
10.48.060(B).
      (2)   For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are
prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see "basement" definition).
This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MARKET VALUE. Is determined by estimating the cost to replace the structure
in new condition and adjusting that cost figure by the amount of depreciation
that has accrued since the structure was constructed. The cost of replacement
of the structure shall be based on a square foot cost factor determined by
reference to a building cost estimating guide recognized by the building
construction industry. The amount of depreciation shall be determined by taking
into account the age and physical deterioration of the structure and functional
obsolescence as approved by the Floodplain Administrator, but shall not include
economic or other forms of external obsolescence. Use of replacement costs or
accrued depreciation factors different from those contained in recognized
building cost estimating guides may be considered only if the factors are
included in a report prepared by an independent professional appraiser and
supported by a written explanation of the differences.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North American Vertical
Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum to which base flood elevations shown on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
   MUDSLIDE. A condition where there is a river, flow, or inundation of liquid
mud down a hillside, usually as a result of a dual condition of loss of brush
cover and the subsequent accumulation of water on the ground, preceded by a
period of unusually heavy or sustained rain.
   MUDSLIDE (I.E., MUDFLOW) PRONE AREA. An area with land surfaces and slopes
of unconsolidated material where the history, geology, and climate indicate a
potential for mudflow.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For floodplain management purposes means structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of
floodplain management regulations adopted by this community (July 5, 1983) and
includes any subsequent improvements to the structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community (July 5,
1983).
   OBSTRUCTION. Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation,
channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel,
refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or
projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the
direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its
propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its
likelihood of being carried downstream.
   ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD or 100-YEAR FLOOD. See BASE FLOOD.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE. As related to §
10.48.070 of this chapter means that the granting of a variance must not result
in anything that is injurious to the safety or health of an entire community or
neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs
the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or
river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis.
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection.
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-
duty truck.
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation by more than one
foot.
   REMEDY A VIOLATION. To bring the structure or other development into
compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this
is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its non-compliance. Ways that impacts
may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development
from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this chapter or
otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal
financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
   SHEET FLOW AREA. See AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). An area in the floodplain subject to a 1%
or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM
as zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99 or AH.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement and other proposed
new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement, or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of the
permit. The "ACTUAL start" means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
"Permanent construction" does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground;
this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the START OF
CONSTRUCTION of the improvement. This term includes structures that have
incurred SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE, regardless of the actual repair work performed.
The term does not, however, include either:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
that have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
      (2)   Any alteration of a HISTORIC STRUCTURE, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
HISTORIC STRUCTURE.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the
elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance
required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or
other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains
of coastal or riverine areas.
   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel, or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. The
watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.48.040 General provisions.
   (A)   Lands to which this chapter applies. This chapter shall apply to all
areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the City of Tulare.
   (B)   The basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. The
areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance
Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated January 5, 1983, and accompanying Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFMs), dated
July 5, 1983, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and
attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may
be supplemented by studies for other areas that allow implementation of this
chapter and which are recommended to the City Council by the Floodplain
Administrator. The study, FIRMs, and FBFMs are on file at 411 East Kern Avenue,
Community Development Department.
   (C)   Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed,
located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms
of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements
(including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection
with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent
the City Council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation.
   (D)   Abrogation and greater restrictions. This chapter is not intended to
repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement,
covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.
   (E)   Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter,
all provisions shall be:
      (1)   Considered as minimum requirements.
      (2)   Liberally construed in favor of the City Council.
      (3)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
   (F)   Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection
required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and
is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and
will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or
natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of
special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part
of the City Council, any officer or employee thereof, the State of California,
or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency
for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
   (G)   Severability. This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby
declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the
courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the
section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.48.050 Administration.
   (A)   Establishment of development permit. A development permit shall be
obtained before any construction or other development begins within any area of
special flood hazard established in §
10.48.040(B). Application for a development permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the Floodplain Administrator and may include, but not be limited
to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions,
and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required.
      (1)   Site plan, including, but not limited to:
         (a)   For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building
corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or
one-foot contour elevations throughout the building site.
         (b)   Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and
utilities.
         (c)   If available, the base flood elevation from the Flood Insurance
Study and/or Flood Insurance Rate Map.
         (d)   If applicable, the location of the regulatory floodway.
      (2)   Foundation design detail, including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest
floor (including basement) of all structures.
         (b)   For a crawlspace foundation, location and total net area of
foundation openings as required in §
10.48.060(A)(3)(c) hereof and FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93.
         (c)   For foundations placed on fill, the location and height of fill
and compaction requirements (compacted to 95% using the Standard Proctor Test
method).
      (3)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-
residential structure will be floodproofed, as required in §
10.48.060(A)(3)(b) hereof and FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93.
      (4)   All appropriate certifications are listed in §
10.48.050(C)(4) hereof.
      (5)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
   (B)   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. The Community Development
Director is hereby appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this chapter
by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its provisions.
   (C)   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. The
duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include but
are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Permit review. Review all development permits to determine that:
         (a)   The permit requirements for this chapter have been satisfied.
         (b)   All other required state and federal permits have been obtained.
         (c)   The site is reasonably safe from flooding.
         (d)   The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying
capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined, but a
floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this chapter, adversely
affects means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated developments, will increase
the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot at any
point.
      (2)   Review, use, and development of other base flood data.
         (a)   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in
accordance with §
10.48.040(B), the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or
state agency or other source in order to administer §
10.48.060. Any such information shall be submitted to the City Council for
adoption.
         (b)   If no base flood elevation data is available from a federal or
state agency or other source, then a base flood elevation shall be obtained
using one of two methods from the FEMA publication Managing Floodplain
Development in Approximate Zone A Areas - A Guide for Obtaining and Developing
Base (100-year) Flood Elevations dated July 1995 in order to administer §
10.48.060.
         (c)   Simplified method.
            1.    One-hundred-year or base flood discharge shall be obtained
using the appropriate regression equation found in a U.S. Geological Survey
publication or the discharge drainage area method.
            2.   Base flood elevation shall be obtained using the Quick-
2 computer program developed by FEMA.
         (d)   Detailed method.
            1.    One-hundred-year or base flood discharge shall be obtained
using the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' HEC-HMS computer program.
            2.   Base flood elevation shall be obtained using the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers' HEC-RAS computer program.
      (3)   Notification of other agencies. Alteration or relocation of a
watercourse.
         (a)   Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of
Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation.
         (b)   Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance
Administration and Federal Emergency Management Agency.
         (c)   Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.
      (4)   Base flood elevation changes due to physical alterations.
         (a)   Within six months of information becoming available or project
completion, whichever comes first, the Floodplain Administrator shall submit or
assure that the permit application submits technical or scientific data to FEMA
for a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR).
         (b)   All LOMRs for flood control projects are approved prior to the
issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on
Conditional Letters of Map Revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow
construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as
specified in the "start of construction" definition.
         (c)   Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of the
physical changes affecting flood conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain
management requirements are based on current data.
      (5)   Changes in corporate boundaries. Notify FEMA in writing whenever
the corporate boundaries have been modified by annexation or other means and
include a copy of a map of the community clearly delineating the new corporate
limits.
      (6)   Documentation of floodplain development. Obtain and maintain for
public inspection and make available as needed the following:
         (a)   Certification required by §§
10.48.060(A)(3)(a) and
10.48.060(D) (lowest floor elevations).
         (b)   Certification required by §
10.48.060(A)(3)(b) (elevation or floodproofing of non-residential structures).
         (c)   Certification required by §
10.48.060(A)(3)(c) (wet floodproofing standard).
         (d)   Certification of elevation required by §
10.48.060(C)(2) (subdivision standards).
         (e)   Certification required by §
10.48.060(F)(1) (floodway encroachments).
      (7)   Map determinations. Make interpretations where needed, as to the
exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard. Where
there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions, grade and base flood elevations shall be used to determine the
boundaries of the special flood hazard area. The person contesting the location
of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the
interpretation as provided herein.
      (8)   Remedial action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter
as specified in §
10.48.040(C).
   (D)   Appeals. The City Council of Tulare shall hear and decide appeals when
it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.48.060 Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
   (A)   Standards of construction. In all areas of special flood hazards, the
following standards are required:
      (1)   Anchoring.
         (a)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the
effects of buoyancy.
         (b)   All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of §
10.48.060(D).
      (2)   Construction materials and methods. All new construction and
substantial improvement shall be constructed:
         (a)   With flood-resistant materials as specified in FEMA Technical
Bulletin TB 2-93, and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
         (b)   Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
         (c)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities are designed and/or located to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
         (d)   Within zones AH or AO, there are adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
      (3)   Elevation and floodproofing. (See §
10.48.030, definitions for "basement," "lowest floor," "new construction,"
"substantial damage," and "substantial improvement.")
         (a)   1.   Residential construction, new or substantial improvement,
shall have the lowest floor, including basement:
               a.   In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to
a height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM,
or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth
number is specified. (The State of California recommends that in AO zones
without velocity, the lowest floor be elevated above the highest adjacent grade
to a height exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM by at
least two feet or elevated at least four feet above the highest adjacent grade
if no depth number is specified).
               b.   In an A zone, elevated to or above the base flood
elevation; said base flood elevation shall be determined by one of the methods
in §
10.48.050(C)(2). (The State of California recommends the lowest floor be
elevated at least two feet above the base flood elevation, as determined by the
community.)
               c.   In AE, AH, and A1-30 zones, elevated to or above the base
flood elevation. (The State of California recommends the lowest floor be
elevated at least two feet above the base flood elevation.)
            2.   Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the
lowest floor, including the basement, shall be certified by a registered
professional engineer or surveyor and verified by the community building
inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be
provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
         (b)   Non-residential construction, new or substantial improvement,
shall either be elevated to conform with §
10.48.060(A)(3)(a) or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:
            1.   Be floodproofed below the elevation recommended under §
10.48.060(A)(3)(a) so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water.
            2.   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
            3.   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect that the standards of this division are satisfied. The certification
shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
         (c)   All new construction and substantial improvement with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable
solely for parking vehicles, building access, or storage, and which are subject
to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater.
Designs for meeting this requirement shall follow the guidelines in FEMA
Technical Bulletins TB 1-93 and TB 7-93, and must exceed the following minimum
criteria:
            1.   Have a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwater.
            2.   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect.
         (d)   Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in §
10.48.060(D).
   (B)   Standards for utilities.
      (1)   All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems
shall be designed to minimize or eliminate:
         (a)   Infiltration of flood waters into the systems.
         (b)   Discharge from the systems into flood waters.
      (2)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to them, or contamination from them during flooding.
   (C)   Standards for subdivisions and other proposed development.
      (1)   All preliminary subdivision proposals or other developments greater
than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, shall:
         (a)   Identify the special flood hazard areas (SFHA) and base flood
elevation (BFE).
         (b)   Identify the elevations of the lowest floors of all proposed
structures and pads on the final plans.
         (c)   If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the
following as-built information for each structure shall be certified by a
registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and provided as part of an
application for a Letter of Map Revision based on Fill (LOMR-F) to the
Floodplain Administrator:
            1.   Lowest floor elevation.
            2.   Pad elevation.
            3.   Lowest adjacent grade.
      (2)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
      (3)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
      (4)   All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure
to flood hazards.
   (D)   Standards for manufactured homes.
      (1)   All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved,
within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map, on
sites located:
         (a)   Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision.
         (b)   In a new manufactured home park or subdivision.
         (c)   In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision.
         (d)   In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site
upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result
of a flood, it shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest
floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation
(the State of California recommends at least two feet above the base flood
elevation) and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system
to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
      (2)   All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on
sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30,
AH, and AE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map that are not subject to
the provisions of §
10.48.060(D)(1) will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, and be elevated so
that either the:
         (a)   Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base
flood elevation (the State of California recommends at least two feet above the
base flood elevation).
         (b)   Manufactured home chassis are supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than
36 inches in height above grade.
         (c)   Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the
lowest floor, including the basement, shall be certified by a registered
professional engineer or surveyor and verified by the community building
inspector to be properly elevated. The certification and verification shall be
provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
   (E)   Standards for recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed
on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate
Map will either:
      (1)   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, and be fully
licensed and ready for highway use - a recreational vehicle is ready for
highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, and is attached to the
site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions.
      (2)   Meet the permit requirements of §
10.48.050 and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes
in §
10.48.060(D)(1).
   (F)   Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in
§
10.48.040(B) are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters, which carry
debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions
apply:
      (1)   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvement, and other new development, unless certification by a
registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments
shall not result in any increase in [the base] flood elevation during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
      (2)   If §
10.48.060(F)(1) is satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement,
and other proposed new developments shall comply with all other applicable
flood hazard reduction provisions of §
10.48.060.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.48.070 Variance procedures.
   (A)   Nature of variances.
      (1)   The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on the
general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property
and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of
property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the
requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the
applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be
unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique
characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its
inhabitants, or the property owners.
      (2)   It is the duty of the City Council to help protect its citizens
from flooding. This need is so compelling, and the implications of the cost of
insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances in
flood elevation or other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare.
The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be
met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines
provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that
must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are
designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a
variance are more appropriate.
   (B)   Appeal Board.
      (1)   In passing upon requests for variances, the City Council shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified
in other sections of this chapter, and the:
         (a)   Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
         (b)   Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
         (c)   Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and
future owners of the property.
         (d)   Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community.
         (e)   Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
         (f)   Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use that
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
         (g)   Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development.
         (h)   Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area.
         (i)   Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
         (j)   Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the flood waters expected at the site.
         (k)   Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.
      (2)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice over the signature of a community official that:
         (a)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up
to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage.
         (b)   The construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be
recorded by the Floodplain Administrator in the Office of the Tulare County
Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of
title of the affected parcel of land.
      (3)   The Floodplain Administrator will maintain a record of all variance
actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances
issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance
Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   (C)   Conditions for variances.
      (1)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction,
substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a
lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the
procedures of §§
10.48.070(C)(4) and
10.48.070(C)(5) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond
one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
      (2)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
"historic structures" (as defined in §
10.48.030 hereof) upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
      (3)   Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway
if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      (4)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the "minimum necessary" considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief. Minimum necessary means to afford relief with a minimum deviation from
the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an
elevation requirement, this means the City Council need not grant permission
for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the
applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the City Council believes
will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance.
      (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon a:
         (a)   Showing of good and sufficient cause.
         (b)   Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional "hardship" (as defined in §
10.48.030 hereof) to the applicant.
         (c)   Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary
public expense, create a nuisance (as defined in §
10.48.030), cause fraud or victimization (as defined in §
10.48.030) of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      (6)   Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial
improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of §§ 10.48.060(C)(1)
through 10.48.070(C)(5) are satisfied and that the structure or other
development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base
flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not
create a public nuisance.
      (7)   Upon consideration of the factors of §
10.48.070(B)(1) and the purposes of this chapter, the City Council may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further
the purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.50: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
   Section
   
10.50.010   Purpose.
   
10.50.020   Applicability.
   
10.50.030   Standards that apply in all zones.
   
10.50.040   Fences, walls, and hedges in all zones.
   
10.50.050   Outdoor lighting standards.
   
10.50.060   Exceptions in building setback area limitations.
   
10.50.070   Exceptions to height limitations.
   
10.50.080   Property maintenance.
   
10.50.090   Standards that apply in all Commercial zones.
   
10.50.100   Standards that apply in all Industrial zones.
§ 10.50.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish development standards to
preserve, protect, and promote the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the city, and to minimize environmental impacts and land use conflicts.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.50.020 Applicability.
   This chapter shall apply to uses within all zone districts unless
specifically stated otherwise.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.50.030 Standards that apply in all zones.
   (A)   Air pollution. No emission shall be permitted that exceeds the
requirements of the San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District or the
requirements of any air quality plan adopted by the City of Tulare.
   (B)   Combustibles and explosives. The use, handling, storage, and
transportation of combustibles and explosives shall comply with the Uniform
Fire Code and Cal. Code of Regulations Title 19.
   (C)   Discharge of materials. No use shall discharge at any point into any
public or private street, public sewer, storm drain, private stream, body of
water, or into the ground, any material that can contaminate any water supply,
interfere with bacteriological processes in sewerage treatment, or otherwise
cause the emission of dangerous or offensive elements, except according to the
standards approved by the California Department of Public Health, or any other
federal, state or local government agency.
   (D)   Ground vibration. No use shall be permitted to cause a steady state,
earth-borne oscillation beyond the project site. Ground vibration caused by
moving vehicles, trains, aircraft, or temporary construction or demolition is
exempt from this requirement.
   (E)   Odorous gases and matter. No use shall be permitted that emits odorous
gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be dangerous, harmful,
noxious, or otherwise objectionable at a level that is detectable with or
without the aid of instruments at or beyond the project site boundary.
   (F)   Property development. New development shall be required to install the
public infrastructure necessary to adequately serve the project, based on
requirements of the City Engineer, including sewer, water, and storm drainage
lines, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street paving, and street lighting. These
improvements shall be constructed consistent with requirements shown in the
City of Tulare Standards and Specifications Manual and shall be installed prior
to occupancy of any structures on the site.
   (G)   Rooftop equipment. All mechanical equipment located on the roof of any
building shall be screened from adjacent views and contained within a
completely enclosed penthouse or portion of the same building having walls and
roofs with construction and appearance similar to the building.
   (H)   Trash collection areas. Suitable area shall be provided on-site for
collection of trash and recyclable materials for all multi-family residential,
mixed-use, commercial, office, public facility and industrial uses. Refuse
storage areas shall be adequately screened from view. The refuse area enclosure
shall be designed to meet the minimum recommended dimensional standards as
determined by the City Engineer and shall provide direct stab access as
determined by the City's Solid Waste Manager.
   (I)   Through lots. A front building setback area shall be provided on each
frontage of a through lot, except where access to one of the frontages has been
waived or is otherwise prohibited.
   (J)   Waste materials. Waste materials that are associated with any use that
causes fumes or dust, that may be a fire hazard, or that are edible by, or
otherwise attractive to, rodents or insects, shall be stored in closed
containers.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.50.040 Fences, walls, and hedges in all zones.
   (A)   No fence or wall shall be placed within the public right-of-way.
   (B)   A masonry fence exceeding three feet in height shall require
engineered footings and a building permit. All other fencing exceeding seven
feet in height shall require engineered post footings and a building permit.
   (C)   Corner cutoff areas. The following regulations shall apply at all
intersections of streets, alleys, or private driveways in all zoning districts
in order to provide adequate visibility for vehicular traffic. There shall be
no visual obstruction within the cutoff areas established herein.
      (1)   There shall be a corner cutoff area at all intersecting streets or
highways. The cutoff line shall be in a horizontal plane, making an angle of 45
degrees, with the side, front, or rear property line, as the case may be. It
shall pass through the points located on both the side and front (or rear)
property lines at a distance of 45 feet from the intersection of such lines or
their projections at the corner of a street or highway.
      (2)   There shall be a corner cutoff area on each side of any private
driveway intersecting a street or alley. The cutoff lines shall be in a
horizontal plane, making an angle of 45 degrees with the side, front, or rear
property line, as the case may be. They shall pass through a point at a
distance determined by the AASHTO 7th Edition Highway and Street Design (Green
Book), but in no case not less than ten feet, from the edges of the driveway
where it intersects the street or alley right-of-way.
      (3)   Where, due to an irregular lot shape, a line at a 45-degree angle
does not provide for intersection visibility, said corner cutoff shall be
defined by a line drawn from a point on the front (or rear) property line and
through a point on the side property line from said intersection of the side
and front (or rear) property lines at a distance determined by the AASHTO 7th
Edition Highway and Street Design (Green Book).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0bf1a20f2574f87b1d689bfa9416489a00654b80/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7572.png]
 
   (D)   Allowable fence materials. All fences constructed or installed within
the city shall be limited to the materials specified for each zoning district.
   (E)   All fences and walls shall be constructed of new or good used
material, and all fences and walls shall be kept in good repair and adequately
maintained. Any dilapidated, dangerous, or unsightly fences or walls shall be
removed unless otherwise required, or repaired.
   (F)   The provisions of this title regarding fences or walls shall not apply
to a fence or wall necessary for public safety or as required by any law or
regulation of the state, or any agency thereof.
   (G)   The city reserves the right to remove, at the expense of the owner of
the property or properties enclosed by the fence, any fence in a public
easement or public right of way in any emergency.
   (H)   Temporary fences. The use of temporary fences is allowed subject to
the following requirements:
      (1)   A temporary fence may be constructed of chain link or other such
material approved by the Director and shall not be permanently affixed to the
site.
      (2)   A temporary fence shall be located on the site in such a manner as
not to impede pedestrian or automobile traffic adjacent to the site unless
approved by the Director or City Engineer.
      (3)   A temporary fence placed to secure a construction, rehabilitation,
or demolition project on the site shall be removed when the project is
completed.
      (4)   A temporary fence placed for a reason other than to secure a
construction, rehabilitation, or demolition project on the site shall be
removed after 90 days unless a temporary use permit is issued in accordance
with
Chapter 10.76 which allows a longer period of time.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.50.050 Outdoor lighting standards.
   The following requirements and standards shall apply in all zone districts
for the installation and use of outdoor lighting fixtures:
   (A)   All lights and light fixtures, except public streetlights and solar-
powered lights of five watts or less per fixture, shall be located, aimed, or
shielded so as to minimize light trespassing across property boundaries or
skyward.
   (B)   No lights or light fixtures shall flash, revolve, blink, or otherwise
resemble a traffic control signal or operate in such a fashion as to create a
hazard for passing traffic.
   (C)   Building-mounted lighting fixtures shall be attached only to the walls
of the building. The top of a light fixture attached to a building wall shall
not be higher than the top of the building parapet or the top of the roof eave,
whichever is lower.
   (D)   Light fixtures under ceiling canopies shall be recessed, or the sides
of the lens area shall be shielded to eliminate the emission of horizontal
light.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.50.060 Exceptions in building setback area limitations.
   (A)   Architectural features, including without limitation, sills, chimneys,
fireplaces, cornices, and eaves, may extend into a required side building
setback area, a required rear building setback area, or a space between
structures, not more than 36 inches, and a porch may extend into a required
front building setback area not more than six feet. Where an architectural
feature extends more than 24 inches into a required side building setback area,
such extension shall meet all fire and building code requirements. No building
or projection thereof may extend into a public easement or right-of-way.
   (B)   Open, unenclosed, uncovered metal fire escapes and depressed ramps or
stairways may project into any required yard or space between buildings not
more than four feet; and planter boxes attached to a building may be extended
into a required front building setback area by not more than three feet.
   (C)   Fences, walls, hedges, garden structures, walks, driveways, and
retaining walls may occupy any required building setback area or other open
space, subject to the limitations prescribed in this title.
   (D)   When more than 60% of the linear frontage of lots improved with
residential buildings within any street block is comprised of lots with less
than the minimum front building setback requirements, the minimum front
building setback for proposed new buildings in such block shall be the average
of the actual front building setback of the main buildings on either side of
the proposed new building.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.50.070 Exceptions to height limitations.
   Penthouses or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways,
tanks, ventilating fans, air- conditioning equipment, or similar equipment
required to operate and maintain buildings, and fire and parapet walls,
skylights, towers, spires, cupolas, road signs (where permitted), flagpoles,
chimneys, smokestacks, television and radio masts, or similar structures may be
erected above the height limit but shall not be allowed for the purpose of
providing additional floor space.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.50.080 Property maintenance.
   It is a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, renting, occupying,
or having possession of any real property to maintain said real property in a
manner in which any of the following conditions are found to exist:
   (A)   The real property or any buildings, structures, or improvements
located thereon which violate one or more of the following:
      (1)   The California Building Standards Code, Cal. Code of Regulations,
Title 24, and any and all amendments, thereto, published by the California
Building Standards Commission.
      (2)   Any provision of the Tulare Municipal Code.
      (3)   Any other law or regulation, such violations including, without
limitation, violations that create a fire hazard, endanger human life, or are
hazards to the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of
the city, including without limitation, real property, structures or other
improvements that are in disrepair or are not properly maintained as determined
by the Chief Building Official.
   (B)   Outdoor storage of personal property of any type or design in any
unscreened/unfenced areas fronting any alley, street, or other public right-of-
way.
   (C)   The outside placement, parking, storage, or stockpiling of equipment,
materials, vehicles, furnishings, or commodities, not associated with the
normal use, maintenance, or repair of a residential dwelling or its accessory
structures, including, but not limited to, farm equipment, porta-potties,
picking ladders, agricultural produces, produce boxes and bins, trucks larger
than one ton, scrap materials, inoperable vehicles, and appliances or
furniture.
   (D)   Real property or structures or improvements thereon not properly
maintained so as to constitute a fire hazard by reason of weeds, grass, rank
overgrowth, or accumulations of debris or which could harbor rats or other
vermin, create an unsightly appearance, or create conditions which are
detrimental to neighboring properties.
   (E)   Broken windows or other structural defects in the real property or any
structures or improvements that create hazardous conditions and invite
trespassing and malicious mischief including unsafe structural supports,
boarded doorways and windows, dry rot, termites, and similar hazards.
   (F)   Clotheslines visible from a public street.
   (G)   Garbage cans and garbage receptacles stored in locations on a lot that
are visible from the public street or neighboring properties except that, the
Enforcement Officer may determine that circumstances involving the property or
its occupants make it difficult or impossible to place the garbage cans and
receptacles out of public view. If the Enforcement Officer makes such a
determination, the Enforcement Officer shall designate a location on the
property for the storage of the garbage cans and receptacles even though such
location may allow the garbage cans and receptacles to be visible from the
public street or neighboring properties.
   (H)   Failure to maintain any wall, fence, or hedge as to constitute a
hazard to persons or property or which creates an unsightly appearance.
   (I)   Failure to maintain required landscaping and trees and/or removal,
destruction, or severe pruning of required landscaping or trees.
   (J)   Installation of newspaper/magazine racks, overnight/postal drop boxes,
or other items of personal property in the public right-of-way without first
obtaining an encroachment permit from the city and/or failure to properly
maintain said items.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.50.090 Standards that apply in all Commercial zones.
   The following standards apply to all development occurring within the C
districts and are intended to facilitate high-quality development that
complements the character of Tulare.
   (A)   Site design. Design and placement of new buildings must consider the
existing built environment of the surrounding area, in particular existing
setbacks, building size and massing, and color and materials. Toward this end,
the following objectives shall be considered:
      (1)   Structures shall be sited in a manner that complements adjacent
structures. Where applicable, single and multi-structure sites shall be
clustered to create plazas or pedestrian malls. Where clustering is not
possible, a visual link between separate structures shall be established, by
various means, including stamped concrete walkways, arcade systems, trellises,
or other open structures.
      (2)   Structures shall be sited to minimize conflicts between pedestrians
and vehicle traffic. Structures can be linked to adjoining street sidewalks
with textured paving, landscaping, and trellises.
      (3)   Outdoor spaces between buildings shall be used to provide important
pedestrian amenities such as benches, trellises, fountains, artwork, etc.
      (4)   Freestanding commercial structures shall be oriented with the main
entry towards the street and should have the main facade parallel to the
street, to the extent possible.
      (5)   Loading facilities shall be located to the side or rear of
commercial buildings and shall be screened from view to the extent possible.
   (B)   Parking and circulation. Design considerations for parking and
circulation shall include the location of ingress and egress points, pedestrian
and vehicle conflicts, on-site circulation patterns, and service vehicle
functions.
      (1)   Safe pedestrian circulation systems shall be provided in the design
of parking facilities. Pedestrian linkages between buildings in commercial
developments should be strongly emphasized.
      (2)   Provide on-site vehicle circulation, which utilizes main entrances
and avoids awkward turning movements.
      (3)   Common driveways are encouraged to provide access to adjacent sites
and improve on-site circulation.
      (4)   Parking areas shall be generously landscaped to provide interior
and perimeter treatments.
      (5)   Parking lots shall be separated from buildings by raised sidewalks
or curbing, in conjunction with landscaping where appropriate.
      (6)   Parking driveways (access points) shall be located as far as
possible from street intersections to avoid traffic problems. The number of
access points shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary to provide
adequate circulation.
      (7)   Parking lots shall be screened from adjoining streets by the use of
low earth berms, walls, landscaping, or a combination of these methods.
   (C)   Landscaping.
      (1)   Landscaping for commercial uses shall be used to define specific
areas by helping to focus on entrances to buildings and parking lots, define
the edges of various land uses, provide a transition between neighboring
properties, and provide screening for loading and equipment areas.
      (2)   Landscaping around the entire base of structures is recommended to
soften the edge between the parking lot and the building.
      (3)   Trees shall be located throughout parking lots not simply at the
ends of aisles.
      (4)   Landscaping must be protected from vehicle encroachment by means of
raised planting areas, walls, and curbs.
   (D)   Walls and fences.
      (1)   To the extent possible, walls shall be designed to blend with the
overall architectural character of the site, including material, color, and
texture. Where possible, landscaping should be used to soften the appearance of
walls.
      (2)   Walls shall not be blank, long surfaces, but rather should be
articulated with intervening pillars, alternating heights, offsetting sections,
and materials that provide variety, including material texturing (as with
plaster treatments).
      (3)   Screening fences shall be compatible with the overall site design.
Chain link fencing with slats is acceptable for areas not visible from the
street. Exterior storage shall be limited to portions of the site least visible
to public view.
   (E)   Building design.
      (1)   Consideration should be given to the height and scale of buildings
so that they are compatible with that of surrounding development. The height of
new buildings shall transition from adjoining buildings to the maximum building
height of the new structure.
      (2)   Large buildings shall be designed to avoid the appearance of a box-
like structure. Methods to achieve this objective include:
         (a)   Vary the planes of the exterior walls. Walls should not run in
one direction for more than 50 feet without an offset.
         (b)   Vary the height of buildings so that they appear to be divided
into distinct massing elements.
         (c)   Articulate the different parts of a building's exterior by use
of color and material changes, trim accents, window placement, and other facade
elements.
         (d)   Use of landscaping, including climbing vines, can work to reduce
the bulky appearance of buildings.
         (e)   All building faces shall receive architectural treatment, not
just the street face of the building. Walls and roof lines should have varied
planes.
      (3)   Rooflines should not run in a continuous plane for more than 50
feet without offsetting or jogging the roof plane.
      (4)   All roof-mounted equipment shall be screened from public view by
materials similar to those used in the overall structure. Mechanical equipment
should be located below the highest vertical element of the building.
      (5)   Where appropriate, the use of awnings is encouraged. Awning color
and form should be consistent. Plexiglas, metal, and glossy vinyl awnings are
discouraged, while canvas, fabric, and matte finish vinyl awnings are
encouraged.
      (6)   The following standards for building color should be observed:
         (a)   Where possible, the number of colors appearing on exterior walls
should be minimized. Most structures should use no more than three colors.
         (b)   Large areas of white should be avoided. The use of a subdued
dominating color is encouraged, however a bright trim color may be appropriate.
         (c)   Colors used on new buildings should be complementary to colors
used on surrounding existing development unless surrounding buildings use
colors that strongly conflict with these standards.
   (F)   Lighting.
      (1)   Exterior lighting is required to provide illumination for the
security and safety of on-site areas such as parking, loading, shipping and
receiving, pathways, and other work areas.
      (2)   The design of light fixtures should be architecturally compatible
with on-site buildings.
      (3)   All light fixtures must be shielded to confine the spread of light
within the boundaries of the site, particularly where uses sensitive to
exterior lighting are located in close proximity.
   (G)   Driveways.
      (1)   Driveways shall conform to city commercial driveway approach
standards.
      (2)   Entrance driveways to major activity centers shall be no closer
than 200 feet from the adjacent intersection of a collector or arterial street,
measured from the end of the curb return to the nearest edge of the driveway.
Entrance driveways for service stations, small commercial properties, or
neighborhood shopping centers shall be no closer than 50 feet from the adjacent
intersection, measured from the end of the curb return to the nearest edge of
the driveway.
      (3)   Service driveways, or private alleys, provided at the rear of
commercial buildings for delivery of goods shall have a minimum width of 25
feet. The City Engineer shall approve all service driveways or private alleys
located within 50 feet of a street intersection (measured from the end of the
curb return to the nearest edge of the driveway) or other commercial driveway.
      (4)   All entrance driveways for major shopping centers that provide for
left and right turning movements on arterial streets shall have a driveway
throat of 100 feet.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.50.100 Standards that apply in all Industrial zones.
   The following guidelines apply to all development occurring within the M
districts and are intended to facilitate high-quality development that
complements the character of Tulare.
   (A)   Site design.
      (1)   For industrial complexes that include multiple buildings (such as
an industrial campus), the placement of structures that create opportunities
for plazas, courts, or gardens is encouraged. Setback areas may be used to
provide space for employee lunch/break areas.
      (2)   Where industrial uses are adjacent to non-industrial uses,
buffering techniques such as setbacks, screening, and landscaping shall be
provided to reduce/eliminate any negative impacts of industrial operations.
   (B)   Parking and circulation. Important design considerations for parking
and circulation include the location of ingress and egress points, on-site
pedestrian and vehicle traffic circulation patterns, and service functions. The
purpose is to ensure efficient circulation, safety, and visual quality.
      (1)   Site access and internal circulation should be designed in a manner
that emphasizes safety and efficiency. Consideration should be given to the
separation of employee/customer parking and commercial vehicle operations
(trucking, delivery, etc.).
      (2)   Parking facilities shall be designed so that vehicles can move from
one area to another on the same site without entering the street, and with an
adequate amount of on-site parking to prevent trucks and other vehicles from
parking or idling on public streets.
      (3)   Separate vehicle and pedestrian circulation systems should be
considered in the design of parking facilities. Pedestrian linkages between
buildings in multi-structure industrial developments shall be implemented if
applicable. To improve vehicle circulation, parking aisles, signs, and drive
aisle pavement markings shall identify onsite circulation patterns and should
be aligned with vehicle circulation routes.
      (4)   Facilities shall be designed to provide common driveways to provide
access to adjacent sites and improve on-site circulation.
      (5)   Parking driveways (access points) shall be located as far as
possible from street intersections to avoid traffic problems. The number of
access points shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary to provide
adequate circulation.
      (6)   Parking lots shall be screened from adjoining streets by the use of
low earth berms, walls, landscaping, or a combination of these methods.
      (7)   Industrial sites shall be designed to accommodate all parking needs
generated by the use. The use of the public street for parking, staging, and
maintenance of trucks is not permitted. Signs shall be installed in adjacent
residential areas noting that facility truck and employee parking and
maintenance of trucks is prohibited in residential areas and public streets.
      (8)   Parking lots shall be designed to accommodate solid waste pick-up
service without excessive backing-up of service trucks.
      (9)   Facilities shall be designed to provide a separate entrance for
heavy-duty trucks accessible via designated truck routes or major streets away
from sensitive receptors and local residential streets.
   (C)   Loading facilities.
      (1)   Loading facilities shall be located out of sight of the public-of-
way, to the extent possible. Loading docks are most appropriately located at
the rear of buildings, however when the rear of buildings is adjacent to noise-
sensitive land uses, loading dock locations should be planned to minimize
associated noise impacts on surrounding land uses .
      (2)   Highly visible loading facilities shall be screened from view
particularly if it is not possible to locate them at the rear of the building.
      (3)   For industrial sites within 500 feet of sensitive receptors, heavy-
duty trucks shall have a separate entrance accessible via a truck route,
arterial road, major thoroughfare, or a local road that predominantly serves
commercial oriented uses.
      (4)   Truck entry, exit, and internal circulation shall be located away
from sensitive receptors. Heavy-duty diesel truck drive aisles shall be
prohibited from being used on sides of the building that are directly adjacent
to a sensitive receptor property line.
      (5)   Loading facilities shall be located so that vehicles are not
required to use public streets backing into loading docks.
   (D)   Building design.
      (1)   Avoid long, blank building facades, particularly on walls visible
from the public right-of-way. Facades with varied setbacks are encouraged. If
possible, wall planes should not run in one continuous direction for more than
50 feet without an offset.
      (2)   All elevations to a building should be architecturally treated to
avoid monotonous overall design.
      (3)   Window and doors are key elements of a structure's form and should
relate to the scale of the facade on which they appear. Windows and doors can
help establish character by their rhythm, spacing, and variety. Recessed
openings further work to provide depth and contrast on elevation planes.
      (4)   Metal buildings should be architecturally designed, providing
variety and visual interest to the streetscape.
      (5)   All roof-mounted equipment shall be screened from public view by
materials similar to those used in the overall structure. Mechanical equipment
should be located below the highest vertical element of the building.
      (6)   Design elements that are undesirable and should be avoided include:
         (a)   Highly reflective surfaces.
         (b)   Large blank, unarticulated wall surfaces.
         (c)   Exposed, treated block walls.
         (d)   Poorly designed mansard roofs on a portion of the roofline.
         (e)   Materials with high maintenance requirements, such as stained
wood or shingles.
   (E)   Lighting.
      (1)   The design of light fixtures should be architecturally compatible
with on-site buildings.
      (2)   All light fixtures must be shielded to confine the spread of light
within the boundaries of the site, particularly where uses sensitive to
exterior lighting are located in close proximity.
   (F)   Driveways.
      (1)   Driveways shall conform to city industrial driveway approach
standards.
      (2)   Driveways designed for heavy truck usage shall not exceed 60 feet
in width without approval from the City Engineer.
   Development Standards165
      (3)   Minimum separation between on-site driveways shall be 100 feet.
   (G)   Monitored electrified security fences.
      (1)   'Monitored electrified security fence' means a perimeter alarm
system with an assembly of battery-powered equipment, including, but not
limited to, a monitored alarm device and an energizer which is intended to
periodically deliver pulses to a security fence, a battery charging device used
exclusively to charge the system's battery, and other integrated components.
      (2)   The monitored perimeter security fence system shall transmit a
signal to an alarm monitoring business in response to an intrusion or burglary.
The system shall not directly connect to or call law enforcement. The business
must first verify the alarm event prior to requesting the deployment of law
enforcement.
      (3)   The design, construction, and use of monitored electrified security
fences shall be allowed, subject to the following requirements:
         (a)   IEC Standard 60335-2-76. Unless otherwise specified herein,
Monitored Electrified Security Fences shall be constructed and operated in
conformance with the specifications set forth in International Electrotechnical
Commission (IEC) Standard No. 60335-2-76, current edition.
         (b)   Power source. The energizer for monitored electrified security
fences must be driven by a commercial storage battery not to exceed 12 volts
DC. The storage battery is charged by a solar panel.
         (c)   Perimeter barrier. Monitored electrified security fences shall
be installed behind a minimum five-foot-high, maximum seven-foot-high, non-
electrified perimeter barrier. On all new fencing, a minimum of six feet high
shall apply.
         (d)   Emergency gate access. Before a monitored perimeter security
fence is activated, a Knox device shall be approved by the Fire Department. The
Knox device will be installed at the main entry gate and fully functional at
all times when the monitored electrified security fence is operational.
         (e)   Setback. The monitored electrified security fence shall be
setback four inches to 12 inches from the non-electrified perimeter barrier.
         (f)   Height. Monitored electrified security fences shall be a minimum
of two feet above the non-electrified perimeter barrier, but in no event, more
than ten feet in height.
         (g)   Warning signs. Monitored electrified security fences shall be
clearly identified with warning signs that read: 'Warning-Electric Fence' at
intervals of not less than 30 feet.
      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any person to install, maintain, or
operate a monitored electrified security fence in violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.52: LANDSCAPE STANDARDS
   Section
   
10.52.010   Purpose.
   
10.52.020   Objectives.
   
10.52.030   Definitions.
   
10.52.040   Applicability.
   
10.52.050   Designation of responsibilities.
   
10.52.060   Compliance with Landscape Documentation Package.
   
10.52.070   Penalties.
   
10.52.080   Elements of the Landscape Documentation Package.
   
10.52.090   Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet.
   
10.52.100   Soil Management Report.
   
10.52.110   Landscape design plan.
   
10.52.120   Irrigation design plan.
   
10.52.130   Grading design plan.
   
10.52.140   Certificate of Completion.
   
10.52.150   Development standards.
   
10.52.160   Irrigation scheduling.
   
10.52.170   Landscape and irrigation maintenance scheduling.
   
10.52.180   Irrigation audit, irrigation survey, and irrigation water use
analysis.
   
10.52.190   Irrigation efficiency.
   
10.52.200   Recycled water and graywater systems.
   
10.52.210   Stormwater management and rainwater retention.
   
10.52.220   Public education.
   
10.52.230   Environmental review.
   
10.52.240   Provisions for existing landscapes.
   
10.52.250   Existing landscape areas.
   
10.52.260   Water waste prevention.
   
10.52.270   Effective precipitation.
   
10.52.280   Appendices.
   
10.52.290   Enforcement and penalties.
§ 10.52.010 Purpose.
   (A)   The State Legislature has found:
      (1)   That the waters of the state are of limited supply and are subject
to ever-increasing demands.
      (2)   That the continuation of California's economic prosperity is
dependent on the availability of adequate supplies of water for future uses.
      (3)   That it is the policy of the state to promote the conservation and
efficient use of water and to prevent the waste of this valuable resource.
      (4)   That landscapes are essential to the quality of life in California
by providing areas for active and passive recreation and as an enhancement to
the environment by cleaning air and water, preventing erosion, offering fire
protection, and replacing ecosystems lost to development.
      (5)   That landscape design, installation, maintenance, and management
can and should be water efficient.
      (6)   That Section 2 of Article X of the California Constitution
specifies that the right to use water is limited to the amount reasonably
required for the beneficial use to be served, and the right does not and shall
not extend to waste or unreasonable methods of use.
   (B)   Consistent with these legislative findings, the purpose of this
chapter is to:
      (1)   Promote the values and benefits of landscaping practices that
integrate and go beyond the conservation and efficient use of water.
      (2)   Establish a structure for planning, designing, installing,
maintaining, and managing water-efficient landscapes in new construction and
rehabilitated projects by encouraging the use of a watershed approach that
requires the cross-sector collaboration of industry, government, and property
owners to achieve the many benefits possible.
      (3)   Establish provisions for water management practices and water waste
prevention for existing landscapes.
      (4)   Use water efficiently without waste by setting a maximum applied
water allowance as an upper limit for water use and reducing water use to the
lowest practical amount.
      (5)   Promote the benefits of consistent landscape ordinances with
neighboring local and regional agencies.
      (6)   Encourage the use of economic incentives that promote the efficient
use of water, such as implementing a tiered-rate structure.
      (7)   Encourage cooperation between the City of Tulare and other local
agencies to implement and enforce this chapter.
   (C)   Landscapes that are planned, designed, installed, managed, and
maintained with the watershed-based approach can improve California's
environmental conditions, provide benefits, and realize sustainability goals.
Such landscapes will make the urban environment resilient in the face of
climatic extremes. Consistent with the legislative findings and purposes of
this chapter, conditions in the urban setting will be improved by:
      (1)   Creating the conditions to support life in the soil by reducing
compaction, incorporating organic matter that increases water retention, and
promoting productive plant growth that leads to more carbon storage, oxygen
production, shade, habitat, and esthetic benefits.
      (2)   Minimizing energy use by reducing irrigation water requirements,
reducing reliance on petroleum-based fertilizers and pesticides, and planting
climate-appropriate shade trees in urban areas.
      (3)   Conserving water by capturing and reusing rainwater and graywater
wherever possible and selecting climate-appropriate plants that need minimal
supplemental water after establishment.
      (4)   Protecting air and water quality by reducing power equipment use
and landfill disposal trips, selecting recycled and locally sourced materials,
and using compost, mulch, and efficient irrigation equipment to prevent
erosion.
      (5)   Protecting existing habitat and creating new habitat by choosing
locally native plants, climate-adapted non-natives, and avoiding invasive
plants. Utilizing integrated pest management with the least toxic methods as
the first course of action.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.52.020 Objectives.
   The objective of this chapter is to establish landscaping regulations that
achieve the following:
   (A)   Conserve water through the selection of plants consistent with
Tulare's Mediterranean climate and the design of water-efficient landscapes.
   (B)   Enhance the aesthetic appearance of the city by promoting development
that is well- landscaped, properly irrigated, and effectively maintained.
Further, encourage a landscaping scheme that facilitates the following design
concepts, where possible:
      (1)   Extensive use of vines on bare walls and fences.
      (2)   Use of plantings to create shadows and patterns against walls.
      (3)   Use of trees to create canopies and shade, especially in parking
lots.
      (4)   Use of flowering trees in informal groups to provide color and a
focal point.
      (5)   Use of informal massing or colorful plantings to create visual
interest.
      (6)   Use of berms, hedges, low walls, and landscaping to screen parking
areas, trash enclosures, and utility areas from public rights-of-way.
      (7)   Use of space between buildings and streets for landscaping with a
hierarchy of plants, including trees, shrubs, and turf or groundcover.
      (8)   Use of a colorful landscaped edge at the base of buildings to avoid
pavement being located at the base of structures.
   (C)   Reduce ambient temperatures along streets, in parking lots, and around
buildings in an effort to conserve energy that is related to cooling.
   (D)   Preserve the integrity of residential neighborhoods by using
landscaping to screen incompatible uses, provide shade for pedestrian and
vehicular traffic, and enhance the beauty of the residential setting.
   (E)   Provide for both solar access for energy generation and for winter
warming by properly placing trees in locations that encourage such purposes.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.52.030 Definitions.
   The terms used in this chapter have the meaning set forth below:
   APPLIED WATER. The portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the
landscape.
   AUTOMATIC IRRIGATION CONTROLLER. A timing device used to remotely control
valves that operate an irrigation system. AUTOMATIC IRRIGATION CONTROLLERS are
able to self-adjust and schedule irrigation events using either
evapotranspiration (weather-based) or soil moisture data.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. A safety device used to prevent pollution or
contamination of the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the
irrigation system.
   CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION. The document required under §
10.52.140.
   CERTIFIED IRRIGATION DESIGNER. A person certified to design irrigation
systems by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade
organization, or other program such as the US Environmental Protection Agency's
WaterSense irrigation designer certification program and Irrigation
Association's Certified Irrigation Designer program.
   CERTIFIED LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION AUDITOR. A person certified to perform
landscape irrigation audits by an accredited academic institution, a
professional trade organization, or another program such as the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency's WaterSense irrigation auditor certification
program and Irrigation Association's Certified Landscape Irrigation Auditor
program.
   CHECK VALVE or ANTI-DRAIN VALVE. A valve located under a sprinkler head or
other location in the irrigation system to hold water in the system to prevent
drainage from sprinkler heads when the sprinkler is off.
   COMMON INTEREST DEVELOPMENTS. Community apartment projects, condominium
projects, planned developments, and stock cooperatives per Cal. Civil Code §
1351.
   COMPOST. The safe and stable product of controlled biological decomposition
of organic materials that is beneficial to plant growth.
   CONVERSION FACTOR (0.62). The number that converts acre-inches per acre per
year to gallons per square foot per year.
   DISTRIBUTION UNIFORMITY. The measure of the uniformity of irrigation water
over a defined area.
   DRIP IRRIGATION. Any non-spray low-volume irrigation system utilizing
emission devices with a flow rate measured in gallons per hour. Low-volume
irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water
slowly at or near the root zone of plants.
   ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION PROJECT. A project where the site is intentionally
altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem.
   EFFECTIVE PRECIPITATION OR USABLE RAINFALL (EPPT). The portion of total
precipitation that becomes available for plant growth.
   EMITTER. A drip irrigation emission device that delivers water slowly from
the system to the soil.
   ESTABLISHED LANDSCAPE. The point at which plants in the landscape have
developed significant root growth into the soil. Typically, most plants are
established after one or two years of growth.
   ESTABLISHMENT PERIOD OF THE PLANTS. The first year after installing the
plant in the landscape or the first two years if irrigation will be terminated
after establishment. Typically, most plants are established after one or two
years of growth. Native habitat mitigation areas and trees may need three to
five years for establishment.
   ESTIMATED TOTAL WATER USE (ETWU). The total water used for the landscape as
described in §
10.52.090.
   ET ADJUSTMENT FACTOR (ETAF). A factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45
for non-residential areas, that, when applied to reference evapotranspiration,
adjusts for plant factors and irrigation efficiency, two major influences upon
the amount of water that needs to be applied to the landscape. The ETAF for a
new and existing (non-rehabilitated special landscape area shall not exceed
1.0. The ETAF for existing non-rehabilitated landscapes is 0.8.
   EVAPORATION RATE. The quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil and
other surfaces and transpired by plants during a specified time.
   FLOW RATE. The rate at which water flows through pipes, valves, and emission
devices, measured in gallons per minute, gallons per hour, or cubic feet per
second.
   FLOW SENSOR. An inline device installed at the supply point of the
irrigation system that produces a repeatable signal proportional to the flow
rate. Flow sensors must be connected to an automatic irrigation controller or
flow monitor capable of receiving flow signals and operating master valves.
This combination flow sensor/controller may also function as a landscape water
meter or submeter.
   FRIABLE. A soil condition that is easily crumbled or loosely compacted down
to a minimum depth per planting material requirements, whereby the root
structure of newly planted material will be allowed to spread unimpeded.
   FUEL MODIFICATION PLAN GUIDELINE. Guidelines from a local fire authority to
assist residents and businesses that are developing land or building structures
in a fire hazard severity zone.
   GRAYWATER. Untreated wastewater that has not been contaminated by any toilet
discharge, has not been affected by infectious, contaminated, or unhealthy
bodily wastes, and does not present a threat from contamination by unhealthful
processing, manufacturing, or operating wastes. GRAYWATER includes but is not
limited to, wastewater from bathtubs, showers, bathroom washbasins, clothes
washing machines, and laundry tubs but does not include wastewater from kitchen
sinks or dishwashers (see Cal. Health and Safety Code § 17922.12).
   HARDSCAPES. Any durable material (pervious and non-pervious).
   HYDROZONE. A portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water
needs and rooting depth. A HYDROZONE may be irrigated or non-irrigated.
   INFILTRATION RATE. The rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a
depth of water per unit of time (e.g., inches per hour).
   INVASIVE PLANT SPECIES. Species of plants not historically found in
California that spread outside cultivated areas and can damage environmental or
economic resources. INVASIVE SPECIES may be regulated by county agricultural
agencies as noxious species. Lists of invasive plants are maintained at the
California Invasive Plant Inventory and USDA invasive and noxious weeds
database.
   IRRIGATION AUDIT. An in-depth evaluation of the performance of an irrigation
system conducted by a Certified Landscape Irrigation Auditor. An IRRIGATION
AUDIT includes but is not limited to inspection, system tune-up, system test
with distribution uniformity or emission uniformity, reporting overspray or
runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule.
The audit must be conducted in a manner consistent with the Irrigation
Association's Landscape Irrigation Auditor Certification program or other U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency "WaterSense" labeled auditing program.
   IRRIGATION EFFICIENCY (IE). The measurement of the amount of water
beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. IRRIGATION EFFICIENCY
is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics
and management practices. The minimum average irrigation efficiency for
purposes of this chapter is 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip
systems.
   IRRIGATION SURVEY. An evaluation of an irrigation system that is less
detailed than an irrigation audit. An IRRIGATION SURVEY includes but is not
limited to inspection, system tests, and written recommendations to improve the
performance of the irrigation system.
   IRRIGATION WATER USE ANALYSIS. An analysis of water use data based on meter
readings and billing data.
   LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT. A person who holds a license to practice landscape
architecture in the Cal. Business and Professions Code § 5615.
   LANDSCAPE AREA. All the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a
landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water allowance
calculation. The LANDSCAPE AREA does not include footprints of buildings or
structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone
walks, other pervious or non-pervious hardscapes, and other non-irrigated areas
designated for non-development (e.g., open spaces and existing native
vegetation).
   LANDSCAPE CONTRACTOR. A person licensed by the State of California to
construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of
landscape systems.
   LANDSCAPE DOCUMENTATION PACKAGE. The documents required under §
10.52.060.
   LANDSCAPE PROJECT. The total area of landscape in a project as defined in
LANDSCAPE AREA for the purposes of this chapter, meeting requirements under §
10.52.090.
   LANDSCAPE WATER METER. An inline device installed at the irrigation supply
point that measures the flow of water into the irrigation system and is
connected to a totalizer to record water use.
   LATERAL LINE. The water delivery pipeline that supplies water to the
emitters or sprinklers from the valve.
   LOCAL AGENCY. A city or county, including a charter city or charter county,
that is responsible for adopting and implementing the ordinance. The LOCAL
AGENCY is also responsible for the enforcement of this chapter, including, but
not limited to, approval of a permit and plan check or design review of a
project.
   LOCAL WATER PURVEYOR. Any entity, including a public agency, city, county,
or private water company that provides retail water service. The LOCAL WATER
PURVEYOR in the City of Tulare is the city.
   LOW-VOLUME IRRIGATION. The application of irrigation water at low pressure
through a system of tubing or lateral lines and low-volume emitters such as
drip, drip lines, and bubblers. LOW-VOLUME IRRIGATION systems are specifically
designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of
plants.
   MAIN LINE. The pressurized pipeline that delivers water from the water
source to the valve or outlet.
   MASTER SHUT-OFF VALVE. An automatic valve installed at the irrigation supply
point, which controls water flow into the irrigation system. When this valve is
closed, water will not be supplied to the irrigation system. A master valve
will greatly reduce any water loss due to a leaky station valve.
   MAXIMUM APPLIED WATER ALLOWANCE (MAWA). The upper limit of annual applied
water for the established landscaped area as specified in §
10.52.090. It is based on the area's reference evapotranspiration, the ET
adjustment factor, and the size of the landscape area. The estimated total
water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. Special
landscape areas, including recreation areas, areas permanently and solely
dedicated to edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens, and areas
irrigated with recycled water are subject to the MAWA with an ETAF not to
exceed 1.0. MAWA=(Eto) (0.62) [(ETAF x LA) + ((1-ETAF) x SLA].
   MEDIAN. An area between opposing lanes of traffic that may be unplanted or
planted with trees, shrubs, perennials, and ornamental grasses.
   MICROCLIMATE. The climate of a small, specific area that may contrast with
the climate of the overall landscape area due to factors such as wind, sun
exposure, plant density, or proximity to reflective surfaces.
   MINED-LAND RECLAMATION PROJECTS. Any surface mining operation with a
reclamation plan approved in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation
Act of 1975.
   MULCH. Any organic material such as leaves, bark, straw, compost, or
inorganic mineral materials such as rocks, gravel, or decomposed granite left
loose and applied to the soil surface for the beneficial purposes of reducing
evaporation, suppressing weeds, moderating soil temperature, and preventing
soil erosion.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of this chapter, a new building with a
landscape or other new landscape, such as a park, playground, or greenbelt
without an associated building.
   NON-RESIDENTIAL LANDSCAPE. Landscapes in commercial, institutional,
industrial, and public settings that may have areas designated for recreation
or public assembly. It also includes portions of common areas of common
interest for developments with designated recreational areas.
   OPERATING PRESSURE. The pressure at which the parts of an irrigation system
are designed by the manufacturer to operate.
   OVERHEAD SPRINKLER IRRIGATION SYSTEMS. Systems that deliver water through
the air (e.g., spray heads and rotors).
   OVERSPRAY. The irrigation water which is delivered beyond the target area.
   PERMIT. An authorizing document issued by local agencies for new
construction or rehabilitated landscapes.
   PERVIOUS. Any surface or material that allows the passage of water through
the material and into the underlying soil.
   PLANT FACTOR or PLANT WATER USE FACTOR. A factor that, when multiplied by
eto, estimates the amount of water needed by plants. For purposes of this
chapter, the plant factor range for very low water-use plants is 0 - 0.1, and
the plant factor range for low water-use plants is 0.2 to 0.3. The plant factor
range for moderate water-use plants is 0.4 to 0.6, and the Plant Factor range
for high water-use plants is 0.7 to 1.0. plant factors cited in this chapter
are derived from the publication "Water Use Classification of Landscape
Species." PLANT FACTORS may also be obtained from horticultural researchers
from academic institutions or professional associations as approved by the
California Department of Water Resources (DWR).
   PROJECT APPLICANT. The individual or entity submitting a Landscape
Documentation Package required under §
10.52.060 to request a permit, plan check, or site plan review from the City of
Tulare. A project applicant may be the property owner or his or her designee.
   RAIN SENSOR or RAIN SENSING SHUTOFF DEVICE. A component that automatically
suspends an irrigation event when it rains.
   RECORD DRAWING or AS-BUILTS. A set of reproducible drawings that show
significant changes in the work made during construction and which are usually
based on drawings marked up in the field and other data furnished by the
contractor.
   RECREATIONAL AREA. Areas, excluding private single-family residential areas,
designated for active play, recreation, or public assembly in parks, sports
fields, picnic grounds, amphitheaters, or golf courses - tees, fairways,
roughs, surrounds, and greens.
   RECYCLED WATER, RECLAIMED WATER, or TREATED SEWAGE EFFLUENT WATER. Treated
or recycled waste water of a quality suitable for non-potable uses such as
landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for human
consumption.
   REFERENCE EVAPOTRANSPIRATION or ETo. A standard measurement of environmental
parameters that affect the water use of plants. ETo is expressed in inches per
day, month, or year as represented for the State of California in Appendix A of
the Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance, and is an estimate of the
evapotranspiration of a large field of four- to seven-inch tall, cool-season
grass that is well-watered. REFERENCE EVAPOTRANSPIRATION is used as the basis
for determining the maximum applied water allowance so that regional
differences in climate can be accommodated. The ETo for the City of Tulare is
50.7.
   REGIONAL WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE ORDINANCE. A local ordinance adopted by
two or more local agencies, water suppliers, and other stakeholders for
implementing a consistent set of landscape provisions throughout a geographical
region. Regional ordinances are strongly encouraged to provide a consistent
framework for the landscape industry and applicants to adhere to.
   REHABILITATED LANDSCAPE. Any re-landscaping project that requires a permit,
plan check, or site plan review, meets the requirements of §
10.52.040, and the modified landscape area is equal to or greater than 2,500
square feet.
   RESIDENTIAL LANDSCAPE. Landscapes surrounding single or multi-family homes.
   RUNOFF. Water that is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is
applied and flows from the landscape area. For example, runoff may result from
water that is applied at too great a rate (application rate exceeds
infiltration rate) or when there is a slope.
   SOIL MOISTURE SENSING DEVICE or SOIL MOISTURE SENSOR. A device that measures
the amount of water in the soil. The device may also suspend or initiate an
irrigation event.
   SOIL TEXTURE. The classification of soil based on its percentage of sand,
silt, and clay.
   SPECIAL LANDSCAPE AREA (SLA). An area of the landscape dedicated solely to
edible plants, recreational areas, and areas irrigated with recycled water.
   SPRINKLER HEAD. A device that delivers water through a nozzle.
   STATIC WATER PRESSURE. The pipeline or municipal water supply pressure when
water is not flowing.
   STATION. An area served by one valve or by a set of valves that operate
simultaneously.
   SWING JOINT. An irrigation component that provides a flexible, leak-free
connection between the emission device and lateral pipeline to allow movement
in any direction and prevent equipment damage.
   SUBMETER. A metering device to measure water applied to the landscape that
is installed after the primary utility water meter.
   TURF. A groundcover surface of mowed grass. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky
bluegrass, perennial ryegrass, red fescue, and tall fescue are cool-season
grasses. Bermudagrass, Kikuyugrass, Seashore Paspalum, St. Augustinegrass,
Zoysiagrass, and Buffalo grass are warm-season grasses.
   VALVE. A device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system.
   WATER CONSERVING PLANT SPECIES. A plant species identified as having a very
low or low plant factor.
   WATER FEATURE. A design element where open water performs an aesthetic or
recreational function. WATER FEATURES include ponds, lakes, waterfalls,
fountains, artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools (where water is
artificially supplied). The surface area of water features is included in the
high water use hydrozone of the landscape area. Constructed wetlands used for
on-site wastewater treatment or stormwater best management practices that are
not irrigated and used solely for water treatment or stormwater retention are
not water features and, therefore, are not subject to the water budget
calculation.
   WATERING WINDOW. The time of day irrigation is allowed.
   WUCOLS. The Water Use Classification of Landscape Species published by the
University of California Cooperative Extension and the Department of Water
Resources.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.52.040 Applicability.
   (A)   After December 1, 2015, and consistent with Executive Order No. B-29-
15, this chapter shall apply to all of the following landscape projects:
      (1)   New development projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to
or greater than 500 square feet require a building or landscape permit, plan
check, or site plan review.
      (2)   Rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area
equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet require a building or landscape
permit, plan check, or site plan review.
      (3)   Existing landscapes limited to §§
10.52.240,
10.52.250, and
10.52.260.
      (4)   Cemeteries. Recognizing the special landscape management needs of
cemeteries, new and rehabilitated cemeteries are limited to §§
10.52.090,
10.52.170, and
10.52.180; and existing cemeteries are limited to §§
10.52.240,
10.52.250, and
10.52.260.
   (B)   Any project with an aggregate landscape area of 2,500 square feet or
less may comply with the performance requirements of this chapter or conform to
the prescriptive measures contained in §
10.52.080(A).
   (C)   For projects using treated or untreated graywater or rainwater
captured on site, any lot or parcel within the project that has less than 2,500
square feet of landscape and meets the lot or parcel's landscape water
requirement (estimated total water use) entirely with treated or untreated
graywater or through stored rainwater captured on site is subject only to §
10.52.080(A)(5).
   (D)   This chapter does not apply to:
      (1)   Registered local, state, or federal historical sites.
      (2)   Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent
irrigation system.
      (3)   Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent
irrigation system.
      (4)   Plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open
to the public.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.52.050 Designation of responsibilities.
   The City of Tulare designates the Community Services Department and the
Planning Division of the Community Development Department to implement the
requirements contained in this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.52.060 Compliance with Landscape Documentation Package.
   Prior to construction, the City of Tulare shall:
   (A)   Provide the project applicant with this chapter and procedures for
permits, plan checks, or site plan reviews.
   (B)   Review the Landscape Documentation Package submitted by the project
applicant.
   (C)   Approve or deny the Landscape Documentation Package.
   (D)   Issue a permit or approve the plan check or site plan review for the
project applicant.
   (E)   Provide inspection of the irrigation system and plant species as
approved under division (B).
   (F)   Upon filing a certificate of completion by the project applicant, the
project shall be accepted as complete.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.52.070 Penalties.
   The City of Tulare may identify penalties to the project applicant for non-
compliance with this chapter per the penalties enumerated in §
10.52.290.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.52.080 Elements of the Landscape Documentation Package.
   (A)   Projects 2,500 square feet or less. Projects 2,500 square feet or less
may comply with the requirements of this chapter by conforming to the
prescriptive measures below. Compliance with all of the following items is
mandatory and must be documented on a landscape plan in order to use the
prescriptive compliance option:
      (1)   Submit a Landscape Documentation Package that includes the
following elements:
         (a)   Date.
         (b)   Project applicant.
         (c)   Project address (if available, parcel and/or lot number(s)).
         (d)   Total landscape area (square feet), including a breakdown of
turf and plant material.
         (e)   Project type (e.g., new, rehabilitated, public, private,
cemetery, homeowner-installed).
         (f)   Water supply type (e.g., potable, recycled, well) and identify
the local retail water purveyor if the applicant is not served by a private
well.
         (g)   Contact information for the project applicant and property
owner.
         (h)   Applicant signature and date with the statement, "I agree to
comply with the requirements of the prescriptive compliance option of the
MWELO."
         (i)   Incorporate compost at a rate of at least four cubic yards per
1,000 square feet to a depth of six inches into the landscape area (unless
contraindicated by a soil test).
      (2)   Plant material shall comply with all of the following:
         (a)   For residential areas, install climate-adapted plants that
require occasional, little or no summer water (average WUCOLS plant factor 0.3)
for 75% of the plant area excluding edibles and areas using recycled water; for
non-residential areas, install climate-adapted plants that require occasional,
little or no summer water (average WUCOLS plant factor 0.3) for 100% of the
plant area excluding edibles and areas using recycled water.
         (b)   A minimum three-inch layer of mulch shall be applied on all
exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or
rooting groundcovers, or direct seeding applications where mulch is
contraindicated.
      (3)   Turf shall comply with all of the following:
         (a)   Turf shall not exceed 25% of the landscape area in residential
areas, and there shall be no turf in non-residential areas.
         (b)   Turf shall not be planted on sloped areas that exceed a slope of
one-foot vertical elevation change for every four feet of horizontal length.
         (c)   Turf is prohibited in parkways less than ten feet wide unless
the parkway is adjacent to a parking strip and used to enter and exit vehicles.
Any turf in parkways must be irrigated by sub-surface irrigation or by other
technology that creates no overspray or runoff.
      (4)   Irrigation systems shall comply with the following:
         (a)   Automatic irrigation controllers are required and must use
evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data.
         (b)   Irrigation controllers shall be of a type that does not lose
programming data in the event the primary power source is interrupted.
         (c)   Pressure regulators shall be installed on the irrigation system
to ensure the dynamic pressure of the system is within the manufacturer's
recommended pressure range.
         (d)   Manual shut-off valves (such as gate valves, ball valves, or
butterfly valves) shall be installed as close as possible to the point of
connection to the water supply.
         (e)   All irrigation emission devices must meet the requirements set
in the ANSI standard, ASABE/ICC 802-2014, "Landscape Irrigation Sprinkler and
Emitter Standard." All sprinkler heads installed in the landscape must document
a distribution uniformity of a low quarter of 0.65 or higher using the protocol
defined in ASABE/ICC 802-2014.
      (5)   At the time of final inspection, the permit applicant must provide
the owner of the property with a certificate of completion, certificate of
installation, irrigation schedule, and a schedule of landscape and irrigation
maintenance.
   (B)   Any project over 2,500 square feet. The Landscape Documentation
Package shall include the following six elements:
      (1)   Project information:
         (a)   Date.
         (b)   Project applicant.
         (c)   Project address (if available, parcel and/or lot number(s)).
         (d)   Total landscape area (square feet).
         (e)   Project type (e.g., new, rehabilitated, public, private,
cemetery, homeowner-installed).
         (f)   Water supply type (e.g., potable, recycled, well) and identify
the local retail water purveyor if the applicant is not served by a private
well.
         (g)   Checklist of all documents in the Landscape Documentation
Package.
         (h)   Project contacts to include contact information for the project
applicant and property owner.
         (i)   Applicant signature and date with the statement, "I agree to
comply with the requirements of the water-efficient landscape ordinance and
submit a complete Landscape Documentation Package."
      (2)   Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet:
         (a)   Hydrozone information table.
         (b)   Water budget calculations:
            1.   Maximum applied water allowance (MAWA).
            2.   Estimated total water use (ETWU).
            3.   Soil management report.
            4.   Landscape design plan.
            5.   Irrigation design plan.
            6.   Grading design plan.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.52.090 Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet.
   (A)   A project applicant shall complete the Water Efficient Landscape
Worksheet in Appendix A, attached to Ordinance 15-11 and incorporated by
reference as if set forth in full herein, which contains information on the
plant factor, irrigation method, irrigation efficiency, and the area associated
with each hydrozone. Calculations are then made to show that the
evapotranspiration adjustment factor (ETAF) for the landscape project does not
exceed a factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for non-residential
areas, exclusive of special landscape areas. The ETAF for a landscape project
is based on the plant factors and irrigation methods selected. The maximum
applied water allowance is calculated based on the maximum ETAF allowed (0.55
for residential areas and 0.45 for non-residential areas) and expressed as
annual gallons required. The estimated total water use (ETWU) is calculated
based on the plants used and the irrigation method selected for the landscape
design. ETWU must be below MAWA.
      (1)   In calculating the maximum applied water allowance and estimated
total water use in the City of Tulare, a project applicant shall use 50.6 as
the ETo value.
   (B)   Water budget calculations shall adhere to the following requirements:
      (1)   The plant factor used shall be from WUCOLS or from horticultural
researchers with academic institutions or professional associations as approved
by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR). The plant factor ranges
from 0 to 0.1 for very low water using plants, 0.2 to 0.3 for low water use
plants, from 0.4 to 0.6 for moderate water use plants, and from 0.7 to 1.0 for
high water use plants.
      (2)   All water features shall be included in the high water use
hydrozone and temporarily irrigated areas shall be included in the low water
use hydrozone.
      (3)   All special landscape areas shall be identified and their water use
calculated as shown in Appendix A, attached to Ordinance 15-11 and incorporated
by reference as if set forth in full herein.
      (4)   ETAF for new and existing (non-rehabilitated special landscape
areas shall not exceed 1.0).
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.52.100 Soil Management Report.
   In order to reduce runoff and encourage healthy plant growth, a soil
management report shall be completed by the project applicant, or his/her
designee, as follows:
   (A)   Submit soil samples to a laboratory for analysis and recommendations.
      (1)   Soil sampling shall be conducted in accordance with laboratory
protocol, including protocols regarding adequate sampling depth for the
intended plants.
      (2)   The soil analysis shall include:
         (a)   Soil texture.
         (b)   Infiltration rate determined by laboratory test or soil texture
infiltration rate table.
         (c)   pH.
         (d)   Total soluble salts.
         (e)   Sodium.
         (f)   Percent organic matter.
         (g)   Recommendations.
      (3)   In projects with multiple landscape installations (i.e., production
home developments), a soil sampling rate of one in seven lots or approximately
15% will satisfy this requirement. Large landscape projects shall sample at a
rate equivalent to one in seven lots.
   (B)   The project applicant, or his or her designee, shall comply with one
of the following:
      (1)   If significant mass grading is not planned, the soil analysis
report shall be submitted to the City of Tulare Community Development
Department as part of the Landscape Documentation Package.
      (2)   If significant mass grading is planned, the soil analysis report
shall be submitted to the City of Tulare Community Development Department as
part of the certificate of completion.
   (C)   The soil analysis report shall be made available, in a timely manner,
to the professionals preparing the landscape design plans and irrigation design
plans to make any necessary adjustments to the design plans.
   (D)   The project applicant, or his or her designee, shall submit
documentation verifying the implementation of soil analysis report
recommendations to the City of Tulare with a Certificate of Completion.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.52.110 Landscape design plan.
   (A)   For the efficient use of water, a landscape shall be carefully
designed and planned for the intended function of the project. A landscape
design plan meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of
the Landscape Documentation Package.
      (1)   Plant material.
         (a)   Any plant may be selected for the landscape, providing the
estimated total water use in the landscape area does not exceed the maximum
applied water allowance. To encourage the efficient use of water, the following
is highly recommended:
            1.   Protection and preservation of native species and natural
vegetation.
            2.   Selection of water-conserving tree and turf species,
especially local native plants.
            3.   Selection of plants based on local climate suitability,
disease, and pest resistance.
            4.   Selection of trees based on applicable local tree ordinances
or tree shading guidelines; and size at maturity as appropriate for the
planting area.
            5.   Selection of plants from local and regional landscape program
plant lists.
            6.   Selection of plants from local Fuel Modification Plan
Guidelines.
         (b)   Each hydrozone shall have plant materials with similar water
use, with the exception of hvdrozones with plants of mixed water use, as
specified in §
10.52.120.
         (c)   Plants shall be selected and planted appropriately based on
their adaptability to the climatic, geologic, and topographical conditions of
the project site. Methods to achieve water efficiency shall include one or more
of the following:
            1.   Use the Sunset Western Climate Zone System, which takes into
account temperature, humidity, elevation, terrain, latitude, and varying
degrees of continental and marine influence on local climate.
            2.   Recognize the horticultural attributes of plants (i.e., mature
plant size, invasive surface roots) to minimize damage to property or
infrastructure (e.g., buildings, sidewalks, power lines), and allow for
adequate soil volume for healthy root growth.
            3.   Consider the solar orientation for plant placement to maximize
summer shade and winter solar gain.
         (d)   Turf is not allowed on slopes greater than 25% where the toe of
the slope is adjacent to an impermeable hardscape and where 25% means one foot
of vertical elevation change for every four feet of horizontal length (rise
divided by run x 100 = slope percent).
         (e)   High-water plants, characterized by a plant factor of 0.7 to
1.0, are prohibited in street medians.
         (f)   A landscape design plan for projects in fire-prone areas shall
address fire safety and prevention. A defensible space or zone around a
building or structure is required per Cal. Public Resources Code § 4291(a) and
(b). Avoid fire-prone plant materials and highly flammable mulches. Refer to
the local Fuel Modification Plan guidelines.
         (g)   The use of invasive plant species, such as those listed by the
California Invasive Plant Council, is strongly discouraged.
         (h)   The architectural guidelines of common interest development that
include community apartment projects, condominiums, planned developments, and
stock cooperatives, shall not prohibit or include conditions that have the
effect of prohibiting the use of low-water use plants as a group.
      (2)   Water features.
         (a)   Recirculating water systems shall be used for water features.
         (b)   Where available, recycled water shall be used as a source for
decorative water features.
         (c)   Surface area of a water feature shall be included in the high
water use hydrozone area of the water budget calculation.
         (d)   Pool and spa covers are highly recommended.
      (3)   Soil preparation, mulch, and amendments.
         (a)   Prior to the planting of any materials, compacted soils shall be
transformed to a friable condition. On engineered slopes, only amended planting
holes need to meet this requirement.
         (b)   Soil amendments shall be incorporated according to
recommendations of the soil report and what is appropriate for the plants
selected.
         (c)   For landscape installations, compost at a rate of a minimum
depth of four cubic yards per 1,000 square feet of permeable area shall be
incorporated to a depth of six inches into the soil. Soils with greater than 6%
organic matter in the top six inches of soil are exempt from adding compost and
tilling.
         (d)   A minimum three-inch layer of mulch shall be applied on all
exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or
rooting groundcovers, or direct seeding applications where mulch is
contraindicated. To provide habitat for beneficial insects and other wildlife,
up to 5% of the landscape area may be left without mulch. Designated insect
habitat must be included in the landscape design plan as such.
         (e)   Stabilizing mulching products shall be used on slopes that meet
current engineering standards.
         (f)   The mulching portion of the seed/mulch slurry in hydro-seeded
applications shall meet the mulching requirement.
         (g)   Organic mulch materials made from recycled or post-consumer
shall take precedence over inorganic materials or virgin forest products unless
the recycled post-consumer organic products are not locally available. Organic
mulches are not required where prohibited by local Fuel Modification Plan
guidelines or other applicable local ordinances.
   (B)   The landscape design plan, at a minimum, shall:
      (1)   Delineate and label each hydrozone by number, letter, or other
method.
      (2)   Identify each hydrozone as low, moderate, high water, or mixed
water use. Temporarily irrigated areas of the landscape shall be included in
the low water use hydrozone for the water budget calculation.
      (3)   Identify recreational areas.
      (4)   Identify areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants.
      (5)   Identify areas irrigated with recycled water.
      (6)   Identify type of mulch and application depth.
      (7)   Identify soil amendments, type, and quantity.
      (8)   Identify type and surface area of water features.
      (9)   Identify hardscapes (pervious and non-pervious).
      (10)   Identify location and installation details, as well as 24-hour
retention or infiltration capacity of any applicable stormwater best management
practices that encourage on-site retention and infiltration of stormwater.
Project applicants shall refer to the local agency or regional Water Quality
Control Board for information on any applicable stormwater technical
requirements. Stormwater best management practices are encouraged in the
landscape design plan, and examples are provided in §
10.52.210.
      (11)   Identify any applicable rain harvesting or catchment as discussed
in §
10.52.210 and their 24-hour retention or infiltration capacity.
      (12)   Identify any applicable graywater discharge piping, system
components, and area(s) of distribution.
      (13)   Contain the following statement: "I have complied with the
criteria of the ordinance and applied them for the efficient use of water in
the landscape design plan."
      (14)   Bear the signature of a licensed landscape architect, licensed
landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design a landscape.
(See Cal. Business and Professions Code §§ 5500.1, 5615, 5641, 5641.1, 5641.2,
5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701, 7027.5, Cal. Code of Regulations, Title
16, § 832.27, and Cal. Food and Agricultural Code § 6721.)
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.52.120 Irrigation design plan.
   (A)   This section applies to landscaped areas requiring permanent
irrigation, not areas that require temporary irrigation solely for the plant
establishment period. For the efficient use of water, an irrigation system
shall meet all the requirements listed in this section and the manufacturers'
recommendations. The irrigation system and its related components shall be
planned and designed to allow for proper installation, management, and
maintenance. An irrigation design plan meeting the following design criteria
shall be submitted as part of the Landscape Documentation Package.
      (1)   System.
         (a)   Landscape water meters, defined as either a dedicated water
service meter or private submeter shall be installed for all non-residential
irrigated landscapes of 1,000 square feet but not more than 5,000 square feet
(the level at which Cal. Water Code § 535 applies) and residential irrigated
landscapes of 5,000 square feet or greater.
            1.   A customer service meter dedicated to landscape use provided
by the local water purveyor.
            2.   A privately owned meter or submeter.
         (b)   Automatic irrigation controllers utilizing either
evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data utilizing non-volatile memory
shall be required for irrigation scheduling in all irrigation systems.
         (c)   If the water pressure is below or exceeds the recommended
pressure of the specified irrigation devices, the installation of a pressure
regulating device is required to ensure that the dynamic pressure at each
emission device is within the manufacturer's recommended pressure range for
optimal performance.
            1.   If the static pressure is above or below the required dynamic
pressure of the irrigation system, pressure-regulating devices such as inline
pressure regulators, booster pumps, or other devices shall be installed to meet
the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system.
            2.   Static water pressure, dynamic or operating pressure, and flow
reading of the water supply shall be measured at the point of connection. These
pressure and flow measurements shall be conducted at the design stage. If the
measurements are not available at the design stage, they shall be conducted at
installation.
         (d)   Sensors (rain, freeze, wind, etc.) either integral or auxiliary,
that suspend or alter irrigation operation during unfavorable weather
conditions shall be required on all irrigation systems, as appropriate for
local climatic conditions. Irrigation should be avoided during windy or
freezing weather or during rain.
         (e)   Manual shut-off valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or
butterfly valve) shall be required, as close as possible to the point of
connection of the water supply, to minimize water loss in case of an emergency
(such as a mainline break) or routine repair.
         (f)   Backflow prevention devices shall be required to protect the
water supply from contamination by the irrigation system. A project applicant
shall refer to the applicable local agency code (i.e., public health) for
additional backflow prevention requirements.
         (g)   Flow sensors that detect high flow conditions created by system
damage or malfunction are required for all non-residential landscapes and
residential landscapes of 5,000 square feet or larger.
         (h)   Master shut-off valves are required on all projects except
landscapes that make use of technologies that allow for the individual control
of sprinklers that are individually pressurized in a system equipped with low-
pressure shut-down features.
         (i)   The irrigation system shall be designed to prevent runoff, low
head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where irrigation water
flows onto non-targeted areas, such as adjacent property, non-irrigated areas,
hardscapes, roadways, or structures.
         (j)   Relevant information from the soil management plan, such as soil
type and infiltration rate, shall be utilized when designing irrigation
systems.
         (k)   The design of the irrigation system shall conform to the
hvdrozones of the landscape design plan.
         (l)   The irrigation system must be designed and installed to meet, at
a minimum, the irrigation efficiency criteria as described in §
10.52.090 regarding the maximum applied water allowance.
         (m)   All irrigation emission devices must meet the requirements set
out in the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standard, American
Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers/International Code Council's
(ASABE/ICC) 802-2014 "Landscape Irrigation Sprinkler and Emitter Standard." All
sprinkler heads installed in the landscape must document a distribution
uniformity low quarter of 0.65 or higher using the protocol defined in ASABE/
ICC 802-2014.
         (n)   It is highly recommended that the project applicant or local
agency inquire with the City of Tulare Water Utility about peak water operating
demands (on the water supply system) or water restrictions that may impact the
effectiveness of the irrigation system.
         (o)   In mulched planting areas, the use of low-volume irrigation is
required to maximize water infiltration into the root zone.
         (p)   Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall have matched
precipitation rates unless otherwise directed by the manufacturer's
recommendations.
         (q)   Head-to-head coverage is recommended. However, sprinkler spacing
shall be designed to achieve the highest possible distribution uniformity using
the manufacturer's recommendations.
         (r)   Swing joints or other riser-protection components are required
on all risers subject to damage that are adjacent to hardscapes or in high-
traffic areas or turf grass.
         (s)   Check valves or anti-drain valves are required on all sprinkler
heads where low-point drainage could occur.
         (t)   Areas less than ten feet in width in any direction shall be
irrigated with subsurface irrigation or other means that produce no runoff or
overspray.
         (u)   Overhead irrigation shall not be permitted within 24 inches of
any non-permeable surface. Allowable irrigation within the setback from non-
permeable surfaces may include drip, drip line, or other low-flow non-spray
technology. The setback area may be planted or implanted. The surfacing of the
setback may be mulch, gravel, or other porous material. These restrictions may
be modified if:
            1.   The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no
runoff occurs.
            2.   The adjacent non-permeable surfaces are designed and
constructed to drain entirely to landscaping.
            3.   The irrigation designer specifies an alternative design or
technology, as part of the Landscape Documentation Package and clearly
demonstrates strict adherence to irrigation system design criteria in §
10.52.120(A)(1)(h). Overspray and runoff prevention must be confirmed during
the irrigation audit.
         (v)   Slopes greater than 25% shall not be irrigated with an
irrigation system with an application rate exceeding three-quarter inches per
hour. This restriction may be modified if the landscape designer specifies an
alternative design or technology as part of the Landscape Documentation Package
and clearly demonstrates no runoff or erosion will occur. Prevention of runoff
and erosion must be confirmed during the irrigation audit.
      (2)   Hydrozone.
         (a)   Each valve shall irrigate a hydrozone with a similar site,
slope, sun exposure, soil conditions, and plant materials with similar water
use.
         (b)   Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall be selected
based on what is appropriate for the plant type within that hydrozone.
         (c)   Where feasible, trees shall be placed on separate valves from
shrubs, groundcovers, and turf to facilitate the appropriate irrigation of
trees. The nature, size, and extent of the root zone shall be considered when
designing irrigation for the tree.
         (d)   Individual hydrozones that mix plants of moderate and low water
use, or moderate and high water use, may be allowed if:
            1.   Plant factor calculation is based on the proportions of the
respective plant water uses and their plant factor.
            2.   The plant factor of the higher water-using plant is used for
calculations.
         (e)   Individual hydrozones that mix high- and low-water use plants
shall not be permitted.
         (f)   On the landscape design plan and irrigation design plan,
hvdrozone areas shall be designated by number, letter, or other designation. On
the irrigation design plan, designate the areas irrigated by each valve, and
assign a number to each valve. Use this valve number in the Hvdrozone
Information Table (see Appendix B Section A). This table can also assist with
the irrigation audit and programming of the controller.
   (B)   The irrigation design plan, at a minimum, shall contain:
      (1)   Location and size of separate water meters for landscape.
      (2)   Location, type, and size of all components of the irrigation
system, including controllers, main and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads,
moisture sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, pressure regulators,
and backflow prevention devices.
      (3)   Static water pressure at the point of connection to the public
water supply.
      (4)   Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per hour),
and design operating pressure (pressure per square inch) for each station.
      (5)   Recycled water irrigation systems as specified in §
10.52.200.
      (6)   The following statement: "I have complied with the criteria of the
ordinance and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the
irrigation design plan."
      (7)   The signature of a licensed landscape architect, certified
irrigation designer, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person
authorized to design an irrigation system. (See Cal. Business and Professions
Code §§ 5500.1, 5615, 5641, 5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6,
6701, 7027.5, Cal. Code of Regulations Title 16, § 832.27, and Cal. Food and
Agricultural Code § 6721.)
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.52.130 Grading design plan.
   For the efficient use of water, the grading of a project site shall be
designed to minimize soil erosion, runoff, and water waste. A grading plan
shall be submitted as part of the Landscape Documentation Package. A
comprehensive grading plan prepared by a civil engineer for other local agency
permits satisfies this requirement.
   (A)   The project applicant shall submit a landscape grading plan that
indicates finished configurations and elevations of the landscape area,
including:
      (1)   Height of graded slopes.
      (2)   Drainage patterns.
      (3)   Pad elevations.
      (4)   Finish grade.
      (5)   Stormwater retention improvements, if applicable.
   (B)   To prevent excessive erosion and runoff, it is highly recommended that
project applicants:
      (1)   Grade so that all irrigation and normal rainfall remains within
property lines and does not drain onto non-permeable hardscapes.
182Tulare - Zoning
      (2)   Avoid disruption of natural drainage patterns and undisturbed soil.
      (3)   Avoid soil compaction in landscape areas.
   (C)   The grading design plan shall contain the following statement: "I have
complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them accordingly for
the efficient use of water in the grading design plan" and shall bear the
signature of a licensed professional as authorized by law.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.52.140 Certificate of Completion.
   (A)   The certificate of completion (see Appendix B, attached to Ordinance
15-11 and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein, for a sample
certificate) shall include the following six elements:
      (1)   Project information sheet that contains:
         (a)   Date.
         (b)   Project name.
         (c)   Project applicant name, telephone, and mailing address.
         (d)   Project address and location.
         (e)   Property owner name, telephone, and mailing address.
      (2)   Certification by either the signer of the landscape design plan,
the signer of the irrigation design plan, or the licensed landscape contractor
that the landscape project has been installed per the approved Landscape
Documentation Package:
         (a)   Where there have been significant changes made in the field
during construction, these "as-built" or record drawings shall be included with
the certification.
         (b)   A diagram of the irrigation plan showing hydrozones shall be
kept with the irrigation controller for subsequent management purposes.
      (3)   Irrigation scheduling parameters used to set the controller (see §
10.52.160).
      (4)   Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule (see §
10.52.170).
      (5)   Irrigation audit report (see §
10.52.180).
      (6)   Soil analysis report, if not submitted with Landscape Documentation
Package, and documentation verifying implementation of soil report
recommendations (see §
10.52.100).
   (B)   The project applicant shall:
      (1)   Submit the signed certificate of completion to the City of Tulare
for review.
      (2)   Ensure that copies of the approved certificate of completion are
submitted to the City of Tulare Water Utility and property owner or his or her
designee.
   (C)   The City of Tulare shall:
      (1)   Receive the signed certificate of completion from the project
applicant.
      (2)   Approve or deny the certificate of completion. If the certificate
of completion is denied, the City of Tulare shall provide information to the
project applicant regarding a reapplication, appeal, or other assistance.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.52.150 Development standards.
   All projects that require a landscaping and irrigation plan pursuant to this
chapter shall comply with the following development standards.
   (A)   General standards.
      (1)   All landscape development over 500 square feet (new) or 2,500
square feet (rehabilitated) that requires a permit, plan check, or site plan
review shall meet the water efficiency and site design requirements detailed in
other sections of this chapter. The project applicant, and owner (if different)
shall sign the Landscape Documentation Package as required in §
10.52.080(B)(1)(i).
      (2)   All exterior areas not devoted to parking, storage, driveways,
walkways, or loading areas shall be landscaped. A minimum of 5% of the gross
lot area shall be landscaped unless the district in which the project is
located does not require yard areas in which case only street trees are
required.
      (3)   Landscaping shall be used to screen storage areas, trash
enclosures, parking, public utilities, and other similar elements. The
landscaping shall screen these elements within three years of installation.
      (4)   Planting and irrigation shall conform to the water use efficiency
sections of this code in such a manner that the site-wide estimated total water
use (ETWU) will be less than the maximum applied water allowance (MAWA).
Landscape plans shall document compliance with the ordinance by submitting a
Landscape Documentation Package and providing supporting documentation as
required in the ordinance.
      (5)   All landscaping on the city-owned property shall conform to city
landscaping and irrigation standards, including the City Services Department
Improvements Standards; City of Tulare Parking Lot Tree Shading Design and
Maintenance Guidelines; area-specific plans and other applicable documents, as
may be updated from time to time.
      (6)   Certain landscapes (see §
10.52.040) are exempt from the water efficiency documentation requirements of
this section. These landscapes must still comply with the development standards
in §
10.52.150 as much as is practical.
   (B)   Trees.
      (1)   Fifteen-gallon street trees shall be planted in the right-of-way
along all public streets. The number of street trees required shall be
determined by dividing the total street frontage measured at the property line
by 30. Round up to whole trees. Actual spacing of trees can vary to accommodate
driveways, buried and overhead utilities, and other obstructions. Trees shall
be spaced at reasonable mature canopy width.
      (2)   Street tree location can be in the landscape parkway between the
curb and sidewalk, in tree wells if approved in the site plan, or on the
property side of the sidewalk as appropriate for the particular situation. The
species selection shall respect the available root area in the planting zone.
      (3)   The front, rear, and side setbacks facing public streets shall be
planted with trees and shrubs to provide an attractive buffer between the
building and/or parking and the adjacent roadways and shade for walks and
parking lots.
      (4)   Trees in the setback area, yards, and around the parking lot shall
be 15 gallons or larger.
      (5)   Trees planted near sidewalks, curbs, or another hardscape shall be
appropriately sized for the root area of the trees and shall be irrigated on a
dedicated irrigation valve. If the center of the trunk of the tree is within
eight feet of a curb, sidewalk, building, trash enclosure, or other hardscape
improvement the tree shall be installed with an 18-inch by ten-foot root
barrier installed in a linear fashion adjacent to the concrete improvement.
      (6)   Trees shall be planted in locations where they do not interfere
with service lines, basic property rights of adjacent owners, or the right to
solar access.
   (C)   Shrubs.
      (1)   Shrubs and living ground covers shall be used in the city right-of-
way in lieu of turf. Spacing of shrubs shall not exceed 120% of the mature size
stated for the shrubs in the current edition of the Sunset Western Garden Book.
      (2)   Front, side, and rear setback areas that abut public streets shall
be planted with a combination of shrubs, groundcovers, and mulches in such a
manner that the landscape meets the water efficiency requirements elsewhere in
this section.
      (3)   Shrubs and ground covers in setbacks shall be spaced at no more
than 120% of the mature size stated in the current edition of the Sunset
Western Garden Book.
      (4)   Unplanted mulch areas may comprise no more than 30% of the planter
area. Tree canopy over unplanted mulch areas is encouraged.
      (5)   Fifty of the shrubs and ground covers shall be five-gallon
containers or larger; the remainder shall be from one-gallon containers.
      (6)   Vines that self-cling shall be planted on all frontage masonry
walls for graffiti control.
   (D)   Turf.
      (1)   Turf (as defined in §
10.52.030) is only allowable in cases where the water budget will demonstrate
that adequate irrigation water is available.
      (2)   Concrete mow strips shall separate all turf areas from planter beds
on city-owned property.
      (3)   Turf beds shall be a minimum of ten feet in width unless irrigated
with subsurface irrigation; turf may not be used in storm drainage ponds with
slopes steeper than 1:6 or on mounds or berms with slopes steeper than 1:8,
except as provided for by the City Services Department.
      (4)   Use of artificial turf on city-owned property may be used subject
to approval by the Community Services Director.
   (E)   Irrigation.
      (1)   All components of the irrigation system and the irrigation design
must meet the water efficiency requirements elsewhere in this section,
including:
         (a)   Low-volume systems (drip, low-volume sprays, or individual
bubblers) shall be used whenever feasible. In city-owned shrub areas low-volume
irrigation shall be installed using hard pipe underground with low-volume
sprays or bubblers above grade.
         (b)   Irrigation for sports turf and recreational turf may use
overhead irrigation subject to the restrictions elsewhere in this chapter.
         (c)   All irrigation systems shall be equipped with an automatic
Smart-controller with Et sensing, weather-sensing and multiple cycle
capabilities, and a flexible calendar program.
         (d)   Plants shall be grouped into hydrozones of like water
requirements.
         (e)   Sprinkler heads must have matched application rates within each
control valve.
         (f)   Sprinkler head spacing shall be designed for head-to-head
coverage and placed at a maximum of 50% of the diameter of the throw for square
spacing and 60% for triangular spacing.
         (g)   Overhead sprays shall not throw water onto hardscape, bare
ground areas, or other non-planted areas, including sidewalks between
landscaped areas. Irrigation water must stay in landscape areas and not drain
off to storm drains or gutters.
         (h)   Pop-up sprinklers must have a six-inch pop-up height and must
clear all plant material and obstacles in their throw zone.
         (i)   Automatic rain shut-off devices shall be required on all
irrigation systems.
         (j)   One valve shall be dedicated to tree irrigation and shall be
able to run independently of any other irrigation valve.
   (F)   Mulch.
      (1)   As required elsewhere in this chapter, a minimum of three inches of
mulch is required in all non-turf planters.
      (2)   Mulch may be organic (such as bark, compost, or straw) or mineral
(such as cobble or decomposed granite).
      (3)   Mulch on city-owned property must be coarse ground cedar or redwood
bark product. Dyed products are prohibited.
      (4)   Plastic or other non-porous sheeting is prohibited in city-owned
landscape and lighting district planters and discouraged elsewhere.
   (G)   Mounding.
      (1)   Mounds that contain turf or groundcover shall be no steeper than 1:
8 and 1:5, respectively. Slopes steeper than 1:8 may contain shrubs if this
material is irrigated with a drip or other low-volume system.
      (2)   Incorporate compost into the mounds prior to compaction per §
10.52.110(A)(3). Mounds shall be compacted prior to planting.
   (H)   Corner lots. Landscape and irrigation plans for any development
involving corner lots at project entries shall include additional special
design requirements, including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Incorporate significant landscape or hardscape features, including
specimen trees; wall breaks, angled walls or walls with different material
treatments; special signing or lighting or statue.
      (2)   Specimen trees.
      (3)   Corner landscape and irrigation plans shall be designed so that
proper sight lines across the corner are maintained consistent with the Traffic
Safety Sight Area as defined in §
10.52.030 (Definitions).
   (I)   Walls. Plans for development project walls facing public streets
should include the following special design requirements, including, but not
limited to, the following:
      (1)   Wall material should vary. Caps, pilasters, or corner segments of
the wall should vary in appearance from the primary portion of the wall.
      (2)   Masonry walls shall be planted with vines in order to soften the
appearance of the wall and discourage graffiti.
      (3)   Non-masonry fences facing public streets or property shall be set
back from the back of walk a minimum of three feet and planted with shrubs or
other plant materials.
   (J)   Parking lots. Parking lot plans for non-residential developments
serving 20 parking stalls or greater should include the following design
requirements. These requirements will promote an attractive visual environment,
promote a transition between land uses, reduce energy consumption in buildings
adjacent to parking lots, and decrease glare and high summer temperatures
community-wide by reducing the amount of exposed pavement.
      (1)   A combination of landscaping and/or low walls and/or mounding shall
be installed between the parking lot and the street to screen the parking lot
from view from the public right-of-way.
      (2)   All parking lots with a capacity of 20 cars or more shall contain
shade trees, which within ten years from installation, shall shade 50% of the
parking lot. All surfacing on which a vehicle can drive is subject to shade
calculation, including parking stalls, drive aisles, and all maneuvering areas.
Guidelines for shade calculations and a list of approved parking lot trees are
contained in the Parking Lot Tree Shading Design Manual.
      (3)   For each ten parking spaces, a minimum of one 15-gallon or larger
shade tree shall be installed, but more may be required to meet the 50% shading
requirement. Trees shall be contained in tree wells or planters with an outside
measurement of not less than five feet by five feet that are enclosed with a
concrete curb not less than six inches high. Continuous planting islands
between rows of cars are encouraged to allow for multiple tree plantings and
increased soil volume for tree roots.
      (4)   Shade trees planted within a parking lot should be evenly
distributed throughout the lot.
      (5)   Shrubs and trees shall be planted in locations that do not conflict
with the front of cars that extend into a planter area. If within eight feet of
the curb, trees shall be located aligned with parking lot stripes and shall be
provided with root barriers as in division (B)(5) above.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.52.160 Irrigation scheduling.
   For the efficient use of water, all irrigation schedules shall be developed,
managed, and evaluated to utilize the minimum amount of water required to
maintain plant health. Irrigation schedules shall meet the following criteria:
   (A)   Irrigation scheduling shall be regulated by automatic irrigation
controllers.
   (B)   Overhead irrigation shall be scheduled between 8:00 p.m. and 10:00
a.m. unless weather conditions prevent it. If allowable hours of irrigation
differ from the local water purveyor, the stricter of the two shall apply.
Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is
allowed for auditing and system maintenance.
   (C)   For implementation of the irrigation schedule, particular attention
must be paid to irrigation run times, emission devices, flow rate, and current
reference evapotranspiration. so that applied water meets the estimated total
water use. Total annual applied water shall be less than or equal to the
maximum applied water allowance (MAWA). Actual irrigation schedules shall be
regulated by automatic irrigation controllers using current reference
evapotranspiration data (e.g., CIMIS) or soil moisture sensor data.
   (D)   Parameters used to set the automatic controller shall be developed and
submitted for each of the following:
      (1)   The plant establishment period.
      (2)   The established landscape.
      (3)   Temporarily irrigated areas.
   (E)   Each irrigation schedule shall consider for each station all of the
following that apply:
      (1)   Irrigation interval (days between irrigation).
      (2)   Irrigation run times (hours or minutes per irrigation event to
avoid runoff).
      (3)   Number of cycle starts required for each irrigation event to avoid
runoff.
      (4)   Amount of applied water scheduled to be applied on a monthly basis.
      (5)   Application rate setting.
      (6)   Root depth setting.
      (7)   Plant type setting.
      (8)   Soil type.
      (9)   Slope factor setting.
      (10)   Shade factor setting.
      (11)   Irrigation uniformity or efficiency setting.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.52.170 Landscape and irrigation maintenance scheduling.
   (A)   Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure water use efficiency. A
regular maintenance schedule shall be submitted with the Certificate of
Completion.
   (B)   A regular maintenance schedule shall include, but not be limited to,
routine inspection; auditing; adjustment and repair of the irrigation system
and its components; aerating and dethatching turf areas; topdressing with
compost; replenishing mulch; fertilizing; pruning; weeding in all landscape
areas, and removing obstructions to emission devices. Operation of the
irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing
and system maintenance.
   (C)   Repair of all irrigation equipment shall be done with the originally
installed components or their equivalents or with components with greater
efficiency.
   (D)   A project applicant is encouraged to implement established landscape
industry sustainable best practices for all landscape maintenance activities.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.52.180 Irrigation audit, irrigation survey, and irrigation water use
analysis.
   (A)   All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a local agency
landscape irrigation auditor or a third-party certified landscape irrigation
auditor. Landscape audits shall not be conducted by the person who designed the
landscape or installed the landscape.
   (B)   In large projects or projects with multiple landscape installations
(i.e., production home developments), an auditing rate of one in seven lots, or
approximately 15%, will satisfy this requirement.
   (C)   For new construction and rehabilitated landscape projects installed
after December 1, 2015, as described in §
10.52.040:
      (1)   The project applicant shall submit an irrigation audit report with
the certificate of completion to the City of Tulare that may include, but is
not limited to inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution
uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and
preparation of an irrigation schedule, including configuring irrigation
controllers with application rate, soil types, plant factors, slope, exposure
and any other factors necessary for accurate programming:
      (2)   The City of Tulare shall administer programs that may include, but
not be limited to, irrigation water use analysis, irrigation audits, and
irrigation surveys for compliance with the maximum applied water allowance.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.52.190 Irrigation efficiency.
   For the purpose of determining estimated total water use, average irrigation
efficiency is assumed to be 1.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip
system devices.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.52.200 Recycled water and graywater systems.
   (A)   The installation of recycled water irrigation systems shall allow for
the current and future use of recycled water.
   (B)   All recycled water irrigation systems shall be designed and operated
in accordance with all applicable local and state laws.
   (C)   Landscapes using recycled water are considered special landscape
areas. The ET adjustment factor for new and existing (non-rehabilitated special
landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0).
   (D)   Graywater systems promote the efficient use of water and are
encouraged to assist in on-site landscape irrigation. All graywater systems
shall conform to Cal. Plumbing Code, Title 24, Part 5, Chapter 16, and any
applicable local ordinance standards. Refer to §
10.52.040(C) for the applicability of this chapter to landscape areas less than
2,500 square feet, with the estimated total water use met entirely by
graywater.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.52.210 Stormwater management and rainwater retention.
   (A)   Stormwater management practices minimize runoff and increase
infiltration, which recharges groundwater and improves water quality.
Implementing stormwater best management practices into the landscape and
grading design plans to minimize runoff and increase on-site retention and
infiltration are encouraged.
   (B)   Project applicants shall refer to the City of Tulare or the Regional
Water Quality Control Board for information on any applicable stormwater
technical requirements.
   (C)   All planted landscape areas are required to have friable soil to
maximize water retention and infiltration. Refer to §
10.52.110(A)(3).
   (D)   It is strongly recommended that landscape areas be designed for
capture and infiltration capacity that is sufficient to prevent runoff from
impervious surfaces (i.e. roof and paved areas) from either the one-inch, 24-
hour rain event or the 85th percentile, 24-hour event, and/or additional
capacity as required by any applicable local, regional, state or federal
regulation.
   (E)   It is recommended that stormwater projects incorporate any of the
following elements to improve on-site stormwater and dry weather runoff capture
and use:
      (1)   Grade impervious surfaces, such as driveways, during construction
to drain to vegetated areas.
      (2)   Minimize the area of impervious surfaces such as paved areas,
roofs, and concrete driveways.
      (3)   Incorporate pervious or porous surfaces (e.g., gravel, permeable
pavers or blocks, pervious or porous concrete) that minimize runoff.
      (4)   Direct runoff from paved surfaces and roof areas into planting beds
or landscaped areas to maximize site water capture and reuse.
      (5)   Incorporate rain gardens, cisterns, and other rain harvesting or
catchment systems.
      (6)   Incorporate infiltration beds, swales, basins, and dry wells to
capture stormwater and dry weather runoff and increase percolation into the
soil.
      (7)   Consider constructed wetlands and ponds that retain water, equalize
excess flow, and filter pollutants.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.52.220 Public education.
   (A)   Publications. Education is a critical component to promote the
efficient use of water in landscapes. The use of appropriate principles of
design, installation, management, and maintenance that save water is encouraged
in the community.
      (1)   The City of Tulare shall provide information to owners of permitted
renovations and new, single-family residential homes regarding the design,
installation, management, and maintenance of water-efficient landscapes based
on a water budget.
   (B)   Model homes. All model homes shall be landscaped and shall use signs
and written information to demonstrate the principles of water-efficient
landscapes described in this chapter.
      (1)   Signs shall be used to identify the model as an example of a water-
efficient landscape featuring elements such as hydrozones, irrigation
equipment, and others that contribute to the overall water-efficient theme.
Signage shall include information about the site water use as designed per the
local ordinance; specify who designed and installed the water-efficient
landscape and demonstrate low water use approaches to landscaping such as using
native plants, graywater systems, and rainwater catchment systems.
      (2)   Information shall be provided about designing, installing,
managing, and maintaining water-efficient landscapes.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.52.230 Environmental review.
   The City of Tulare must comply with the California Environmental Quality Act
(CEQA), as appropriate.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.52.240 Provisions for existing landscapes.
   The City of Tulare may, by mutual agreement, designate another agency to
implement some or all of the requirements contained in this chapter. The City
of Tulare may collaborate with other agencies to define each entity's specific
responsibilities relating to this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.52.250 Existing landscape areas.
   (A)   This section shall apply to all existing landscapes that were
installed before December 1, 2015, and are over one acre in size.
      (1)   For all landscapes in division (A) that have a water meter, the
City of Tulare shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited
to, irrigation water use analyses, irrigation surveys, and irrigation audits to
evaluate water use and provide recommendations as necessary to reduce landscape
water use to a level that does not exceed the maximum applied water allowance
for existing landscapes. The maximum applied water allowance for existing
landscapes shall be calculated as MAWA = (0.8) (Eto)(LA)(0.62).
      (2)   For all landscapes in division (A), that do not have a meter, the
City of Tulare shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited
to, irrigation surveys and irrigation audits to evaluate water use and provide
recommendations as necessary in order to prevent water waste.
   (B)   All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a certified
landscape irrigation auditor.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.52.260 Water waste prevention.
   (A)   The City of Tulare shall prevent water waste resulting from
inefficient landscape irrigation by prohibiting runoff from leaving the target
landscape due to low head drainage and overspray, or other similar conditions
where water flows onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, walks, roadways,
parking lots, or structures. Penalties are as defined in §
10.52.290.
   (B)   Restrictions regarding overspray and runoff may be modified if:
      (1)   The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff
occurs.
      (2)   The adjacent non-permeable surfaces are designed and constructed to
drain entirely to landscaping.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.52.270 Effective precipitation.
   The City of Tulare may consider effective precipitation (25% of annual
precipitation) in tracking water use and may use the following equation to
calculate the maximum applied water allowance: MAWA= (ETo - Eppt) (0.62) [(0.55
x LA) + (.45 x SLA)] for residential areas. MAWA= (ETo - Eppt) (0.62) [(0.45 x
LA) + (.55 x SLA)] for non-residential areas. The effective precipitation in
the City of Tulare shall be considered to be 7.55.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.52.280 Appendices.
   The City of Tulare hereby incorporates herein by reference Appendix A:
Sample Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet and Appendix B: Sample Certificate
of Completion attached to Ordinance No. 15-11.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.52.290 Enforcement and penalties.
   (A)   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any development
project for which a landscaping and irrigation plan is required pursuant to
this chapter until all improvements shown on the plan have been installed and
the certificate of completion has been accepted by the city. The Community
Development Department may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy, where
completion of the improvements has been delayed because of adverse weather. An
extension may be granted upon execution of an agreement with the city and
providing a cash deposit or letter of credit in an amount equal to the cost of
completing the work.
   (B)   Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to an
administrative citation (
Chapter 1.61).
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.54: PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS
   Section
   
10.54.010   Purpose.
   
10.54.020   Application.
   
10.54.030   General location and use of parking areas.
   
10.54.040   Number of parking spaces required.
   
10.54.050   Exceptions to required number of spaces.
   
10.54.060   Joint use of parking.
   
10.54.070   Director modification.
   
10.54.080   Location of parking spaces.
   
10.54.090   Standards for off-street parking facilities.
   
10.54.100   Parking dimensions.
   
10.54.110   Off-street loading facilities required.
   
10.54.120   Standards for off-street loading facilities.
   
10.54.130   Replacement of off-street parking and off-street loading
facilities.
   
10.54.140   Landscaping of parking areas.
   
10.54.150   Parking for bicycle and low-emission vehicles.
   
10.54.160   Garage conversions of required parking to living space.
   
10.54.170   Unimproved lots.
§ 10.54.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide parking and loading regulations
for new development and uses that are established in Tulare. The objectives of
this chapter are:
   (A)   To provide for accessible, attractive, secure, properly lighted, and
well-maintained and screened off-street parking facilities and off-street
loading facilities.
   (B)   To provide for parking and loading facilities that are designed to
reduce traffic congestion and hazards.
   (C)   To minimize the impact of new development on parking and loading
facilities on surrounding properties.
   (D)   To ensure the maneuverability of emergency vehicles in parking
facilities.
   (E)   To provide for loading and delivery services in proportion to the
needs generated by the proposed land use which are clearly compatible with
adjacent parcels and the surrounding neighborhood.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.54.020 Application.
   The parking and loading standards in this chapter shall apply to all zone
districts unless otherwise specified.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.54.030 General location and use of parking areas.
   The land areas set aside for parking to meet the provisions of this chapter
shall be usable and accessible for the type of off-street parking that is
required. Off-street vehicle parking is restricted to only approved off-street
parking facilities as designed and developed in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.54.040 Number of parking spaces required.
   (A)   At the time of initial occupancy of a site or any existing structure,
or of the construction of a building, or of a major alteration or expansion of
a
site or building, or a change in the use of property that requires additional
parking spaces, the number of off-street parking facilities for automobiles
shall be provided in accordance with Table 10.54.040-1.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, square feet shall mean the gross
square feet of a building. Employees shall mean the expected number of
employees determined at the time a use commences.
   (C)   For uses not listed under this chapter, the Director shall determine
parking and loading space requirements based on the standards for comparable
uses and based upon the particular characteristics of the subject use.
   (D)   If, in the application of the requirements of this section, a
fractional number is obtained, one parking space shall be provided for a
fraction of one-half or more, and no parking space shall be required for a
fraction of less than one-half.
Table 10.54.040-1
Number of Parking Spaces
Land Use Tulare Proposed Parking Space Requirement
Table 10.54.040-1
Number of Parking Spaces
Land Use                                Tulare Proposed Parking Space
                                        Requirement
Assisted living, skilled nursing, or    1 space per dwelling unit or 1 space
hospice facility; residential care      for every 6 beds, plus one space per
facility                                employee on the largest shift
Single-family dwelling                  2 covered spaces per dwelling unit
Multi-family dwelling, no bedroom       1 space per dwelling unit unless
(i.e., studio or SRO)                   located in Downtown Overlay zone or TOD
                                        area
                                        1 bedroom: 1 covered space per dwelling
                                        unit
                                        2 or more bedrooms: 2 spaces per unit,
Multi-family dwelling, 1, 2, or more    of which at least 1 shall be covered,
bedrooms                                plus 1 uncovered guest space per 5
                                        dwelling units
                                        unless located in Downtown Overlay zone
                                        or TOD area
Single- or multi-family dwelling        1 space per dwelling unit plus 1
specifically for seniors 55 years of    uncovered guest space per 10 units
age or older                            unless located in Downtown Overlay zone
                                        or TOD area
Boarding house or rooming house,        1 space per 2 beds
lodging
                                        1 space per guest room, plus 1 space
                                        per employee on evening shift, plus 50%
Motel, hotel, or bed and breakfast inn  of the parking requirements for
                                        associated on-site uses, such as
                                        restaurants and banquet rooms
                                        2 covered parking spaces, plus one
Live/work facility                      space for each employee that does not
                                        live within the home unless located in
                                        Downtown Overlay zone or TOD area
Retail store; shopping center           1 space per 300 square feet
Retail store selling large items
(appliances, furniture, hardware); food 1 space per 500 square feet
locker
Bank                                    1 space per 300 square feet of building
                                        area
                                        Spaces required by accompanying on-site
                                        uses (retail, service, restaurant) with
                                        a minimum of 2 spaces
Fuel sales                              Spaces at pump islands may be counted,
                                        but not to exceed four spaces, provided
                                        that at least five on-site spaces are
                                        not located at pump islands.
Indoor commercial recreation facility;  1 space per 300 square feet
health or fitness facility
Restaurant, bar, nightclub, lounge,     1 space per 150 square feet
brewpub
Microbrewery                            1 space per 150 square feet open to the
                                        public
Artisan food, beverage production, and  1 space per 150 square feet open to the
sales                                   public
                                        1 space per 250 square feet plus 5
All office and medical uses, except     spaces for each professional (e.g., RN,
call center, hospital, and pharmacy     PA, MD, DO, DDS, LCSW, PsyD, etc.) that
                                        sees patients or clients on an
                                        appointment basis
Call center                             1 space per employee; otherwise, 1
                                        space per 250 square feet
                                        1 space per 3 beds plus 2 spaces for
Hospital                                every 3 employees of the maximum
                                        working shift, including doctors
Pharmacy                                1 space per 300 square feet
Government office; social service       1 space per 250 square feet unless
office, assistance center, or guidance  located in Downtown Overlay zone or TOD
center                                  area
                                        1 space per 300 square feet plus
All Service commercial uses             additional parking spaces prescribed by
                                        the Director or Site Plan Review
                                        Committee
Studio for martial arts, music, dance,  1 space per employee, plus 1 space per
yoga, exercise, gymnastics, or similar  2 students at maximum occupancy unless
                                        located in Downtown Overlay zone
All manufacturing and processing uses   1 parking space for each employee
except agricultural food production and during the shift of maximum employment,
animal raising; cold storage or ice     plus 1 parking space for each vehicle
house                                   used in conjunction with the use
                                        1 space per 250 square feet of office
Mini-warehouse or self-storage          space, plus 1 space per caretaker
                                        residence
Commercial and industrial uses          1 parking space for each employee on
conducted primarily outside of          the maximum shift plus additional
buildings, including junk yard,         parking spaces prescribed by the
wrecking yard, or salvage facility, and Director or Site Plan Review Committee
vehicle impound yard
Auditorium; card room; club, lodge, or  1 space per 4 fixed seats; or 1 space
private meeting hall; funeral home or   for each 35 square feet of non-fixed
mortuary; religious institution or      seating area in the principal
facility; theater; community center or  sanctuary, conference space, or
facility                                auditorium, whichever is greater
All recreation uses except indoor
commercial recreation facility, small   As prescribed by the Director or Site
health or fitness facility, and park or Plan Review Committee
playground
                                        Kindergarten and nursery schools: 1
                                        parking space for each employee plus
School; public, private, or charter     one parking space for each 10 children
(kindergarten to 8th grade)             Elementary and junior high schools: 2
                                        parking spaces for each classroom, plus
                                        the number of additional spaces
                                        prescribed by the Director
                                        Kindergarten and nursery schools: 1
                                        parking space for each employee plus
                                        one parking space for each 10 children
School; public, private, or charter     Elementary and junior high schools: 2
(9th to 12th grade)                     parking spaces for each classroom, 2
                                        spaces per classroom plus 1 space for
                                        each employee, plus the number of
                                        additional spaces prescribed by the
                                        Director
                                        1 space per employee plus 10 spaces per
                                        classroom, plus 1 space per 300 square
School; trade, vocational, art,         feet of administrative office use, plus
business, or professional               additional parking for either stadium
                                        or auditorium or as approved by
                                        conditional use permit
                                        1 space per employee plus 10 spaces per
                                        classroom, 5 spaces per classroom plus
                                        1 space per 300 square feet of
College or university                   administrative office use, plus
                                        additional parking for either stadium
                                        or auditorium or as approved by
                                        conditional use permit
Daycare center                          1 space per employee plus on-site drop-
                                        off area
Library, museum, cemetery, fairgrounds, 1 space per 300 square feet of gross
public building, and grounds other than floor area unless located in Downtown
offices and educational uses            Overlay zone or TOD area
                                        1 covered space in conjunction with
Mobile home park                        each mobile home, plus 1 space for each
                                        10 mobile home sites for guest parking.
Recreational vehicle park               1 space per employee of the maximum
                                        working shift
Airport, heliport, bus, transit, or     As prescribed by the Director or Site
train station                           Plan Review Committee
                                        1 space per employee of the maximum
Truck stop or travel center, trucking   working shift plus the number of
or transportation terminal              additional spaces prescribed by the
                                        Director or Site Plan Review Committee
                                        1 space for each 1,000 square feet of
                                        gross floor area for the first 20,000
Warehouse or distribution center        square feet and 1 space for each 5,000
                                        square feet thereafter, plus 1 per 250
                                        square feet of office.
                                        As prescribed by the Director or Site
Emergency Shelter                       Plan Review Committee (Any requirement
                                        to be consistent with the requirements
                                        of AB 2339)
                                        1 space per 500 square feet plus 1
Post office                             space per employee of the maximum
                                        working shift
Public corporation yard, utility yard,  1 space per employee of the maximum
or vehicle and heavy equipment          working shift plus the number of
maintenance and storage yard; public    additional spaces required by the
safety facility or station              Director based on trip generation
                                        Director shall determine parking and
                                        loading space requirements based on the
Adult entertainment establishment       standards for comparable uses and based
                                        on the particular characteristics of
                                        the subject use
                                        Director shall determine parking and
Uses not specifically described in this loading space requirements based on the
table                                   standards for comparable uses and based
                                        on the particular characteristics of
                                        the subject use
 
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.54.050 Exceptions to required number of spaces.
   (A)   No additional parking spaces shall be required for a change in use or
a building enlargement of less than 1,000 square feet in an existing building
located within the Downtown Overlay zone.
   (B)   In the event a change in use requires an increase of two or less off-
street parking spaces, no additional parking spaces shall be required.
   (C)   No additional off-street parking facilities shall be required solely
because of the remodeling of an existing use or building unless there is a
change in use or increase in floor area or another unit of measurement as the
result of such remodeling.
   (D)   The total requirements for off-street parking facilities for a mixed-
use development on the same site shall be 90% of the sum of the parking space
requirements for the various uses.
   (E)   No existing land use or structure shall be deemed to be a non-
conforming use solely because of the lack of off-street parking or off-street
loading facilities prescribed in this chapter.
   (F)   For uses located in Downtown Overlay zone or TOD area, the Director
may reduce parking and loading space requirements by up to 50%. Reductions
beyond 50% may be approved by variance in accordance with
Chapter 10.84.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.54.060 Joint use of parking.
   (A)   Where two or more non-residential uses share a single parking lot, the
number of required parking spaces may be reduced by a maximum of 20%, as long
as the total number of spaces is not less than the required for the use
requiring the largest number of spaces.
   (B)   Where non-residential uses share a single parking lot and it can be
demonstrated that the uses operate at different times of the day (an evening
use versus a day-time use), the required number of parking spaces may be
reduced by up to 50% of the combined parking requirements of the two uses.
   (C)   Where two nearby uses have distinct and differing peak parking demands
(an evening use versus a day-time use), or where it can be demonstrated that
one site has an excess supply of parking spaces that will not be used in the
foreseeable future, the required number of parking spaces may be reduced
through minor deviation, provided that the parking lots of each use are located
within 200 feet of each other (as measured along the most direct pedestrian
path). The amount of reduction may be up to 50% of the amount of spaces
required for the most intensive of the two uses sharing the parking.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.54.070 Director modification.
   Parking space requirements of this chapter may be modified through minor
deviation approval based upon specific findings that the characteristics of a
use or its immediate vicinity do not necessitate the number of parking spaces
required and that reduced parking will be adequate to accommodate all parking
needs generated by the use. To grant a modification, the Director must make the
following findings:
   (A)   That neither present nor anticipated future traffic volumes generated
by the use of the site in the vicinity reasonably require strict or literal
interpretation and enforcement of the specified regulation.
   (B)   That the granting of the modification will not create a safety hazard
or loading of vehicles on public streets in such a manner as to interfere with
the free flow of traffic on the streets.
   (C)   That the granting of the modification will not create a safety hazard
or any other condition inconsistent with the objectives of this title.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.54.080 Location of parking spaces.
   (A)   Off-street parking and off-street loading shall be located on the same
site as the use for which they are required or within 100 feet of the business,
except that within the Downtown Overlay/TOD/Mixed-Use Overlay zone may locate
required off-street parking within 400 feet of the use for which the spaces are
required, measured by the shortest route of pedestrian access.
   (B)   All parking spaces, whether required by this chapter or in addition to
that which is required, shall be located outside of a street side yard setback.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.54.090 Standards for off-street parking facilities.
   Off-street parking facilities shall conform to the following standards and
be approved by the Director in accordance with
Chapter 10.54:
   (A)   Parking areas shall be designed to the city's standard specifications
and approval by the City Engineer.
   (B)   All parking areas shall have ingress and egress to and from a street
or alley as required by the city's standard specifications.
   (C)   Accessible parking spaces shall be provided and designed as required
by the Americans with Disabilities Act.
   (D)   Sufficient room for turning and maneuvering vehicles shall be provided
on the site, including fire and refuse collection vehicles; backing onto a
public street is to be avoided.
   (E)   Developed parking areas are to be utilized by all vehicles associated
with or visiting the site.
   (F)   Entrances and exits to parking lots and other parking facilities shall
be provided only at locations approved by the Director.
   (G)   Parking areas shall have lighting capable of providing adequate
illumination for security and safety. Lighting standards shall be in scale with
the height and use of the structure. Lighting shall be installed so as not to
cause a nuisance to adjoining properties. Off-site illumination shall be
limited to one- half foot-candles where adjacent property is residential.
   (H)   Concrete curbing at least six inches tall and six inches wide shall be
provided around all perimeter areas and around all landscape areas to define
the edges of the parking lot and to protect landscaping. Wheel stops are
required to protect walkways when a vehicle overhang of two feet would result
in less than 48 inches of clear path of travel on adjacent sidewalks, or when
required to protect structures or adjacent facilities.
   (I)   Parking spaces shall be clearly marked with paint striping a minimum
of four inches in width. Other markings and signage shall be provided to show
circulation patterns. All paint striping shall be maintained by the property
owner.
   (J)   All commercial parking lots shall be landscaped and shall be provided
with pedestrian-oriented circulation patterns.
   (K)   Tandem parking is allowed in mobile home parks, commercial parking
structures with valet parking, single-family homes, and up to 20% of required
parking for multi-family housing.
   (L)   Parking lots for commercial development should have pedestrian-
oriented circulation patterns.
   (M)   No commercial repair work or servicing of vehicles shall be conducted
in a parking area.
   (N)   The storage of abandoned, dismantled, wrecked, inoperative vehicles or
parts thereof within setback areas is prohibited.
   (O)   Parking areas, aisles, and access drives shall be paved with a solid
material so as to provide a durable, dustless surface and shall be graded and
drained so as to dispose of surface water without drainage onto any sidewalk or
adjacent property. Long-term storage areas for vehicles in the C-S and I
districts accessed by a paved drive aisle may be surfaced with rock, gravel, or
granite with Director approval. The parking of vehicles on lawn, landscaped
areas, or other areas not designed for parking is prohibited.
   (P)   All vehicle parking areas within single-family zones shall occur on
approved paved surfaces such as concrete or asphalt, except for vehicles parked
in side yard setback areas and back yards which are enclosed by a six-foot high
solid fence, such that the vehicles are not visible from the adjacent street or
alley.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.54.100 Parking dimensions.
   (A)   A standard parking space for a 90- degree stall shall not be less than
20 feet in length and nine feet in width, exclusive of aisles and access
drives.
   (B)   Wheel stops are required for a standard 90-degree stall to protect
walkways when a vehicle overhang of two feet would result in less than 48
inches of clear path of travel on adjacent sidewalks, or when required to
protect structures or adjacent facilities.
   (C)   Where wheel stops are not required and vehicles have space to over-
hang by a minimum of two feet, standard 90-degree parking stall length may be
reduced to 18 feet.
   (D)   A compact parking space shall not be less than 16 feet in length and
nine feet in width and marked for compact cars. Parking lots with ten or more
spaces may substitute up to 10% of all parking spaces in a parking lot or
parking structure with compact parking spaces. There shall be no more than two
compact spaces adjacent to each other
   (E)   Motorcycle spaces shall be a minimum size of four feet by eight feet.
Parking lots with 40 or more spaces may substitute up to 2.5% of all standard
parking spaces with motorcycle spaces if they are located within 150 feet of a
building entry.
   (F)   The dimensions, design, and construction of parking spaces reserved
for individuals with disabilities shall meet the latest adopted California
Uniform Building Code and Americans with Disabilities Act.
   (G)   Driveways for commercial/industrial/ multiple-family residential uses:
      (1)   Minimum width.
         (a)   One-way circulation: 15 feet.
         (b)   Two-way circulation: 25 feet.
      (2)   The location of driveways to and from the public right-of-way shall
be determined by the City Engineer and Director. For corner lots, driveways
shall be no closer than five feet to the street radius.
   (H)   The layout of a parking lot shall meet the dimensions of the Parking
Standards of the City of Tulare Improvement Standards.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.54.110 Off-street loading facilities required.
   At least one off-street loading space shall be provided in connection with a
building having a gross floor area of 10,000 square feet or more and intended
for a use that typically receives or delivers goods. Buildings over 25,000
square feet shall provide at least one off-street loading space plus additional
spaces as determined by the Director. This requirement shall not apply to a
building adjacent to a public alley. The Director may waive this requirement
for buildings located within the Mixed-Use Overlay District.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.54.120 Standards for off-street loading facilities.
   Off-street loading facilities shall conform to the following standards:
   (A)   Commercial, industrial, office, institutional, and public uses
exceeding 10,000 square feet in size shall be required to install an off-street
loading facility unless the Director finds that due to the operational nature
of the use, none or more than one off-street loading space should be required.
   (B)   To the extent possible, loading facilities shall be located at the
rear or side of the building that they are to serve.
   (C)   Streets and alleys shall not be used as loading or unloading areas,
nor shall trucks use streets and alleys for maneuvering trailers into a loading
space.
   (D)   Loading facilities, at a minimum, shall have a length of 25 feet, a
width of 12 feet, and an overhead clearance of 14 feet. All loading surfaces
shall be paved to provide a durable, dustless surface and shall be graded to
properly dispose of surface water.
   (E)   Where a loading facility is near or adjacent to a residential district
or other noise-sensitive land uses, noise-attenuating design measures will be
incorporated into the project. These design measures could include increased
setback distances, the construction of a seven-foot solid block wall,
landscaping, or locating the loading facilities away from noise-sensitive land
uses.
   (F)   Loading areas shall be lighted to provide adequate illumination for
security and safety. Lighting fixtures shall be in scale with the size and use
of the structure. Any illumination shall be installed so as not to cause a
nuisance to adjoining properties.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.54.130 Replacement of off-street parking and off-street loading
facilities.
   Unless specifically stated otherwise in this title, no off-street parking or
off-street loading facility provided per this chapter shall be reduced in
capacity or in an area without sufficient additional capacity or additional
area being provided to comply with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.54.140 Landscaping of parking areas.
   Parking lot landscaping shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
Chapter 10.52 Landscaping Standards.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.54.150 Parking for bicycle and low-emission vehicles.
   (A)   Parking for bicycles and low-emission vehicles shall be provided in
accordance with the latest adopted version of the California Building Code.
   (B)   Lots with 40 or more spaces may substitute a bicycle rack providing
space for at least five bicycles at a ratio of one bicycle rack for each 40
spaces. One parking space may be subtracted for each five-space bicycle rack
provided above what is required by the California Building Code.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.54.160 Garage conversions of required parking to living space.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this section to allow, in certain cases and
subject to specific design requirements, the conversion of garages and carports
for living space in circumstances where the provisions of §
10.54.140 cannot be met post-conversion.
   (B)   Garage conversions are allowed if the following requirements are met:
      (1)   The area converted shall be subject to all applicable building code
requirements.
      (2)   The garage door shall either be removed from the structure and
replaced with a wall, or a wall shall be constructed behind the pre-existing
garage door with the garage door remaining in place. The exterior elevation of
the conversion shall be compatible in design with the existing dwelling.
      (3)   Required parking shall be replaced for garage conversions unless
the conversion leads to an ADU as defined in Cal. Gov’t Code § 65852.2.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.54.170 Unimproved lots.
   Vacant or unimproved lots shall not be used as vehicle parking facilities
and/or outdoor storage of equipment, construction equipment, and similar uses
unless fenced appropriately, as determined by the Site Plan Review Committee
per
Chapter 10.72.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.56: SIGNS AND OUTDOOR ADVERTISING STRUCTURES
   Section
   
10.56.010   Purpose.
   
10.56.020   Applicability and severability.
   
10.56.030   No discrimination against non-commercial speech.
   
10.56.040   Exempt signs.
   
10.56.050   Prohibited signs.
   
10.56.060   Permits required.
   
10.56.070   Sign design principles.
   
10.56.080   Rules for sign measurement.
   
10.56.090   Sign standards on developed sites by zone district.
   
10.56.100   Mixed-Use Overlay zone.
   
10.56.110   Freeway-Oriented Signs.
   
10.56.120   Pole signs.
   
10.56.130   Additional shopping center signs.
   
10.56.140   Temporary building sign standards.
   
10.56.150   Temporary freestanding sign standards.
   
10.56.160   Illumination standards for signs.
   
10.56.170   Sign regulations on undeveloped or developing sites.
   
10.56.180   Signs placed in windows.
   
10.56.190   Signs in public right-of-way.
   
10.56.200   Comprehensive master sign programs.
   
10.56.210   Offsite temporary signs for residential subdivisions.
   
10.56.220   Historic signs.
   
10.56.230   Signs with manual changeable copy.
   
10.56.240   Signs with electronic changeable copy.
   
10.56.250   Digital display signs.
   
10.56.260   Flags and flagpoles.
   
10.56.270   Search lights and klieg lights.
   
10.56.280   Wall murals.
   
10.56.290   Off-premises signs in city right-of-way.
   
10.56.300   Non-conforming signs.
   
10.56.310   Billboards.
   
10.56.320   Maintenance of signs.
   
10.56.330   Hazardous signs.
   
10.56.340   Abandoned or obsolete signs.
   
10.56.350   Illegal signs.
   
10.56.360   Enforcement.
   
10.56.370   Definitions.
§ 10.56.010 Purpose.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate signs as an information
system that preserves and enhances the aesthetic character and environmental
values of Tulare, its residential neighborhoods, its downtown, and its
commercial and industrial areas, while also providing an effective means for
the public to express themselves through the display of signs. These
regulations recognize both the importance of business activity to the economic
vitality of Tulare and the need to protect the visual environment.
Specifically, these regulations are intended to:
      (1)   Provide standards to safeguard life, health, property, public
welfare, and traffic safety by controlling the quality of materials,
construction, illumination, size, location, and maintenance of signs and sign
structures.
      (2)   Ensure that the design of signs is compatible with the overall
streetscape design and preserve the visual order and attractiveness of the city
for residents, businesses, and visitors.
      (3)   Protect and enhance property values and community appearance by
encouraging signs that are compatible with the architectural style, character,
and scale of the building to which they relate, and with adjacent buildings and
businesses.
      (4)   Restrict signs that may create visual clutter or a nuisance to
nearby properties, violate privacy, or create safety hazards or unreasonable
distractions for pedestrians and drivers of vehicles.
      (5)   Prohibit signs that may interfere with ingress and egress.
      (6)   Provide adequate opportunity for the exercise of free speech by
display of a message or image on a sign, while balancing that opportunity with
other community and public interests.
      (7)   Ensure that commercial signs are accessory or auxiliary to a
principal business or establishment on the same premises, rather than
functioning as general advertising for hire.
   (B)   It is the City of Tulare's policy to regulate signs in a
constitutional manner that is content neutral as to messages, which are within
the protections of the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution and the
corollary provisions of the California Constitution.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.020 Applicability and severability.
   This chapter regulates signs that are located or mounted within the
jurisdictional boundaries of Tulare, California not otherwise regulated by
state or federal law. The provisions in this chapter apply in all zoning
districts within the city. No sign within the regulatory scope of this chapter
shall be erected or maintained anywhere in the City of Tulare except in
conformance with this chapter. If any part, section, division, paragraph,
subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word in this chapter is
declared invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the validity or
enforceability of the remaining portions of the chapter.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.030 No discrimination against non-commercial speech.
   Subject to the property owner's consent, a non-commercial message of any
type may be substituted, in whole or in part, for any commercial message or any
other non-commercial message provided that the sign structure or mounting
device is legal without consideration of message content. Such substitution of
message may be made without any additional approval or permitting. This
provision prevails over any more specific provision to the contrary within this
title. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of
commercial speech over non-commercial speech or favoring of any particular non-
commercial message over any other non-commercial message. This provision does
not create a right to increase the total amount of signage on a parcel, nor
does it affect the requirement that a sign structure or mounting device be
properly permitted.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.040 Exempt signs.
   (A)   The following signs are exempt from the permit requirements of this
chapter and do not count toward the total sign area limit for a site, provided
that they conform to applicable standards:
      (1)   One permanent sign per residence or business premises, mounted on a
wall and not exceeding two square feet in area.
      (2)   Street address numbers shall not count toward the number or amount
of signage allowed on a site.
      (3)   Barber poles, not exceeding 18 inches in height, located in a non-
residential zone district, and containing no lettering.
      (4)   Signs on vehicles, provided that the sign does not utilize
changeable copy or special illumination.
      (5)   Holiday and cultural observance decorations on private property
that do not include commercial advertising. This exemption includes strings of
lights associated with a holiday decoration.
      (6)   Official notices issued by a court or public agency and posted in
the performance of a public duty; notices posted by a utility or other quasi-
public agency; signs erected by a governmental agency to direct or regulate
pedestrian or vehicular traffic; non-commercial bus stop signs erected by a
public transit agency, or other signs required or authorized by law. This
exemption also covers signs and banners provided or approved by the city for
special civic events erected by the city, which may be displayed in public
rights-of-way.
      (7)   Memorial signs and plaques installed by a civic organization
recognized by the Council.
      (8)   Directional and/or information signs bearing no advertising message
and located on the site may be erected when necessary to facilitate circulation
within the site, facilitate egress and ingress, or facilitate a public need,
such as identification of restrooms, public telephones, walkways, and similar
features and facilities. Directional signs shall not exceed four square feet in
area.
      (9)   Signs that are located entirely within a building or enclosed
structure and are not visible from the public right-of-way.
      (10)   Signs located on a private area of a lot that is not accessible by
the general public, such as a backyard, and are not visible from the public
right-of-way.
      (11)   Signs fixed to mobile vending carts, up to a maximum of eight
square feet of sign area.
      (12)   Signs that are part of a vending machine, fuel pump, or similar
structure.
      (13)   Signs mounted on carrier vehicles such as buses, taxicabs, mobile
vendors, and limousines that legally pass through the city.
      (14)   Window signs:
         (a)   That conform to the standards of §
10.56.180.
         (b)   Not exceeding three square feet and limited to business
identification, hours of operation, address, and emergency information
including use permit information.
   (B)   Exempt signs that have electrical connections or engineered supports
shall obtain the appropriate building permit, as required by the California
Building Code.
   (C)   This chapter shall not prohibit or limit a public agency (city,
county, School District, etc.) from placing signs on their public property for
a public purpose.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.050 Prohibited signs.
   The following signs shall be prohibited in all zones:
   (A)   Signs located, placed, or erected in or upon any public right-of-way,
except as specifically allowed by this chapter.
   (B)   Any sign unlawfully installed, erected, or maintained.
   (C)   Signs illuminated with red, green, or amber lights placed in such a
position that it could reasonably be perceived to interfere with, or be
confused with any official traffic control device, traffic signal, or official
directional guide sign.
   (D)   Signs placed within the "Corner Cutoff" area adjacent to a public
street intersection as defined in Tulare Municipal Code §
10.98.020, except for signs erected by a governmental agency to direct or
regulate pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
   (E)   Signs placed in a location that would prevent free ingress and egress
from any door, window, or fire escape.
   (F)   Outdoor advertising structures located on a site other than the site
on which the advertised commercial use is located or on which the advertised
commercial product is produced.
   (G)   Building signs extending above the peak of a pitched roof, or the
parapet line of a flat roof.
   (H)   Reflecting, flashing, sparkling, glittering, twinkling, or shimmering
signs.
   (I)   Signs with open letters that can be viewed from the reverse side.
   (J)   Streamers, balloons, blimps, or other floating, inflatable, or hanging
devices secured with a rope or string, unless specifically permitted with a
temporary use permit.
   (K)   Signs located, placed, or attached upon any tree, utility pole, or
fence, except as specifically allowed by this chapter.
   (L)   Signs placed on private property without permission of the property
owner.
   (M)   Non-conforming signs and sign structures associated with an activity,
business, product, event, or service that has not been sold, produced,
provided, or conducted on the premises for a period of 90 days.
   (N)   Signs that revolve or are animated, except barber poles.
   (O)   Signs containing statements, words, symbols, or characters of an
obscene nature. Obscene nature will be determined by the Director using the
three-part obscenity test established in Miller v. California, 413 U.S. 15
(1973).
   (P)   Signs emitting sound.
   (Q)   Signs located within five feet of a fire hydrant, traffic control
sign, or traffic signal.
   (R)   Signs within ten feet of a driveway or alleyway entrance or exit from
the public street.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.060 Permits required.
   (A)   No sign shall be erected, altered, reconstructed, or relocated without
a sign permit. A permit is not required for ordinary maintenance and repairs to
signs and for temporary signs on private property that conform to the standards
of this chapter. The Director will review all applications for sign permits for
consistency with this chapter. Signs that do not conform may apply for a
variance in accordance with
Chapter 10.82.
   (B)   Signs that project over or extend into a public street or sidewalk
shall also require approval of an encroachment permit or license agreement by
the City Engineer.
   (C)   Consent of the property owner and business owner is required before
any sign permit may be approved.
   (D)   Appeals shall be processed in accordance with
Chapter 10.70.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.070 Sign design principles.
   The following sign design principles should be used as criteria for the
review and approval of sign permits and master sign programs. Applications for
sign permits or master sign programs that are determined by the Director to be
substantially inconsistent with these sign design principles may be denied.
   (A)   Architectural compatibility. A sign, including its supporting
structure, if any, should be designed as an integral design element of a
building's architecture and be architecturally compatible, including color and
scale, with any building to which the sign is to be attached. A sign that
covers a window or that spills over "natural" boundaries or architectural
features and obliterates parts of upper floors of buildings is considered
detrimental to the visual order and attractiveness of the city. Common
indicators of compatibility are quality sign design and construction,
proportional size and scale, and use of materials, shapes, textures, and colors
that complement the building's architectural style and the surrounding
environment.
   (B)   Legibility. The size and proportion of the elements of the sign's
message, including logos, letters, icons, and other graphic images, should be
based on the average distance and average travel speed of the viewer. Sign
messages oriented toward pedestrians should typically be smaller than those
oriented toward automobile drivers. Colors chosen for the sign text and/or
graphics should have sufficient contrast with the sign background to be easily
read during both day and night. Symbols and logos can be used in place of
words. Signs deemed too difficult to read based on one or more of these
criteria may be considered detrimental to public safety.
   (C)   Placement. Often, a building's architectural details create logical
places for signage. Signs should not cover or interrupt architectural details
or ornaments of a building's façade. On buildings with a monolithic or plain
façade, signs should establish or continue appropriate design rhythm, scale,
and proportion. Well-designed and well-located retail signs create visual
interest and continuity with other storefronts on the same or adjacent
buildings. Signs deemed to be architecturally incompatible based on their
placement on the building may be considered detrimental to visual order and
attractiveness of the city. Signs should not obstruct windows or doors except
as allowed by this chapter.
   (D)   Materials. Signs shall be made of sturdy, durable materials. Paper,
cardboard, or other material subject to rapid deterioration can only be used
for signs that comply with applicable requirements for temporary signs. Fabric
signs are restricted to awnings, canopies, flags, temporary building signs, and
temporary freestanding signs. Signs deemed to not be made of durable materials
may be considered detrimental to both public safety and visual order and
attractiveness of the city.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.080 Rules for sign measurement.
   (A)   For the purposes of this chapter, lot frontage shall be calculated as
follows:
      (1)   If a lot fronts on two streets (excluding alleyways), both
frontages shall be used to determine the allowable sign placement area.
      (2)   If a lot fronts on three or more streets (excluding alleyways), the
length of only two contiguous sides shall be added together to determine
allowable sign placement area.
   (B)   The building frontage shall be the building facade in which main
customer access is provided to the establishment. Building frontage is
considered continuous if projections or recesses in the building facade do not
exceed ten feet in any direction. For buildings with two or more frontages, the
length of the building frontage and allowable sign placement area shall be
calculated separately for each building frontage. See Figure 10.56.080-1.
   Figure 10.56.080-1
   Building Frontage Calculation Examples
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0bf1a20f2574f87b1d689bfa9416489a00654b80/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7354.png]
 
   (C)   The area of an individual sign shall be calculated as follows.
      (1)   Sign area shall include the entire area within a single continuous
perimeter composed of squares or rectangles that enclose the extreme limits of
all sign elements, including, but not limited to, sign structures or borders,
written copy, logos, symbols, illustrations, and color. Supporting structures
such as sign bases and columns are not included in the sign area provided that
they contain no lettering or graphics.
      (2)   Where two faces of a double-faced sign are located two feet or less
from one another at all points or located at an interior angle of 45 degrees or
less from one another, the sign area shall be calculated
as the area of one face. Where the two faces are not equal in size, the larger
sign face shall be used. Where two faces of a double-faced sign are located
more than two feet or 45 degrees from one another, both sign faces shall be
counted toward the sign area.
      (3)   On a three-faced sign, where at least one interior angle is 45
degrees or less, the sign area shall be calculated as the sum of the largest
and the smallest face. In all other situations involving a sign with three or
more sides, the sign area shall be calculated as the sum of all faces.
      (4)   Three-dimensional signs. The size of signs that consist of, or have
attached to them, one or more three-dimensional objects (i.e., balls, cubes,
clusters of objects, sculpture, or statue-like trademarks), shall be calculated
as the square footage of the largest face of the smallest theoretical cube that
would encompass the sign. See Figure 10.56.080-2.
   Figure 10.56.080-2
   Illustration of three-faced and three-dimensional signs
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0bf1a20f2574f87b1d689bfa9416489a00654b80/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7356.png]
 
   (D)   The height of a sign shall be calculated as follows.
      (1)   Building sign height. The height of a building sign shall be the
vertical distance measured from the ground level directly beneath the sign to
the highest point at the top of the sign, including any structural or
architectural components of the sign.
      (2)   Freestanding sign height. The height of a freestanding sign shall
be measured as the vertical distance from grade at the edge of the right-of-way
along which a freestanding sign is placed to the highest point of the
freestanding sign, including any structural or architectural components of the
sign. When the grade at the edge of the right-of-way is higher than the site on
which the sign is placed, that portion of the sign below the grade at the edge
of the right-of-way shall not be included in determining the freestanding
sign's overall height. Freestanding signs oriented towards a freeway shall be
measured from the site's finished grade or pad, whichever is lower.
      (3)   Freestanding sign height clearance. Sign clearance shall be
measured as the smallest vertical distance between the finished grade and the
lowest point of the sign, including any framework or other embellishments.
      (4)   Shopping center signs. For the purpose of determining the allowed
number and size of signs, an integrated shopping center shall be considered as
one site.
   (E)   Illustrations of rules for sign measurement are shown in Figure
10.56.080-3. If an interpretation discrepancy exists between the illustrations
and the text of this section, the text shall prevail.
   Figure 10.56.080-3
   Illustration of Rules for Sign Calculation & Height Measurement
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0bf1a20f2574f87b1d689bfa9416489a00654b80/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7358.png]
 
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.090 Sign standards on developed sites by zone district.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, signs are grouped into four types:
permanent building signs, permanent freestanding signs, temporary building
signs, and temporary freestanding signs. Figure 10.56.090-1 illustrates the
types of signs. The sign types are also defined in §
10.56.370 Definitions.
   (B)   This section establishes standards for the number of signs, size of
signs, placement of signs, and illumination of signs for developed sites based
on the zone district in which the signs are located. New signs placed on
private property shall conform to these standards.
      (1)   
Table 10.56.090-1 establishes sign standards for residential uses in all zones.
      (2)   
Table 10.56.090-2 establishes sign standards for commercial and office uses in
residential zones.
      (3)   
Table 10.56.090-3 establishes sign standards for commercial and office uses in
Commercial zones.
      (4)   
Table 10.56.090-4 establishes sign standards for commercial and office uses in
the Downtown Overlay zone.
      (5)   
Table 10.56.090-5 establishes sign standards for commercial and office uses in
the Public Lands and Parks and Recreation zones.
      (6)   
Table 10.56.090-6 establishes sign standards for commercial, office, and
industrial uses in the Agricultural/Open Space zone.
      (7)   
Table 10.56.090-7 establishes sign standards for commercial, office, and
industrial uses in all industrial zones.
      (8)   For the purpose of the tables identified in this section, uses that
are not considered residential, office, or industrial shall be considered
commercial uses. This includes public assembly and community uses.
      (9)   Sign standards for uses within a Planned Unit Development overlay
zone shall be those standards in the tables in this section established for the
site's base zoning. Special standards for signs may be established with the
adoption of the Planned Unit Development overlay zone that modify and supersede
the standards in this section.
   Figure 10.56.090-1
   Illustration of Types of Signs
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0bf1a20f2574f87b1d689bfa9416489a00654b80/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7376.png]
 
Table 10.56.090-1
Sign Standards for Residential Uses in all Zones
Use Type of Sign Number of Signs Maximum Size of Maximum Sign Type of
                                 Sign Face       Placement    Illumination
Table 10.56.090-1
Sign Standards for Residential Uses in all Zones
                        Number of    Maximum    Maximum
Use        Type of Sign Signs        Size of    Sign      Type of Illumination
                                     Sign Face  Placement
Applicable zone districts: All zones (Rural Residential, Residential Estate, Low Density Residential, Medium Density
Residential, High Density Residential, Neighborhood Commercial, Office Commercial, Retail Commercial, Service Commercial,
Public Lands, Parks and Recreation, Agricultural/Open Space, Light Industrial, and Heavy Industrial)
           Permanent    1 per        2 square             External illumination or internal illumination allowed in
           Building     residence    feet       8 feet    accordance with §
           Sign                                           10.56.160
           Permanent    No permanent
One to     Freestanding freestanding N/A        N/A       N/A
four       Sign         signs
residences              allowed
on the     Temporary                            2 feet
parcel     Building     1 per parcel 12 square  below     No illumination
           Sign                      feet       bottom of
                                                roofline
           Temporary    Up to 1 per  Up to 4    Up to 2
           Freestanding unit on the  square     feet high No illumination
           Sign         property     feet
                        1 for each
                        street
                        frontage
                        that is
                        longer than
                        25 feet, up
           Permanent    to a maximum 24 square  20 feet
           Building     of 2 signs,  feet per   above     External & internal illumination allowed in accordance with §
           Sign         plus 1       sign       base of   10.56.160
                        additional              building
                        sign if
                        cumulative
                        street
                        frontage is
                        more than
                        400 feet
                                                6 feet
                                                except no
More than               1 per public            higher
four                    driveway                than 4
residences Permanent    entrance.    24 square  feet if   External & internal illumination allowed in accordance with §
on the     Freestanding The sign     feet       it is     10.56.160
parcel     Sign         must be a               inside
                        monument                the
                        sign.                   Corner
                                                Cutoff
                                                Area
                                     16 square
           Temporary                 feet       2 feet
           Building     Up to 2 per  cumulative below     No illumination
           Sign         parcel       of all     bottom of
                                     temporary  roofline
                                     signs
                                     1 sign up
                                     to 16      1 sign up
           Temporary                 square     to 5 feet
           Freestanding Up to 5 per  feet, all  high, all No illumination
           Sign         parcel       others up  others up
                                     to 4       to 3 feet
                                     square     high
                                     feet
 
Table 10.56.090-2
Sign Standards for Commercial and Office Uses in All Residential Zones
Use Type of Sign Number of Signs Maximum Size of Maximum Sign Type of
                                 Sign Face       Placement    Illumination
Table 10.56.090-2
Sign Standards for Commercial and Office Uses in All Residential Zones
                        Number of   Maximum   Maximum
Use        Type of Sign Signs       Size of   Sign      Type of Illumination
                                    Sign Face Placement
Applicable zone districts: Rural Residential, Residential Estate, Low Density Residential, Medium Density Residential,
and High Density Residential
                                    1 square
                                    foot per
                                    lineal
                                    building
                                    frontage
                                    on the
                                    main      2 feet
           Permanent    1 per       frontage, below
           Building     building    and 1/    height of External & internal illumination allowed in accordance with §
           Sign         frontage    2 square  building  10.56.160
                                    foot per  wall
                                    lineal
                                    building
                                    frontage
                                    on other
                                    allowed
                                    building
                                    frontages
Commercial                                    6 feet
and office                                    except no
uses*                   1 per                 higher
                        parcel. The           than 4
           Permanent    sign must   24 square feet if   External & internal illumination allowed in accordance with §
           Freestanding be a        feet      it is     10.56.160
           Sign         monument              inside
                        sign.                 the
                                              Corner
                                              Cutoff
                                              Area
                        1 sign
                        regardless            2 feet
           Temporary    of number   4 square  below
           Building     of          feet      bottom of No illumination
           Sign         residential           roofline
                        units on
                        the parcel
           Temporary    1 per       4 square  3 feet
           Freestanding parcel      feet      high      No illumination
           Sign
*Does not apply to Home Occupations
 
Table 10.62.090-3
Sign Standards for Commercial and Office Uses in Commercial zones
Use Type of Sign Number of Signs Maximum Size of Maximum Sign Type of
                                 Sign Face       Placement    Illumination
Table 10.62.090-3
Sign Standards for Commercial and Office Uses in Commercial zones
                        Number of     Maximum    Maximum
Use        Type of Sign Signs         Size of    Sign       Type of Illumination
                                      Sign Face  Placement
Applicable zone districts: Neighborhood Commercial, Office Commercial, Retail Commercial, and Service Commercial
                                      1.5 square
                                      foot per 1
                                      lineal
                                      foot on
                                      the main
                                      building
                                      frontage
                                      up to a
                                      maximum of
                                      500 square 2 feet
           Permanent    No maximum    feet, and  below      External & internal illumination allowed in accordance with §
           Building     number.       1/2 square height of  10.56.160
           Sign                       feet per 1 building
                                      lineal
                                      foot on
                                      other
                                      allowed
                                      building
                                      frontages
                                      up to a
                                      maximum of
                                      300 square
                                      feet
                                                 8 feet
                                                 except no
           Permanent    1 per each               higher
Commercial Freestanding street        40 square  than 4     External & internal illumination allowed in accordance with §
and office Signs *See   frontage      feet per   feet if it 10.56.160
uses       notes below. longer than   face.      is inside
                        25 feet                  the Corner
                                                 Cutoff
                                                 Area
                        1 for each
                        business                 2 feet
           Temporary    establishment 16 feet    below      External illumination allowed in accordance with §
           Building     or separate   per sign   bottom of  10.56.160
           Sign         use with an              roofline
                        exterior                 or parapet
                        building wall
                        1 for each
                        business
                        establishment 4 square   3 feet
                        or separate   feet for   high for
                        use with an   each       each
                        exterior      separate   separate
                        building      business;  business
           Temporary    wall; if      32 square  sign; 8    External illumination allowed in accordance with §
           Freestanding there are     feet for   feet for   10.56.160
           Sign         more than 4   the 1      the 1
                        businesses on additional additional
                        the site,     sign for   sign for
                        then 1        each       each
                        additional    street     street
                        sign for      frontage   frontage
                        every street
                        frontage
NOTE: In addition to the above, "Pole Signs" and "Shopping Center Signs" are allowed per the provisions of §
10.56.120 and
10.56.130.
 
 
Table 10.56.090-4
Sign Standards for Commercial and Office Uses in the Downtown Design Overlay Zone
Use         Type of Sign Number of    Maximum Size Maximum Sign Type of Illumination
                         Signs        of Sign Face Placement
Applicable zone districts: Downtown Design Overlay zone
                         1 per tenant
                         on building
                         frontage
                         that does
                         not face a   1 square
                         residential  foot per 1
            Permanent    use          lineal foot  1 foot below
            Building     (excluding   of building  height of    External & internal illumination allowed in accordance with §
            Sign         blade        up to a      building     10.56.160
                         signs). New  maximum of
                         can or       75 square
                         cabinet      feet;
                         signs are
                         not allowed
                         as a sign
                         type.
            Permanent    No permanent No permanent No permanent
            Freestanding freestanding freestanding freestanding No permanent freestanding signs allowed
            Sign         signs        signs        signs
                         allowed      allowed      allowed
            Temporary                              2 feet below
            Building     1 per tenant 16 square    bottom of    No illumination
Commercial  Sign                      feet         roofline or
and office                                         parapet
uses, i.e.,              1 per
all non-                 tenant; sign
residential              type limited
uses                     to A-frame
                         or
                         structurally
                         similar type
                         of sign
                         placed on
                         the site or
                         adjacent
                         sidewalk
            Temporary    within 15    4 square                  External illumination allowed in accordance with §
            Freestanding feet of the  feet per     6 feet       10.56.160
            Sign         building     side
                         entrance;
                         sign shall
                         be placed so
                         that a
                         minimum 4-
                         foot-wide
                         pedestrian
                         path of
                         travel is
                         maintained
                         on the
                         sidewalk
 
Table 10.56.090-5
Sign Standards* for Commercial and Office Uses in Public Lands and Parks
and Recreation zones
Use Type of Sign Number of Signs Maximum Size of Maximum Sign Type of
                                 Sign Face       Placement    Illumination
Table 10.56.090-5
Sign Standards* for Commercial and Office Uses in Public Lands and Parks and Recreation zones
                        Number of Maximum   Maximum
Use        Type of Sign Signs     Size of   Sign      Type of Illumination
                                  Sign Face Placement
Applicable zone districts: Public Lands and Parks and Recreation
                        1 per
                        building
                        plus 1    35 square
                        for each  feet per
                        tenant    sign, or
                        with more 50 square
                        than 20   feet if
           Permanent    feet of   two or    4 feet
           Building     building  more      below     External illumination allowed in accordance with §
           Sign         frontage. allowed   height of 10.56.160
                        New can   signs are building
                        or        combined
                        cabinet   into 1
                        signs are shared
                        not       sign
                        allowed
                        as a sign
                        type.
                                            6 feet
                                            except no
                        1 per               higher
Commercial              driveway            than 4
and office Permanent    entrance.           feet
uses       Freestanding The sign  24 square unless it External & internal illumination allowed in accordance with §
           Sign         must be a feet      is        10.56.160
                        monument            outside
                        sign.               the
                                            Corner
                                            Cutoff
                                            Area
                        No        No
                        specific  specific  2 feet
           Temporary    limit -   limit -   below
           Building     As needed As needed bottom of No illumination
           Sign         to        to        roofline
                        perform   perform   or
                        public    public    parapet
                        functions functions
                        No        No        No
                        specific  specific  specific
           Temporary    limit -   limit -   limit -
           Freestanding As needed As needed As needed No illumination
           Sign         to        to        to
                        perform   perform   perform
                        public    public    public
                        functions functions functions
*Standards do not apply to City of Tulare signage.
 
 
Table 10.56.090-6
Sign Standards for Commercial, Office, and Industrial Uses in the Agricultural/Open Space Zone
                         Number of     Maximum    Maximum
Use         Type of Sign Signs         Size of    Sign       Type of Illumination
                                       Sign Face  Height
Applicable zone districts: Agricultural/Open Space
            Permanent    1 per         25 square             External & internal illumination allowed in accordance with §
            Building     building      feet       8 feet     10.56.160
            Sign
                                                  6 feet
                                                  except no
                         1 per parcel.            higher
            Permanent    The sign must 24 square  than 4     External illumination allowed in accordance with §
            Freestanding be a monument feet       feet if it 10.56.160
            Sign         sign.                    is inside
                                                  the Corner
                                                  Cutoff
                                                  Area
                         1 for each
                         business                 2 feet
            Temporary    establishment 16 square  below
            Building     or separate   feet per   bottom of  No illumination
Commercial, Sign         use with an   sign       roofline
office, and              exterior                 or parapet
industrial               building
uses                     1 for each
                         business
                         establishment 4 square   3 feet
                         or separate   feet for   high for
                         use with an   each       each
                         exterior      separate   separate
                         building      business.  business
            Temporary    wall. If      32square   sign. 8
            Freestanding there are     feet for   feet for   No illumination
            Sign         more than 4   the 1      the 1
                         businesses on additional additional
                         the site,     sign for   sign for
                         then 1        each       each
                         additional    street     street
                         sign for      frontage   frontage
                         every street
                         frontage.
 
 
Table 10.56.090-7
Sign Standards for Commercial, Office, and Industrial Uses in All Industrial Zones
                         Number of     Maximum    Maximum
Use         Type of Sign Signs         Size of    Sign       Type of Illumination
                                       Sign Face  Height
Applicable zone districts: Light Industrial, Heavy Industrial
                                       1 square
                                       foot for
                                       each
                                       lineal
                                       foot of
                                       street
            Permanent                  frontage   2 feet
            Building     Up to 3 per   up to a    below      External & internal illumination allowed in accordance with §
            Sign         building      maximum of height of  10.56.160
                                       500 square building
                                       feet;
                                       maximum
                                       size is
                                       for the
                                       sum of all
                                       signs
                                                  10 feet
                         1 per                    except no
                         driveway                 higher
            Permanent    entrance. The 24 square  than 4     External & internal illumination allowed in accordance with §
            Freestanding sign must be  feet       feet if it 10.56.160
Industrial, Sign         a monument               is inside
Commercial,              sign.                    the Corner
and office                                        Cutoff
uses, i.e.,                                       Area
all non-                 1 for each
residential              business                 2 feet
uses        Temporary    establishment 16 square  below
            Building     or separate   feet per   bottom of  No illumination
            Sign         use with an   sign       roofline
                         exterior                 or parapet
                         building wall
                         1 for each
                         business
                         establishment 4 square   3 feet
                         or separate   feet for   high for
                         use with an   each       each
                         exterior      separate   separate
                         building      business;  business
            Temporary    wall; if      32 square  sign; 8
            Freestanding there are     feet for   feet for   No illumination
            Sign         more than 4   the 1      the 1
                         businesses on additional additional
                         the site,     sign for   sign for
                         then 1        each       each
                         additional    street     street
                         sign for      frontage   frontage.
                         every street
                         frontage
 
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.100 Mixed-Use Overlay zone.
   (A)   The sign standards for non-residential uses in §
10.56.090 are superseded by this section for parcels located within the Mixed-
Use Overlay zone.
   (B)   In place of signs allowed in §
10.56.090, this section establishes standards for the number of signs, size of
signs, placement of signs, and illumination of signs for non-residential uses
in the Mixed-Use Overlay zone.
Table 10.56.100-1 establishes specific regulations for non-residential uses for
permanent building signs, permanent freestanding signs, temporary building
signs, and temporary freestanding signs.
   (C)   In addition to signs allowed in §
10.56.090, one additional permanent building sign oriented to pedestrians may
be allowed up to ten square feet. The sign type is limited to a projecting sign
or an arcade or hanging sign. A minimum eight-foot clearance shall be provided
under signs hanging over pedestrian paths of travel.
   (D)   In addition to signs allowed in §
10.56.090, window signs placed on the inside of the window are allowed. Signs
shall not cover more than 20% of the window.
   (E)   Blade signs are counted towards the maximum allowed permanent building
sign area for a particular parcel. Blade signs may be permitted in the Mixed-
Use Overlay zone, by an application for administrative staff review through the
Planning Department, if the following requirements are met:
      (1)   A blade sign must have a vertical clearance of eight feet above the
sidewalk or other public right-of-way and cannot exceed a height of more than
six feet above the height of the entryway of the building on which the sign is
mounted or as otherwise approved by the planning commission through the
approval of a comprehensive master sign program.
      (2)   A blade sign shall not exceed five square feet of signage per side,
shall be placed at least six inches away from the building wall and the edge of
the sign nearest the building, and shall not project more than 42 inches from
the building wall on which it is mounted.
      (3)   A blade sign must be attached by a wrought iron or similar metal
framework to the building wall. Materials, color, and arrangement of the sign
shall be compatible and consistent with the building and neighboring
structures.
 
Table 10.56.100-1
Sign Standards for Non-residential uses in the Mixed-Use Overlay Zone
Type of Sign  Number and Type Maximum Size of Maximum Sign     Type of
              of Signs        Sign Face       Height           Illumination
Applicable to non-residential uses in Mixed-Use Overlay zone.
              Maximum size of
              sign per        1 square foot
              frontage is     per 1 lineal
              cumulative and  foot of
              may be 1 sign   building        2 feet below the
              or divided into frontage if a   roofline or
              multiple signs. multi-story     parapet for
              New can or      building        single-story     Internal
Permanent     cabinet signs   contains non-   buildings; No    illumination
Building Sign are not allowed residential     more than 15     allowed in
              as a sign type. uses in one of  feet above the   accordance with
              Signs may       the upper       roofline for     10.56.160
              include awning  floors, the     multi-story
              signs, blade    maximum sizes   buildings
              signs in        shall be
              accordance with increased by
              10.56.100(E),   50%
              or canopy-
              mounted signs
              1 permanent
              freestanding                    6 feet except no Internal
Permanent     signs allowed                   higher than 4    illumination
Freestanding  only if the     24 square feet  feet if it is    allowed in
Sign          building does                   inside the       accordance with
              not directly                    Corner Cutoff    10.56.160
              front on the                    Area
              public sidewalk
                                              2 feet below the
              1 per business;                 roofline or
Temporary     all corners of                  parapet for
Building Sign the signs shall 16 square feet  single-story     No illumination
              be attached to                  buildings; 30
              the building                    feet for multi-
                                              story buildings
              1 per business;
              sign type
              limited to A-
              frame or
              structurally
              similar type of
              sign placed on
              the site or
Temporary     adjacent
Freestanding  sidewalk within 4 square feet   6 feet           No illumination
Sign          15 feet of the  per side
              building
              entrance; sign
              shall be placed
              so that a
              minimum 4-foot-
              wide pedestrian
              path of travel
              is maintained
              on the sidewalk
 
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.110 Freeway-oriented signs.
   (A)   The sign standards in §
10.56.090 are modified in accordance with this section for parcels with a
commercial use located within 300 feet of Highway 99 (State Route 99) right-of-
way in the C-3, C-4, M-1, or M-2 zone with approval of a conditional use
permit.
   (B)   Establish a pole sign or a pylon sign consistent with the following
standards:
      (1)   There shall be a maximum of one such pole or pylon sign per parcel.
      (2)   The sign shall have a maximum of two sides.
      (3)   The sign area permitted is generally two square feet of area per
lineal foot of parcel frontage facing towards the highway but shall be approved
by the Planning Commission with a maximum of 500 square feet.
      (4)   The maximum height shall be approved by the Planning Commission but
not to exceed 100 feet measured from the crown of the highway (facing
perpendicular to the site of the sign) when the crown of the highway is above
ground level of the sign, otherwise, the sign height is measured from ground
level at the site of the sign.
      (5)   The sign shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from all property
lines and rights-of-way.
      (6)   The sign shall be set back a minimum of 40 feet from any
residential zone district.
      (7)   The sign shall be located in a landscaped planter at least three
feet wider than the base of the sign on all sides. The planter may encroach
into the required minimum sign setback areas.
   (C)   In lieu of the single sign allowed in division (B) above, up to six
multiple commercial uses that are located on the same parcel or uses that are
located on adjacent parcels may, upon issuance of a freeway-oriented sign
permit, establish a pylon sign consistent with the following standards:
      (1)   There shall be a maximum of one pylon sign per parcel.
      (2)   The sign shall have a maximum of two sides.
      (3)   The maximum combined size shall be 100 square feet per commercial
use per side.
      (4)   The maximum height shall be approved by the Planning Commission but
not to exceed 100 feet measured from the crown of the highway (facing
perpendicular to the site of the sign) when the crown of the highway is above
ground level of the sign, otherwise, the sign height is measured from ground
level at the site of the sign.
      (5)   The sign shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from all property
lines and rights-of-way.
      (6)   The sign shall be set back a minimum of 80 feet from any
residential zone district.
      (7)   Signs 70 feet in height or greater shall contain a City of Tulare
identification. The design of the identification shall be approved by the
Planning Commission.
      (8)   The sign shall be located in a landscaped planter at least five
feet wider than the base of the sign on all sides. The planter may encroach
into the required minimum sign setback areas.
   (D)   Freeway-oriented signs may be internally lit but shall not be
externally lit. Signs must be compliant with all applicable California
Department of Transportation (CALTRANS) regulations and Chapter 2 of the
California Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) which contains
guidance for signs on highways and private roads.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.120 Pole signs.
   (A)   The sign standards in §
10.56.090 are modified in accordance with this section to allow for a pole sign
for parcels with a commercial use located in the C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, M-1, M-2,
or PL zone in the following circumstances:
      (1)   Any parcel with 200 feet or more of street frontage.
      (2)   An office complex with eight or more suites.
      (3)   A shopping center with more than four tenants that does not qualify
for an additional shopping center sign as outlined in §
10.56.130.
      (4)   A pole sign may be permitted as part of a master sign program as
outlined in §
10.56.200.
   (B)   Pole signs are subject to the following standards:
      (1)   Maximum height of twenty feet.
      (2)   Maximum size of one square foot of sign area for each linear feet
of parcel frontage.
      (3)   No pole sign may be erected closer than five feet to any property
line or closer than five feet to any driveway, alley or point of ingress/
egress.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.130 Additional shopping center signs.
   (A)   Shopping centers or office complexes with a mix of retail and/or
professional office tenants having a combined total of 25,000 square feet or
more of gross floor area and located within a commercial zone may be allowed an
additional permanent freestanding or permanent building sign beyond what is
allowed in §
10.56.090 if the sign conforms to the following provisions:
      (1)   The shopping center sign may advertise the name of the center, the
tenants in the center, or both the center and tenant names. Tenant advertising
on a shopping center sign is not counted as part of the overall sign area
permitted by
Table 10.56.090-3. The area of the name of the shopping center is in addition
to the permitted copy area. Only advertising for businesses located on the
parcel is allowed.
      (2)   The sign may be illuminated unless adjacent to residential uses, in
which case the Director may require conditions on the type of illumination to
protect against negative effects on the adjacent residential uses. The sign
must be constructed of a material that is compatible with the texture and
materials of the shopping center buildings. Individual letters and logos may be
internally illuminated.
      (3)   Materials, color, and arrangement shall be compatible and
consistent with the shopping center buildings.
      (4)   A maximum of two shopping center signs on one arterial street may
be allowed. At least 400 feet of combined arterial street frontage is required
to qualify for one sign, except that shopping centers existing at the time of
adoption of this section meeting all other requirements of this section are not
bound by this requirement. An additional 800 feet of frontage is required for a
second sign.
      (5)   The maximum height and size allowances for shopping center signs
are determined by zone. See
Table 10.56.130-1 below:
 
Table 10.56.130-1
Shopping Center Sign Size
                     Neighborhood Commercial/    Service Commercial/Retail
                     Downtown Commercial/Mixed-  Commercial zone
                     Use Overlay zone
Maximum Height (as   12.5 feet plus 2 feet for   25 feet high plus 3 feet
measured from top of appurtenances               for appurtenances
sidewalk or curb)
                     12.5 feet high maximum by 8 20 feet high maximum by 13
Structure Area       feet wide maximum. 100      feet wide maximum. 260
                     square feet per face        square feet per face
                     maximum.                    maximum.
                     50% of Structure Area, not  50% of Structure Area, not
Sign Area            to exceed 50 square feet    to exceed 130 square feet
                     per face                    per face
 
      (6)   A minimum of ten square feet is required for each tenant displayed
on a shopping center sign.
      (7)   The width of the foundation base of a shopping center permanent
freestanding sign shall be a minimum of 80% of the sign face.
      (8)   The sign structure shall have a minimum three-foot setback from any
property line.
      (9)   A building permit application to construct a shopping center sign
shall be signed by all property owners of the shopping center.
   (B)   With the adoption of a comprehensive master sign program in accordance
with §
10.56.200, a shopping center or office complex with a mix of retail and/or
professional office tenants may be eligible for "bonus" sign area greater than
allowed under an overall sign area permitted by §
10.56.090.
      (1)   A "bonus" of up to 30% shall be granted if a permanent copy is
included on the shopping center sign that states "City of Tulare," "Welcome to
Tulare," or equivalent language, as approved by the Planning Commission.
      (2)   A "bonus" of up to 60% may be granted, pending approval by the
planning commission, if enhanced design features (such as additional
landscaping, water features, decorative artwork, seating areas, etc.) are
incorporated into the shopping center.
      (3)   A "bonus of up to 70% may be granted if the criteria of both
division (B)(1) and (B)(2) above are met.
      (4)   A "bonus" that would allow a "changeable copy sign" of no more than
50% of the total sign area to be incorporated into the shopping center sign;
and if the owner agrees to allow the city to advertise city or community/city-
sponsored events, at the discretion of the city, on the sign on a continuous
and ongoing basis as part of a continuous rotation of advertising or as
otherwise defined by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission may
increase the total sign area and/or reduce the amount of city advertising for
unique circumstances, such as motion picture/performing arts theaters. Other
than those city events above, the changeable copy sign shall not advertise any
business, commodity, service, industry, or other activity, that is not sold,
offered, or conducted on the premises upon which the sign is located or
affixed.
      (5)   A "bonus" consisting of an increased maximum allowable height of a
shopping center sign, not to exceed 50% of the maximum allowable height spelled
out in
Table 10.56.130-1, may be granted, pending approval by the Planning Commission,
if the criteria for either division (B)(1) and (B)(2) above are met and/or if
the shopping center is located on the corner of two arterial streets, as
defined in the Tulare General Plan.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.140 Temporary building sign standards.
   (A)   Temporary building signs in non-residential zones shall only be
allowed for a total of three months in any 12-month period for any single
parcel or business.
   (B)   Temporary building signs in non-residential zones over four square
feet in size that will be in place for more than 30 days shall require a
temporary sign permit. With such a permit, the signs may be up to 30 square
feet in size and may be in place for up to six months.
   (C)   Feather banners, balloons, and banners shall not be used as permanent
signs.
   (D)   Temporary building signs shall not be internally illuminated.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.150 Temporary freestanding sign standards.
   (A)   Feather banners are not to be on display in excess of 20 days per
year.
   (B)   Feather banners and balloons shall not be used as permanent signs.
   (C)   Banners and feather banners shall be constructed of durable, weather-
resistant materials not subject to rapid deterioration or fading and shall be
professional in appearance. Acceptable materials include but are not limited to
vinyl, nylon-reinforced vinyl, polyethylene or polyester-like materials, or
durable fabric.
   (D)   A balloon or blimp, not to exceed 20 feet in length and five feet in
width or diameter may be utilized by a business not to exceed 15 days per
quarter with a minimum 30-day break in between. The balloon or blimp must be
connected to a cord or cable so that it does not exceed 100 feet from the
ground to the top of the balloon/blimp. A permit shall be obtained from the
Planning and Building Department prior to the use of any balloon/blimp. The
applicant for use of a balloon/blimp shall assume all liability associated with
its use. The requirement for a permit shall not apply to special public events
such as the Farm Show and County Fair.
   (E)   Temporary freestanding signs in non-residential zones shall not be
placed in the following locations:
      (1)   In any public right-of-way, including sidewalks, except as allowed
by §
10.56.090 in the Downtown Overlay zone and §
10.56.100 in the Mixed-Use Overlay zone.
      (2)   In parking lot driving lanes, drive aisles, or parking spaces.
      (3)   On multi-use trails or sidewalks on private property if they would
block a four-foot-wide pedestrian path of travel.
      (4)   Any location where the sign would block the pedestrian path of
travel or access to a building or reduce a pedestrian path of travel to less
than four feet wide.
      (5)   Within 20 feet on either side or in front of a permanent
freestanding sign.
      (6)   Within 20 feet of an adjoining property line.
      (7)   Within 20 feet from any other temporary freestanding sign.
      (8)   Within five feet of a public right-of-way.
   (F)   Temporary freestanding signs shall be affixed to supporting structures
made of a durable, rigid material such as, without limitation, wood, plastic,
or metal. Freestanding signs placed on hard surfaces in conformance with this
chapter are exempt from this division provided they have a weight and mass that
makes them difficult to inadvertently move and they do not block a four-foot-
wide pedestrian path of travel, do not have any motorized or another such
mechanism to cause them to move or flutter, and are only displayed between one
hour before and one hour after the site's establishment is open for business.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.160 Illumination standards for signs.
   The illumination of signs, from either an internal or external source, must
be designed to avoid negative impacts on surrounding rights-of-way and
properties. The following standards apply to all illuminated signs:
   (A)   Sign lighting shall not be of an intensity or brightness that will
create a nuisance for residential uses in a direct line of sight to the sign.
Light sources shall be shielded from all adjacent buildings and streets. The
lighting shall not create excessive glare to pedestrians and/or motorists and
will not obstruct traffic control or any other public informational signs.
Illuminated signs located adjacent to any residential area shall be controlled
by a rheostat or other acceptable method to reduce glare.
      (1)   Illumination of signs shall be limited to a maximum illumination of
465 lumen per square foot (or 5,000 nits) during daylight hours and a maximum
illumination of 47 lumen per square foot (or 500 nits) between dusk to dawn as
measured from the sign's face. It is strongly recommended that automatic
dimmers be installed in the sign.
      (2)   Signs in residential zones may only be indirectly illuminated by a
concealed light source, shall not remain illuminated between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m., and shall not flash, blink, or fluctuate. Illuminated signs
in residential zones must also be located on an arterial or collector street.
   (B)   Internally illuminated signs shall be designed with an opaque, semi-
opaque, or matte finish background on the sign face. Internally illuminated
signs shall only be located on arterial or collector streets. Internally
illuminated signs must not be located within 100 feet of a residential zone.
   (C)   Light sources for externally illuminated signs shall meet the
following standards:
      (1)   Low-pressure sodium lighting is the preferred light source to
minimize undesirable light in the night sky.
      (2)   High-pressure sodium, metal halide, fluorescent, quartz, LED, and
incandescent light sources shall be fully shielded.
      (3)   Metal halide and fluorescent light sources shall be filtered. Most
glass, acrylic, or translucent enclosures satisfy these filter requirements.
      (4)   Mercury vapor light sources shall be prohibited.
   (D)   External conduits, boxes, and other connections related to the
function of a sign and associated lighting shall not be exposed nor pass
through a public right-of-way.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.170 Sign regulations on undeveloped or developing sites.
   (A)   Undeveloped sites shall be allowed a maximum of two temporary
freestanding signs with a maximum size of 32 square feet each. The maximum
height shall be ten feet. Signs shall be set back at least ten feet from all
property lines and the public right-of-way. Illumination of the sign is
prohibited.
   (B)   Developing sites, i.e., construction sites, shall be allowed a maximum
of two temporary freestanding signs or temporary building signs with a maximum
size of 32 square feet each. The maximum height shall be ten feet. Signs shall
be set back at least ten feet from all property lines and the public right-of-
way. Illumination is prohibited. Temporary signs that are not visible from any
public right-of-way shall not be counted in the maximum number or size of
signs.
   (C)   In addition to any sign permitted pursuant to division (B) above,
residential subdivision sites where ten or more new residences are offered for
sale shall be allowed one temporary building sign or freestanding sign of a
maximum size of 32 square feet. Illumination of the sign is prohibited. The
maximum height shall be ten feet. Additional temporary signs, temporary
freestanding signs, and flags may be maintained within the boundaries of a
residential subdivision provided that they are not visible from outside the
residential subdivision and do not create a safety hazard by obstructing the
clear view of pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   (D)   Construction locations (example: remodel of a building) Signs may be
placed during a construction event pursuant to the conditions of a permit
issued by the city on the lot. Construction events begin on the date of the
local structural permit approval and end on the date the permit is final or
expires.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.180 Signs placed in windows.
   (A)   Signs affixed to windows shall not cover more than 20% of each window
and shall be placed so that there is an unobstructed view of the interior of
the premises.
   (B)   Signs in windows shall not be counted toward the maximum allowable
temporary or permanent building sign size.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.190 Signs in public right-of-way.
   Only a governmental agency with authority over public right-of-way may place
signs in the public right-of-way, with the following specific exceptions:
   (A)   Building signs may be located in the Downtown Overlay zone that
projects into the public right-of-way, provided that the width of the
projecting sign is a maximum of four feet and that the bottom of the sign is
eight feet above the sidewalk or finished grade below it. An encroachment
permit or licensing agreement is required.
   (B)   Building signs located on or under awnings in the Downtown Overlay
zone that meet the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Temporary freestanding signs placed on the public sidewalk in the
Downtown Overlay zone or the Mixed-Use Overlay zone that meet the provisions of
this chapter and when a minimum four-foot-wide clear path of travel is
provided.
   (D)   Government agencies, public institutions, and non-profit organizations
may place banners on existing light poles in the public right-of-way, subject
to an administrative use permit issued by the Development Services Director
and, if deemed necessary, an encroachment permit/license agreement issued by
the City Engineer.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.200 Comprehensive master sign programs.
   (A)   The purpose of the comprehensive master sign program provisions is to
provide a coordinated and flexible design approach to signage for Tulare's
commercial districts, industrial districts, and office parks. A master sign
program is required for any site that contains more than three commercial
establishments in a shopping center, industrial park, or office park.
   (B)   The comprehensive master sign program shall consist of all permanent
building signs and permanent freestanding signs on the premises that can be
viewed from a public street. The comprehensive master sign program shall
establish a comprehensive design theme and set forth size, location,
illumination, materials, and other design requirements for all signs.
   (C)   A comprehensive master sign program may be approved by the Community
Development Director as an administrative use permit. The Planning Commission
may approve a master sign program when it is proposed with a development
project that requires a conditional use permit if the information is available
at the time of conditional use permit issuance. Otherwise, the Director may
approve with an administrative use permit.
   (D)   A comprehensive master sign program shall not be used to grant a
special privilege nor provide more visibility or exposure than is available to
similarly situated properties.
   (E)   Comprehensive master sign programs shall feature a unified and
coordinated approach to the materials, color, size, type, placement, and
general design of signs proposed for a project or property.
   (F)   Reasonable conditions of approval may be imposed to achieve the
purposes of this section and ensure internal sign design consistency on the
site.
   (G)   After approval of a comprehensive master sign program, no sign shall
be erected, placed, painted, or maintained, except in conformance with such
program, and such program shall be enforced in the same way as any provision in
this section.
   (H)   The master sign program and all conditions of approval applicable to a
site shall be included with lease agreements for all leasable space subject to
the comprehensive master sign program.
   (I)   Approval of a comprehensive master sign program does not waive the
permit requirements for individual signs that are subject to the program.
   (J)   The Community Development Director may approve amendments to a
comprehensive master sign program or at the Director's discretion, may be
referred to the original approving body.
   (K)   Proposed amendments to a comprehensive master sign program shall
include written concurrence by the affected property owners.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.210 Offsite temporary signs for residential subdivisions.
   (A)   Residential subdivision sites where ten or more new residences are
offered for sale shall be allowed up to four offsite temporary freestanding
signs with a size not to exceed 32 square feet each and a height not to exceed
ten feet. Signs shall be located on private, non-residential zoned parcels, or
on private, residential zoned parcels that are part of a residential
subdivision under construction, vacant, and otherwise free from any structures
or buildings. Banners and flags with or without an advertising message shall
not be permitted offsite.
   (B)   In addition to any sign permitted pursuant to division (A) above, up
to four non-illuminated offsite temporary freestanding signs in an A-frame
configuration, with a size not to exceed 12 square feet per face or four feet
in height, may be permitted per residential subdivision. A-frame signs shall be
located on private, non-residential property or on public property behind any
existing sidewalks, and in such a manner so as not to create a safety hazard by
obstructing the clear view of, or otherwise hinder or impede, pedestrian and
vehicular traffic. A-frame signs may only be displayed during operating hours
for the residential subdivision sales office and shall be located no further
than 1,500 feet from the subject residential subdivision entry.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.220 Historic signs.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a sign which has
been designated a historic resource shall not be subject to the requirements of
this chapter, other than the requirement to obtain applicable building permits.
   (B)   The Planning Commission may allow or require specific refurbishment or
alteration of the sign designated as a historic resource. The applicant shall
provide illustrations to satisfactorily describe how the sign will look after
refurbishment.
   (C)   The Planning Commission may approve a change to the sign copy of a
sign designated as a historic resource if it finds that the sign will retain
its general historic appearance.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.230 Signs with manual changeable copy.
   (A)   Manual changeable copy is allowed on signs in residential zones or in
conjunction with residential uses in non-residential zones. (Examples of uses
that may need such signs are public assembly, schools, multi-family, etc.)
   (B)   Manual changeable copy shall represent no more than 20% of the total
allowable sign area on commercial signs in commercial or industrial zones.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to signs that indicate the price of motor
vehicle fuel in conformance with the State Business and Professions Code that
otherwise are in conformance with the other sections of this title. Motor
vehicle fuel price signs in conformance with state law shall be allowed and are
exempt from size, height, and other requirements in this chapter that might
interfere with them meeting the requirements of state law as regards to
visibility, the prices being posted for all fuel types, the prices being
visible from the public rights-of-way.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.240 Signs with electronic changeable copy.
   (A)   Electronic changeable copies may be allowed on signs in residential
zones or in conjunction with residential uses in non-residential zones.
(Examples of uses that may need such signs are public assembly, schools, multi-
family, etc.)
   (B)   Electronic changeable copy is allowed as a display medium on
freestanding signs in the commercial and industrial zone districts if the sign
face changes less than once per minute. This includes signs that indicate the
price of motor vehicle fuel in conformance with the State Business and
Professions Code that otherwise are in conformance with the other sections of
this title.
   (C)   Electronic changeable copy is allowed as a display medium on
freestanding signs with a conditional use permit issued pursuant to this title
where the electronic copy changes more than once per minute.
   (D)   Signs with an electronic changeable copy shall meet the following
standards:
      (1)   The electronic sign face shall be directed in a manner that is not
visible from the front or side of residential properties located in a
residential zone district.
      (2)   The electronic sign face shall be an integral part of the remainder
of the sign area.
      (3)   Electronic copy shall be limited to a maximum illumination of 465
lumen per square foot (or 5,000 nits) during daylight hours and a maximum
illumination of 47 lumen per square foot (or 500 nits) between dusk to dawn as
measured from the sign's face. It is strongly recommended that automatic
dimmers be installed in the sign.
      (4)   No portion of the electronic changeable copy shall change more
frequently than once per minute. The maximum electronic changeable copy can be
allowed once every eight seconds with an administrative use permit. Scrolling,
flashing, or other moving messages are not allowed.
      (5)   The electronic sign shall not emit any audible sound, buzz, or
noise.
      (6)   Sign copy or electronic picture displays shall be limited to
advertising related to the use(s) on the premises on which the freestanding
sign is located, except for message substitution, as allowed in §
10.56.030.
      (7)   No change of lighting intensity may occur during a display or
between displays except to respond to a change in ambient lighting conditions.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.250 Digital display signs.
   (A)   Digital display signs are allowed on freestanding signs with a
conditional use permit issued pursuant to this title.
   (B)   Digital display signs shall meet the following standards:
      (1)   The digital display sign face shall be directed in a manner that is
not visible from the front or side of residential properties located in a
residential zone district.
      (2)   The digital display sign face shall be an integral part of the
remainder of the sign area and shall be framed with a sign structure border
that is a minimum of three inches wide around the edge of the digital display
area.
      (3)   The digital display sign shall be limited to a maximum illumination
of 465 lumen per square foot (or 5,000 nits) during daylight hours and a
maximum illumination of 47 lumen per square foot (or 500 nits) between dusk to
dawn as measured from the sign's face. It is strongly recommended that
automatic dimmers be installed in the sign.
      (4)   No portion of the digital display sign face shall change more
frequently than once every eight seconds. No portion of the digital display
sign face shall flash, blink, or include a video display.
      (5)   The electronic sign shall not emit any audible sound, buzz, or
noise.
      (6)   Sign copy shall be limited to advertising related to the use(s) on
the premises on which the freestanding sign is located, except for message
substitution, as allowed in §
10.56.030.
      (7)   No change of lighting intensity may occur during a display or
between displays except to respond to a change in ambient lighting conditions.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.260 Flags and flagpoles.
   (A)   Flags that do not include commercial advertising on flagpoles shall
not count toward the maximum sign area.
   (B)   Flagpoles shall not be located within any required interior side or
rear building setback areas. Flagpoles may be mounted on the ground or on the
roof or wall of a building.
      (1)   The maximum height of a flagpole shall be as follows:
      (2)   Flagpoles located in residential zone districts shall have a
maximum height of 35 feet.
      (3)   Flagpoles located in non-residential zones shall have a maximum
height of 50 feet if mounted on the ground, or 20 feet plus the height of the
building if mounted on a building. The maximum height may be increased to 100
feet if the flagpole is located at least 200 feet from any property line or
public right-of-way.
   (C)   Flags may be illuminated, provided the lighting is energy-efficient,
stationary, and spotlighted only on the flag. Lighting shall not spill onto
adjoining properties or the public rights-of-way and shall be turned off when
the flag is not present.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.270 Search lights and klieg lights.
   Search lights and klieg lights are prohibited, except when used for public
safety purposes or when specifically approved with a temporary use permit for a
special event.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.280 Wall murals.
   The City Council, Planning Commission, or other Commission may authorize a
wall mural. When authorized, a mural would not be considered a sign for the
purposes of this chapter. A wall mural is to be public art, not for the purpose
of identifying, advertising, or drawing attention to a particular business,
service, or economic activity. Wall murals are subject to the following:
   (A)   Murals shall be located on the sides of buildings and walls within the
Downtown District and any other commercially or industrially zoned property
within the City of Tulare.
   (B)   Prior to painting, installation, and execution of a mural, an
application shall be submitted to the Community Development Department. The
application shall include a detailed drawing or sketch of the mural plus other
details as prescribed on the application or deemed by Community Development
Department staff to be pertinent. The Community Development Department shall
forward the application, with a recommendation to the Community Development
Director, Tulare Downtown Association Director, and Executive Director Economic
Development & Redevelopment, hereinafter known as the Mural Committee (MRC).
The MRC shall review and approve or deny the application as submitted or
approve the submitted application subject to modifications.
   (C)   Less than 5% of the size of the mural may be used to identify the
sponsor of the mural.
   (D)   Mural design amendment.
      (1)   Prior to amending an approved mural design (whether painted or not
painted), that has been approved by the MRC an application for an amendment
shall include a detailed drawing or sketch of the mural, plus other details as
prescribed on the application or deemed by Community Development Department
staff to be pertinent.
      (2)   The Community Development Department shall forward the application,
with a recommendation, to the MRC. The MRC shall review and approve or deny the
application as submitted or approve the submitted application, subject to
modifications.
   (E)   In the case that a mural is specifically identifying, advertising, or
drawing attention to a particular business, the mural would be counted toward
the allowable signage area for the business or activity and shall be subject to
a sign permit.
   (F)   Criteria for design of murals. The following criteria shall apply to
the design of murals submitted for approval:
      (1)   The subject matter shall be of historical significance regarding
the growth and development of the City of Tulare and its surrounding environs
or be of such high quality as to be appropriate.
      (2)   The paint to be used shall be appropriate for use in an outdoor
locale, for an artistic rendition, and shall be of a permanent, long-lasting
variety.
      (3)   The mural shall be designed and painted by qualified mural artists
with sufficient knowledge in the design and painting of such projects and the
application of paints for such projects.
      (4)   To the extent feasible, the mural shall be vandal and graffiti-
resistant.
   (G)   Approval of a mural design shall occur only after public notice is
posted at City Hall and an opportunity is provided to any interested party to
present any appropriate comments, considerations, and/or concerns, either in
writing or orally, to the MRC.
   (H)   Any interested party may appeal a decision of the MRC regarding a
mural application. The appeal must be in writing and must be received by the
   Community Development Department within five days of the action by the MRC.
The appeal shall be considered by the City Council, following a notice posted
at City Hall and a hearing before the City Council. Action of the City Council
shall be considered final.
   (I)   Violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by
a fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment in the Tulare County Jail not
to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.290 Off-premises signs in city right-of-way.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, the City Council may
approve, through a special right-of-way leasing agreement, the erection of an
off-premises sign within the city right-of-way. It must be deemed under the
City Council to provide community benefit as defined and be under all the
following circumstances:
   (A)   The sign shall be for a land use that addresses specific community
benefits or priorities (i.e., the provision of groceries in a USDA-defined
"food desert," affordable housing, the provision of needed services within an
income-qualified Census Tract, etc.).
   (B)   The size, location, height, and other design standards for the sign
shall be determined on a case-by-case basis through the licensing agreement.
   (C)   The sign may incorporate a "changeable copy sign" of no more than 50%
of the total actual sign area unless otherwise approved by the City Council.
   (D)   The owner of the land use that provides the community benefits shall
erect the sign and maintain it at their sole expense.
   (E)   The owner shall agree to allow the city to advertise city or
community/city-sponsored events or emergency messages (traffic advisories,
amber alerts, etc.), at the discretion of the city, on the sign on a continuous
and ongoing basis as part of a continuous rotation of advertising or as
otherwise defined by the City Council.
   (F)   Other than those city events above and the land use above that
provides community benefits, the changeable copy sign shall not advertise any
business, commodity, service, industry, or other activity that is not sold,
offered, or conducted on the premises upon which the sign is located or
affixed.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.300 Non-conforming signs.
   A sign of any character lawfully occupying a site prior to the adoption of
this chapter or on the effective date of applicable amendments to this chapter
that, as a result of the adoption or amendment to, does not conform with the
standards for the zone in which it is located, shall be deemed to be a non-
conforming sign, and may be displayed and maintained in said zone subject to
the following provisions:
   (A)   Non-conforming signs in existence beyond what provisions are provided
for above, are hereby declared illegal signs and a public nuisance and shall be
abated as provided for in this title.
   (B)   Modifications to non-conforming signs may be allowed if they do not
increase the non- conformance, are not structurally altered so as to extend its
useful life, are not expanded, moved, or relocated.
   (C)   Sign copy and sign faces may be changed on non-conforming signs when
there is no change in use of the site or when only a portion of a multiple-
tenant sign is being changed.
   (D)   A requirement for a non-conforming sign to be removed or altered so as
to comply with the requirements of this chapter may be imposed as a condition
on the approval of a subdivision, conditional use permit, variance, or other
discretionary development approval. In addition, ministerial approval may also
require removal or alteration of the non-conforming sign as a condition of
approval when in conjunction with a substantial improvement of said property.
   (E)   Legal non-conforming wall signs shall not prevent the installation of
conforming freestanding signs, nor shall legal non-conforming freestanding
signs prevent the installation of conforming wall signs.
   (F)   Legal non-conforming signs shall be made to conform with this chapter
when there is an improvement or expansion of 25% of the assessed valuation of
the site on which the sign is located.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.310 Billboards.
   (A)   Billboards may be permitted with a conditional use permit issued
pursuant to this title.
   (B)   Billboards shall meet the following standards:
      (1)   Maximum height: Not to exceed 70 feet.
      (2)   Permitted zones: M-l, M-2, C-3, and C-4.
      (3)   Location: Within 300 feet of State Route 99, south of Paige Avenue
and north of Cartmill Avenue.
      (4)   Density: Billboards are to be located no closer in distance than
1000 feet apart, irrespective of ownership.
      (5)   Billboards shall not be located in, nor project over public
property or public right-of-way.
      (6)   The sign shall be set back a minimum of 500 feet from any
residential zone district.
      (7)   The sign shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from adjacent
property lines except those fronting public streets where no setback is
required.
      (8)   Billboards may be illuminated provided no lighting is directed onto
adjacent properties or public rights-of-way and, where applicable, have
approval from the California Highway Patrol.
      (9)   Billboards shall have City of Tulare branding on each side that
contains advertising.
   (C)   Design guidelines: All visible sign support columns shall be concealed
with approved architectural embellishments. The materials used in the sign
support embellishments shall be primarily natural stone, brick, approved
masonry panels, stucco, or architectural metal.
   (D)   Electronic message display and LED billboard signs are permitted bul
must have clearance or necessary approvals in writing from Caltrans Outdoor
Advertising and FAA where applicable. Electronic message rotation shall comply
with Caltrans safety standards.
   (E)   The owner of LED billboard sign shall coordinate with the local
authorities to display, when appropriate, emergency information important to
the traveling public including, but not limited to Amber Alerts, alerts
concerning terrorist attacks or natural disasters. Emergency information
messages shall remain in the advertising rotation according to the protocols of
the agency that issues the information.
   (F)   The owner of LED billboard sign shall provide to the City of Tulare
Chief Building Official 24-hour contact information for a person who has the
authority and ability to turn off the electronic sign promptly after a
malfunction occurs. Any sign not properly functioning needs to be repaired to
the city's satisfaction within 60 days of a written notice or be subject to CUP
revocation process.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.320 Maintenance of signs.
   (A)   All signs and associated supporting structures shall be maintained in
like-new condition, without rips, tears, fading, and similar damage that
inevitably occurs as a result of normal wear and aging.
   (B)   All signs shall be reasonably free from deterioration, rot, rust, and
loosening so that they do not create a hazard to persons or property or
constitute a nuisance.
   (C)   Any sign or sign structure that is sagging, leaning, fallen, decayed,
broken, deteriorated, ripped, torn, faded, or other deteriorating or
dilapidated condition shall be promptly repaired to the satisfaction of the
city or removed in accordance with §
10.02.120.
   (D)   Graffiti on a sign shall be removed by the property owner (or
designee) within two days of notice of its placement on such sign. If graffiti
is not removed, it will be subject to §
10.02.120.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.330 Hazardous signs.
   Whenever any sign, by virtue of its physical nature and condition, is deemed
by the Director, Chief Building Official, City Engineer, or Public Works
Director to be an immediate and serious threat to public safety, city personnel
may remove the sign or repair the physical deficiency to the extent necessary
to protect the public safety. The cost of such removal or repair shall be
assessed against the sign owner and/or property owner.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.340 Abandoned or obsolete signs.
   An on-premises sign advertising an activity, business, service, or product
must be removed within 90 days following the actual discontinuance of the
activity, business, service, or product. If the sign is not so removed, the
Director may have the sign removed in accordance with the public nuisance
abatement provisions of this title. A sign structure is not required to be
removed, however, the sign face shall be removed or replaced with a blank face
or other sign face consistent with this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.350 Illegal Signs.
   Any sign, banner, or sign structure not erected, constructed, or located in
conformance with this chapter and not classified as a legal non-conforming sign
is an illegal sign and is subject to abatement in accordance with the public
nuisance abatement procedures of
Chapter 7.28 of the Tulare Municipal Code.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.360 Enforcement.
   Signs erected after the effective date of this chapter that either do not
conform to the provisions of this chapter or are erected without obtaining a
required permit are declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. All signs
declared to be unlawful by this chapter and all persons erecting or maintaining
them shall be subject to the provisions of §
10.02.120 of this title. The remedies provided for in this section are
cumulative and non-exclusive.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.56.370 Definitions.
   The following terms are defined for this chapter. Illustrations of rules for
sign measurement are shown in Figure 10.56.080-1. The accompanying images and
Figure 10.56.370-1 are intended to illustrate some of the sign types that are
defined in this section. If an interpretation discrepancy exists between the
illustrations and the text of this section, the text shall prevail.
   A-FRAME SIGN. A sign made of wood, plastic, or other lightweight and rigid
material having the capability to stand on its own support(s) and being
portable and movable.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0bf1a20f2574f87b1d689bfa9416489a00654b80/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7574.png]
 
   ANIMATED SIGN. A sign with action or motion, whether by flashing lights,
color changes, wind, rotation, movement of any parts of the sign or letters or
parts of the sign structure, or other motion.
   ARCADE SIGN. A sign suspended from the ceiling of a covered pedestrian
walkway, which is attached to the building and oriented perpendicular to the
building face to which the covered walkway is attached.
   AWNING SIGN. A sign placed on a shelter supported entirely from the exterior
wall of a building and composed of a frame covered with non-rigid material.
   BANNER. Any flexible material, such as cloth, plastic, vinyl, paper,
cardboard, or thin metal, with or without a "message", attached outdoors to a
building, structure, or mounting device, or attached indoors to a building,
structure, or mounting device so as to be visible from the exterior of a
building, or structure. This definition includes a pennant, scroll, or bunting.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0bf1a20f2574f87b1d689bfa9416489a00654b80/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7576.png]
 
   BARBER POLE. A pole with diagonal stripes of red and white or of red, white,
and blue used as a sign for a barbershop that may or may not rotate.
   BILLBOARD. A sign that directs attention to a business, community service,
or entertainment not exclusively related to the premises where such sign is
located.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0bf1a20f2574f87b1d689bfa9416489a00654b80/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7578.png]
 
   BLADE SIGN. A pedestrian-oriented, non-internally illuminated double-faced
sign, comprised of one individual panel, projecting from the building wall on
which it is mounted.
   BUSINESS PREMISES. A specific business occupancy within a building or upon a
parcel of land, typically having a specific address and discrete entrance(s)
and exit(s).
   CAN OR CABINET SIGN. A sign that contains all the text and/or logo symbols
within a single enclosed box-shaped cabinet where the translucent face of the
sign can be interchanged to change the sign message without having to remodel
the cabinet. It is mounted to a wall or other surface and illuminated from
within the cabinet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0bf1a20f2574f87b1d689bfa9416489a00654b80/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7580.png]
 
   CHANGEABLE COPY, ELECTRONIC or ELECTRONIC CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN. The display
of a message that can change by means of electronic lights, light emitting
diodes, video screens, or other illuminated electronic or electric format.
   CHANGEABLE COPY, MANUAL or MANUAL CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN. The display of a
message that can change by manually arranging and attaching individual letters,
numbers, or symbols.
   ELECTRONIC DIGITAL DISPLAY SIGN. A sign that displays images with or without
a message through the use of grid lights, cathode ray projections, light
emitting diode displays, plasma screens, liquid crystal displays, fiber optics,
or other similar electronic media that may be changed remotely through
electronic means.
   ERECT. Erect, construct, place, relocate, enlarge, substantially alter,
attach, suspend, paint, post, maintain, and display.
   EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign that has light cast on its surface from
an artificial exterior source installed for the purpose of illuminating the
sign.
   FLAG. A flat piece of cloth, with distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols
used to represent a country or group, having one end of the cloth attached to a
vertical staff (directly or by a rope and pulley mechanism) and all other ends
freely flowing under the natural movement of wind.
   FREESTANDING SIGN. A sign that is permanently supported on the ground by one
or more uprights, braces, poles, or other similar structural components that
are not attached to any building. This category includes both monument and pole
signs.
   FRONTAGE, BUILDING. The distance between the two most distant corners of a
building measured in a straight line along the building face.
   FRONTAGE, STREET. The distance between the two most distant corners of a
site along a single street measured in a line along the street curb, including
drive approaches, but excluding curb returns at street intersections.
   HEIGHT. The distance measured vertically from grade to the highest point or
portion of the object to be measured.
   INSTALL or INSTALLATION. The act by which a sign is constructed or placed on
land or a structure, or the act of attaching, painting, printing, producing, or
reproducing, or using any other method or process by which a visual message is
presented or placed upon a surface.
   INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN. Any sign whose illumination originates from
within the structure of the sign and the source of which is not visible from
the exterior of the sign.
   MESSAGE. Any form of visual communication presented on any type of media. It
is not material whether the communication has any logical, practical, literary,
or artistic significance or not. It includes any form or combination of
letters, graphics, symbols, or designs. The term is not intended to include
mono-color paint applied to the exterior, trim, fascia, or other architectural
elements of a building for protection against the elements.
   MONUMENT SIGN. A low-profile freestanding sign supported by a structural
base or other solid structural features other than support poles and may
contain signage on more than one side.
   MURAL. A sign painted on the exterior wall of a building consisting of
graphics or images, either alone or in combination with letters.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0bf1a20f2574f87b1d689bfa9416489a00654b80/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7582.png]
 
   OFF-SITE, OFF-SITE SIGN, or OFF-PREMISES SIGN. refers to a sign or banner
that promotes or advertises goods, services, or activities located or offered
on a business premises or parcel that is separate from the parcel where the
sign is located, even if the two sites or parcels are contiguous to each other.
   ON-SITE, ON-SITE SIGN, or ON-PREMISES SIGN. A sign or banner that promotes
or advertises goods, services, or activity located or offered on the business
premises or parcel of property where the sign is located.
   OUTDOOR ADVERTISING. The placement of a message on signs or banners located
outdoors or located indoors in a manner such that the message is visible from
the exterior of a building or structure.
   OUTDOOR ADVERTISING STRUCTURE. A structure erected or maintained for the
main purpose of displaying commercial outdoor advertising and located on a site
other than the site on which the advertised commercial use is located or on
which the advertised commercial product is produced.
   OUTDOORS. A location on undeveloped property or to the exterior of a
building or structure.
   PAINTED SIGN. A sign that comprises only paint applied on a building or
structure.
   PARAPET WALL. An exterior wall that extends vertically above the roofline.
   PARCELS or PROPERTY (or similar references or descriptions). Parcels defined
or delineated by assessor parcel numbers maintained by the county tax assessor
or as defined in
Chapter 10.98 of this code.
   PEDESTRIAN ACCESS. A doorway that has been designed for the primary use of
the patrons or customers of that particular use.
   PERMANENT SIGN. A sign that is solidly attached to a building, structure, or
the ground by means of mounting brackets, bolts, welds, or other combination of
attachment methods, thereby rendering the sign non-moveable or difficult to
reposition without the use of machinery, cutting devices, or mechanical
devices. See also TEMPORARY SIGN.
   PLACED. Includes constructing, erecting, posting, painting, printing,
tacking, nailing, gluing, sticking, carving, or otherwise fastening, affixing,
or making visible in any manner whatsoever.
   POLE SIGN. A permanently mounted, freestanding sign that is supported above
the ground by one or more uprights, braces, poles, or other similar structural
components.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0bf1a20f2574f87b1d689bfa9416489a00654b80/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7584.png]
 
   ROOFLINE. The highest point of a parapet wall or the main roof structure or
the highest point of a parapet wall other than such architectural features as
cupolas, pylons, projections, or raised portions of the roof.
   ROOFTOP OR ROOF-MOUNTED SIGN. A sign that extends above the ridgeline of the
roof of a building, or a sign attached to any portion of the roof of a
building. Rooftop or roof-mounted signs are not allowed.
   SIGN. Any letter or symbol made of cloth, metal, paint, paper, wood, or
other material of any kind whatsoever placed for advertising, identification,
written expression, or other similar purposes on the ground or on any wall,
post, fence, building, structure, vehicle, or on any place whatsoever.
   SIGN AREA. The geometric area of a sign including all elements such as board
or frames, perforated or solid background, ornamental embellishments, arrows,
or other sign media. For the purposes of a freestanding sign the structural
elements necessary to support the sign are included in the sign area.
   SIGN COPY. Any words, letters, numbers, figures, designs, or other symbolic
representations incorporated into a sign face and/or its structure with the
purpose of attracting attention to the subject matter.
   SIGN FACE. The panel surface of a sign that carries the advertising,
information, or identification message.
   SIGN STRUCTURE. Any structure that supports or is capable of supporting a
sign. A sign structure may or may not be an integral part of a building. For
the purpose of a freestanding sign, the sign structure shall include the
aggregate area of the sign including the sign copy and all structural elements
of the sign.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change to the sign structure.
   TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign that is easily moveable, and which is not attached to
a building, structure, or the ground in such a manner as to be rendered a
permanent sign.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0bf1a20f2574f87b1d689bfa9416489a00654b80/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7586.png]
 
   Figure 10.56.370-1
   Illustration of Sign Types
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0bf1a20f2574f87b1d689bfa9416489a00654b80/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7384.png]
 
1. Permanent building sign (can or cabinet sign)
2. Permanent building sign (blade/projecting sign)
3. Permanent building sign (channel letter sign)
4. Temporary building sign (banner)
5. Permanent building sign (awning sign)
6. Permanent building sign (canopy-mounted sign)
7. Permanent building sign (arcade or hanging sign)
8. Permanent building sign (directory sign)
9. Temporary building sign (window sign)
10. Temporary freestanding sign (A-frame sign)
11. Permanent freestanding sign (pylon sign)
12. Permanent freestanding sign (pole sign)
13. Permanent freestanding signs (monument sign)
14. Permanent building sign (directional sign)
 
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.58: SIDEWALK VENDING AND STATIONARY MOBILE VENDORS
Section
   
10.58.010   Purposes.
   
10.58.020   Definitions.
   
10.58.030   Permit required.
   
10.58.040   Vending on private property.
   
10.58.050   Sidewalk vending requirements.
   
10.58.060   Specific requirements for roaming sidewalk vendors.
   
10.58.070   Specific requirements for stationary sidewalk vendors and
stationary mobile vendors.
   
10.58.080   Permit process.
   
10.58.090   Special limitations.
   
10.58.100   Insurance or bond requirements.
   
10.58.110   Permit revocation.
   
10.58.120   Appeal process.
   
10.58.130   Term.
   
10.58.140   Enforcement.
   
10.58.150   Penalty.
   
10.58.160   Severance clause.
§ 10.58.010 Purposes.
   The primary purpose of this chapter is to apply reasonable standards for the
outside sale of food and merchandise and to protect pedestrian and vehicle
circulation. In addition, standards based on the health, safety, and welfare of
the general public are significant issues to be addressed in the issuance of a
vending permit. Access to and use of the public sidewalks for vending and
selling of merchandise, which does not unduly interfere with the pedestrian
traffic, promotes the public interest by contributing to an attractive
pedestrian environment and increasing sales activities within the City of
Tulare. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the lawful operation of itinerant
vending when associated with special civic events such as the County Fair and
downtown events such as a farmers market.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.58.020 Definitions.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meaning as set forth herein below:
   CITY BUSINESS LICENSE. A business license as is required by Tulare Municipal
Code §
5.04.070. Sidewalk vendors are required to obtain both a business license and a
sidewalk vendor permit to operate.
   PERMITTED SPECIAL EVENT. An event, whether annual or one-time, that has an
approved special event permit issued by the office of the City Clerk, or
granted approval by the Director of Community Services or Director of Community
Development. Such events can include but are not limited to downtown civic
events and events held at the Tulare County Fairgrounds or International Agri-
Center.
   PRIVATE SIDEWALKS or PRIVATE YARDS. Refers to private property suitable for
stationary vending stands which is not encumbered by parking spaces, driveways,
vehicular pathways, landscape areas, and building sites.
   PUBLIC SIDEWALK. Areas or properties owned or held by the City of Tulare
that are open to the general public for pedestrian travel.
   ROAMING SIDEWALK VENDOR. A sidewalk vendor who moves from place to place and
stops only to complete a transaction. A roaming sidewalk vendor does not
include a peddler or solicitor who makes uninvited entry onto private property
for the purpose of selling goods or services or requesting/collecting
donations.
   SIDEWALK VENDOR. A person who sells food or merchandise from a pushcart,
stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other non-
motorized conveyance or from one person upon a public sidewalk or other
pedestrian path. As described in this chapter, sidewalk vendors can be
classified as roaming vendors or stationary vendors.
   SIDEWALK VENDOR PERMIT. The permit issued by the City of Tulare under this
chapter and required for a sidewalk vendor to operate within the city limits.
This type of permit is not the same permit required for door-to-door peddlers/
solicitors that are permitted/licensed under separate provisions of the Tulare
Municipal Code, nor the same type of permit for stationary mobile vendors,
which require a conditional use permit. Sidewalk vendors are required to obtain
both a City of Tulare business license and a sidewalk vendor permit to operate.
For stationary sidewalk vendors, the permit shall describe the specific site
location used by the stationary sidewalk vendor, what the stationary sidewalk
vendor will be placed in the public right-of-way, the area the stationary
sidewalk vendor is required to keep free from debris and trash, and an
acknowledgment by the stationary sidewalk vendor that they are subject to
closure if the city requires the use of the space for a municipal purpose.
   SPECIAL EVENT. A parade, march, procession, pageant, review, ceremony,
festival, assembly, or exhibition consisting of persons, animals, or vehicles,
or a combination thereof which is conducted in, or would impact, any portion of
any city street, sidewalk, alley, or other public right-of-way, or other
property owned or controlled by the city that required or involved the issuance
of a permit for such usage by the city.
   STATIONARY CART or VENDOR STAND. Equipment used for vending that has no
motorized wheels and is not otherwise mobile once it has been transported and
is set in a location for vending. This includes any table, bench, rack, hand
cart, or push cart. The term stationary does not include trailers that are
pulled by a motorized vehicle and licensed by the Department of Motor Vehicles;
this type of equipment shall be considered a stationary mobile vendor.
   STATIONARY MOBILE VENDOR. Soliciting, displaying, or offering produce,
fruits, vegetables, prepared food, pre-packaged food, or non-food sundries of
any kind for sale or barter or exchange from a mobile vending vehicle on
private property within the City of Tulare and includes the standing of a
mobile vending vehicle or trailer for the purpose of obtaining or soliciting
retail sales of produce, fruits, vegetables, prepared food, pre-packaged food
or non-food sundries, including, but not limited to, goods, wares, or
merchandise.
   STATIONARY SIDEWALK VENDOR. A sidewalk vendor who vends from a fixed
location. This does not include restaurants or businesses at fixed locations
that, pursuant to applicable rules and regulations for food safety and right-
of-way encroachment, set up temporary outdoor sales at their locations.
   VENDOR. An individual, including any employee or agent of a group of
individuals, partnership, non-profit organization, or corporation, who sells or
offers to sell food, beverages, goods, or merchandise from a stationary vendor
stand on any public sidewalk or private sidewalk open to the public.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.58.030 Permit required.
   It shall be unlawful, and no vendor shall offer for sale, or sell from any
stationary vendor stand located on a public sidewalk, park, or private
sidewalk/yard open to public use, or from their person if they are a roaming
sidewalk vendor, any merchandise, food or beverage without first obtaining a
sidewalk vendor stand permit in addition to a city business license, and in the
case of a stationary mobile vendor, a conditional use permit. If a vendor
intends to sell food, the vendor must obtain all applicable licenses required
to safely sell and serve food as required by state and local law.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.58.040 Vending on private property.
   Vending on private sidewalks or yards shall be permitted, subject to the
limitations of this chapter and subject to the submittal to the Community
Development Department of written authorization by the property owner. Vending
shall not be allowed on any required parking spaces or required landscaping and
may not interfere with the safe movement of pedestrians and motor vehicles.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.58.050 Sidewalk vending requirements.
   The following requirements apply to both stationary and roaming sidewalk
vendors:
   (A)   Sidewalk vending is prohibited within 1,000 feet of any special event
that is operating pursuant to a permit issued by the City of Tulare. This
prohibition shall only be in effect during the duration of the special event
permit and does not apply to sidewalk vendors that are selling food or
merchandise with the permission of the special event applicant and are
specified as part of the special event permit. The special event applicant must
provide the city with the locations of the stationary sidewalk vendors and the
routes of roaming sidewalk vendors that will be permitted by the special event
applicant prior to the issuance of a special event permit. Roaming sidewalk
vendors during special events must carry a copy of the permission from the
special event applicant with them at all times during the special event.
   (B)   Sidewalk vending is prohibited within 1,000 feet from the exterior
boundary of any property used or occupied by any high school, middle school, or
elementary school for the period of one hour before the school is in session,
while the school is in session, and one hour after the school day ends. This
provision does not apply if the vendor is present at the invitation of the
school.
   (C)   Sidewalk vending on trails or parkways that are operated by the City
of Tulare for pedestrian/bicycle usage is prohibited in order to ensure the
public's use and enjoyment of the natural resources and recreational
opportunities provided by these trails. In addition, prohibiting sidewalk
vending on these trails would ensure that the health, safety, and welfare of
the general public using the trails is not compromised due to obstruction and
interference of sidewalk vendors with walking, jogging, and cycling activities
on these active use trails.
   (D)   Recognizing that many non-profit recreational leagues operate
concession stands as primary fundraising for such leagues, which provide
recreational opportunities to the public, sidewalk vendors, roaming or
stationary, are prohibited within 1,000 feet of any events put on by non-profit
recreational leagues that are operating concession stands as fundraising
sources.
   (E)   Sidewalk vendors must, at all times during operations on a public
sidewalk or pedestrian path, maintain a minimum width of five feet of
unobstructed sidewalk for pedestrian traffic and must also meet all other
requirements for pedestrian travel that are required pursuant to the Americans
with Disabilities Act or other access standards for persons with disabilities.
      (1)   In places where the sidewalk is less than five feet wide, sidewalk
vending stands shall be not less than four consecutive feet of sidewalk width
to every point from said stationary vendor stand, which is clear and unimpeded
for pedestrian traffic.
      (2)   Sidewalk vendors may not be located within five feet of any
pedestrian ramps, driveways, and trash cans within the public right-of-way,
drinking fountains, push buttons for traffic signals, or another right-of-way
element that requires pedestrian access. If lines of customers block or
interfere with any pedestrian ramps, driveways, trash cans within the public
right-of-way, drinking fountains, push buttons for traffic signals, bus stops,
or another right-of-way element that requires pedestrian access, then the
sidewalk vendor must relocate to another sidewalk location to avoid such
interference. This rule is to provide adequate space for disability access
within the public right-of-way. This rule shall not apply to roaming sidewalk
vendors making a sale to a bona fide purchaser during the allotted time period,
although the vendor shall make all reasonable efforts to comply with requests
from pedestrians to move out of the way as soon as possible and not obstruct
the sidewalk. Failure by a sidewalk vendor to move or cease business when they
are not providing the minimum width of unobstructed sidewalk for pedestrian
traffic shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
      (3)   In areas where the street contains striped diagonal or vertical
parking stalls (not including spaces that are parallel with a sidewalk),
sidewalk vendors must maintain a minimum width of five feet of unobstructed
sidewalk from the curb to allow for persons or passengers exiting or entering
the vehicles parked in such stalls sufficient space for directly accessing the
sidewalk from the vehicle and not be required to travel in the street to reach
the sidewalk.
   (F)   Sidewalk vending is prohibited within ten feet from entrances of
businesses and bus stops to prevent obstructing access and to allow pedestrians
adequate space in the public right-of-way to reach destinations.
   (G)   The City Council may, by resolution adopted during a public meeting,
prohibit sidewalk vending in specific areas within the city limits upon a
finding that sidewalk vending should be prohibited in such areas due to health,
safety, or welfare concerns. Such findings may include but are not limited to,
situations involving areas with both substantial vehicle traffic and
substantial pedestrian traffic in locations presenting risks of pedestrians
improperly crossing streets or entering the street when sidewalks are blocked.
If any such resolutions are adopted, then the locations of prohibited vending
shall be indicated and provided to sidewalk vendor permit applicants.
   (H)   Sidewalk vendors must maintain sanitary conditions and carry a trash
container so customers can deposit waste from sold merchandise or wrappers.
   (I)   Hours of sidewalk vending shall be the same as those of other
businesses operating in the vending area. For sidewalk vendors operating in a
park, then the hours shall be the same hours of operation as the park.
   (J)   Sidewalk vendors are prohibited from operating within streets,
medians, crosswalks (although roaming vendors may cross in such areas as other
pedestrians), or other areas that are marked closed to pedestrian traffic.
   (K)   If any type of food or beverage is displayed and/or sold from a
stationary vendor stand, the vendor shall have and prominently display any and
all valid permits required by the Tulare County Health Department. The revision
or expiration of any such required County Health Department permit, or the
failure to obtain such a permit within 90 days of the date on which the county
commences issuing such permits, shall result in the automatic suspension of the
sidewalk vendor permit or use permit issued by the city pursuant to this
chapter; in addition, the approved permit must be readily available for
inspection by law enforcement or code enforcement officials.
   (L)   The sidewalk vendor permit issued by the city shall be prominently
affixed to the side of the stationary vendor stand which faces inward toward
the sidewalk.
   (M)   No vendor shall use any signs in connection with the sale, display, or
offering for sale of items, except for those signs which are affixed to or
painted on the sides or canopy of the stationary vendor stand and one sandwich
sign located on private property, not exceeding four square feet per sign face.
   (N)   No vendor shall use any noise-making device in connection with the
sale, display, or offering for sale of items.
   (O)   Sidewalk vendors are subject to all other applicable rules,
regulations, and ordinances.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.58.060 Specific requirements for roaming sidewalk vendors.
   In addition to the rules applicable to all sidewalk vendors, the following
rules shall specifically apply to roaming sidewalk vendors:
   (A)   Roaming sidewalk vendors shall remain mobile and may not stand or park
at any specific location or place for more than ten minutes unless the vendor
is otherwise stopped as necessary to complete a transaction(s) at the request
of a bona fide purchaser(s) that approached the roaming vendor while stopped.
   (B)   Roaming sidewalk vendors are not permitted to knock on the doors of
homes or businesses to vend under a sidewalk vendor permit. Such attempts at
peddling or soliciting shall be considered door-to-door sales and require a
separate type of permit under the Tulare Municipal Code
Chapter 5.24.
   (C)   Sidewalk vendor permits issued by the City of Tulare only allow for
vending on publicly owned rights-of-way, as limited by this chapter. Roaming
sidewalk vendors are not permitted on private property without the permission
of the property owner and must meet all underlying zoning requirements to
operate on private property.
   (D)   Roaming sidewalk vendors are permitted in areas zoned exclusively for
residential use, but hours of operations are limited to between the hours of 9:
00 a.m. and one hour prior to sunset or 7:00 p.m., whichever is earlier.
   (E)   In order to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of pedestrians,
mobile carts used by roaming sidewalk vendors are not permitted to be utilized
as a cooktop for food preparation when the food being prepared requires the
cooking or heating of food in order for it to be consumed.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.58.070 Specific requirements for stationary sidewalk vendors and
stationary mobile vendors.
   In addition to the rules applicable to all sidewalk vendors in §
10.58.050, the following rules shall specifically apply to stationary sidewalk
vendors and stationary mobile vendors:
   (A)   All stationary vendor stands and stationary mobile vending units shall
have refuse receptacles large enough to contain all refuse generated by the
operation. The operator shall pick up all refuse generated by such operation
within a 50-foot radius at the close of the day's operation, and all refuse
shall be disposed of at an approved solid waste facility.
   (B)   No vehicle or stationary vendor stand used for stationary sidewalk
vending or stationary mobile vending shall remain on public property during
non-operating hours. Overnight parking of mobile vending vehicles on a public
street, alley, or private property that does not meet the definition of a
commissary in accordance with the California Retail Food Code (Cal. Code) is
prohibited. Hours of operation for all stationary vendor stands, or stationary,
mobile vending shall be limited to the hours of operation of the business
located on the property from which they operate.
   (C)   Vending shall not be allowed on any required parking spaces or private
driveways.
   (D)   Vendors shall not remove, destroy, or interfere with any required on-
site landscaping.
   (E)   Vending may only occur on paved surfaces.
   (F)   For stationary, mobile vendors, restroom facilities with running water
that are connected to the city's wastewater system shall be readily available
during hours of operation.
   (G)   Stationary mobile vendors shall maintain 500 feet of separation
between businesses possessing an on-sale ABC license.
   (H)   Stationary mobile vendors shall maintain 300 feet of separation from
an adjacent stationary mobile vendor.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.58.080 Permit process.
   (A)   Stationary sidewalk vendors. Applicants for a sidewalk vendor permit
shall submit a written application to the Community Development Director on a
city form. The application shall be accompanied by a fee, based on the costs of
the application and set by the City Council in resolution. All sidewalk vendor
applicants must submit the sidewalk vendor permit application, and copies of
insurance certificates, listing the City of Tulare as additional insured that
meets the same insurance requirements for encroachment permits to operate
within the City of Tulare public right-of-way. The vendor encroachment permit
is part of the vendor permit issued to sidewalk vendors and is not a separate
permit, and shall include a proposed site plan showing the planned location and
what will be utilized by the stationary vendor in the public right-of-way as
the stationary cart/stand. The city may reject stationary vendor site plans
that do not allow adequate space for pedestrian access. Stationary sidewalk
vendors must acknowledge that they are not permitted to permanently install
anything within the public right-of-way and that they do not have permanent
rights to utilize public property and are subject to temporary or permanent
closure if the city requires the use of the right-of-way for a municipal
purpose, which includes but is not limited to usage of the space by persons
holding valid rights under franchises, or if another permitted use, other than
another sidewalk vendor, requires the space on a temporary basis. Any
stationary vendor seeking to utilize park property will also be subject to
review by the City Services Director, or that person's designee. Vendor permit
applications on park property are subject to denial if the proposed location
would interfere with the public's use and enjoyment of natural resources or
recreational opportunities, such as blocking equipment, sports fields, or
walkways. Vendor permit applications on park property may also be denied if
necessary to prevent an undue concentration of commercial activity that
unreasonably interferes with the scenic and natural character of the park,
including negatively impacting the public welfare of park users. The Community
Development Director, or his or her designee, and the City Engineer, or his or
her designee, shall review the application and the proposed site plan prior to
issuance and may require modifications of specific site proposals to meet
objective health, safety, or public welfare concerns. A permit shall be granted
if it is determined that: the proposed display and sale and proposed location
will not significantly interfere with the pedestrian traffic or otherwise
constitute a health and safety risk.
   (B)   Stationary mobile vending. Where a person desires to have a stationary
mobile vending unit, the applicant shall obtain a conditional use permit
pursuant to
Chapter 10.80.
   (C)   Roaming sidewalk vendor. In addition to the permit process applicable
to stationary sidewalk vendors in §
10.58.080(A), applicants intending to be roaming sidewalk vendors shall include
the proposed areas of the city where the vendor intends to operate. Roaming
sidewalk vendors are not permitted on private property without the written
permission of the property owner. Roaming vendors seeking to utilize park
property will also be subject to review by the City Services Director or that
person's designee, and vending in certain parks or park locations may be denied
or restricted, including limiting the total number of roaming vendors allowed
in a specific park, if necessary to prevent an undue concentration of
commercial activity that unreasonably interferes with the scenic and natural
character of the park, including negatively impacting the public welfare of
park users.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.58.090 Special limitations.
   (A)   Sidewalk vendor permits are an interruptible or terminable privilege.
The city shall have the right and power, through the City Manager or his or her
designee, to prohibit the operation of a stationary vendor stand at any time
because of anticipated or actual problems or conflicts in the use of a public
area. Such problems and conflicts may arise from but are not limited to,
scheduled festivals and similar events, parades or marches, or repairs to the
street or sidewalk, or from demonstrations or emergencies occurring in the
area.
   (B)   (1)No sidewalk vendor permits shall be issued for any location:
         (a)   Owned by the city other than the pedestrian right-of-way.
         (b)   The area east of the Union Pacific Railroad, west of O Street,
north of (and including) Inyo Avenue, and south of (and including) the parcels
north of Cross Avenue due to an increased and significant risk of pedestrian
and vehicular traffic conflicts in order to preserve public health, safety, and
welfare.
      (2)   This shall not apply to any city-approved events in these areas or
to businesses that have obtained an outside display and sale of merchandise
permit under §
10.60.180.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.58.100 Insurance or bond requirements.
   No permit shall be issued unless the applicant furnishes proof to the city
of a public liability bond or insurance policy in an amount not less than
$1,000,000 for property damages and injury, including injury resulting in
death, caused by the operation of the vending business. The said insurance bond
shall name the City of Tulare and its employees, officers, and agents as
additional insureds.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.58.110 Permit revocation.
   A sidewalk vendor permit may be revoked by the City Council, following
written notice to the permittee, if one or more of the conditions of the permit
or of this chapter have been violated or if the stationary sidewalk vendor
stand is being operated in a manner which constitutes a nuisance, or unduly
impedes or restricts the movements of pedestrians. Following revocation, the
former permit holder shall not be eligible to file for a new permit application
for a period of six months.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.58.120 Appeal process.
   An applicant or any other interested party may appeal the granting, denial,
or revocation of a permit application. Such an appeal may be made in writing
within ten days of the decision and shall be filed with the City Council. The
Council shall hold a public hearing on any such appeal.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.58.130 Term.
   A sidewalk vendor permit is valid for a period of one year from the date of
issuance and must be renewed every year. Where a conditional use permit is
issued, such permit may be time-limited to require renewal.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.58.140 Enforcement.
   The Community Development Director, his or her designee, or any other person
authorized by the City Manager, shall be authorized to enforce the provisions
of this chapter and to take such actions as may be necessary to ensure
compliance with the regulations, general provisions, and conditions opposed
upon any permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.58.150 Penalty.
   Violations of this chapter are not punishable as an infraction or
misdemeanor and persons alleged to violate this chapter shall not be subject to
arrest. This section does not prevent code enforcement personnel from taking
immediate action, such as seizing items, to abate unsafe and dangerous
conditions to the public, which include but are not limited to vendors selling
food without proper licensing, and subject to enforcement pursuant to §
1.61.030 Administrative Citation.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.58.160 Severance clause.
   The provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable and if any
section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter shall for any reason be
held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the
validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this
chapter, but they shall remain in effect, it being the legislative intent that
this chapter shall stay and notwithstanding the validity of any part.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.60: SPECIFIC LAND USE STANDARDS
   Section
   
10.60.010   Purpose.
   
10.60.020   Applicability.
   
10.60.030   Accessory dwelling units.
   
10.60.040   Accessory dwelling units, junior.
   
10.60.050   Alcoholic beverages, on-sale and off-sale.
   
10.60.060   Animals.
   
10.60.070   Bed and breakfast inns.
   
10.60.080   Cottage food operations.
   
10.60.090   Drive-thru pick-up windows.
   
10.60.100   Emergency shelter.
   
10.60.110   Garage or yard sales.
   
10.60.120   Manufactured housing.
   
10.60.130   Mobile home and manufactured home parks.
   
10.60.140   Modular structures
   
10.60.150   Outdoor assemblies.
   
10.60.160   Outdoor dining areas.
   
10.60.170   Outdoor sale of merchandise.
   
10.60.180   Commercial or industrial outdoor storage areas.
   
10.60.190   Recycling collection facilities.
   
10.60.200   Sale of new and used automobiles and trucks.
   
10.60.210   Sale of vehicle fuel.
   
10.60.220   Shipping containers.
   
10.60.230   Swimming pools.
   
10.60.240   Vending machines.
   
10.60.250   Wireless communication facilities and towers.
   
10.60.260   Adult entertainment establishments.
§ 10.60.010 Purpose.
   This chapter requires certain development and operational standards for
specific land uses within the city to preserve, protect, and promote public
health and safety and to promote orderly growth and aesthetically pleasing
urban development.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.60.020 Applicability.
   Specific land uses covered by this chapter shall conform with the provisions
of the section(s) applicable to the specific use, in addition to other
applicable provisions of this title, including the standards of the zone
district where the use is located.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.60.030 Accessory dwelling units.
   This section provides standards for accessory dwelling units (ADUs) located
on the same site as an existing residence located in either the R-1, R-M, or R-
H zone districts. All accessory dwelling units as defined in Cal. Gov’t Code §
65852.2 shall meet the following standards:
   (A)   Number of accessory dwelling units per parcel.
      (1)   For parcels zoned for and including a proposed or existing single-
family home, one accessory dwelling unit shall be allowed for each parcel. Each
parcel may also include a junior accessory dwelling unit conforming to the
standards set forth in §
10.60.040.
      (2)   For parcels zoned to allow and including an existing multi-family
structure(s), two new construction and at least one conversion accessory
dwelling unit shall be allowed on each parcel. Up to 25% of the number of
existing dwellings in the structure may be added as conversion accessory
dwelling units. When the 25% limit results in a fraction of a unit, the total
number of accessory dwelling units that may be added shall be determined by
rounding the fraction up to the next whole number.
      (3)   For the purposes of this section, multi-family structures are those
that contain more than one dwelling unit, including, but not limited to,
duplexes, triplexes, apartment buildings, and condominium buildings.
   (B)   No off-street parking shall be required for any accessory dwelling
unit. Any parking spaces, covered or uncovered, removed to create an accessory
dwelling unit shall not be required to be replaced.
   (C)   The floor area for all accessory dwelling units shall not exceed 1,200
square feet. If the accessory dwelling unit is attached, the floor area shall
not exceed 800 square feet or 50% of the existing living area of the principal
dwelling unit, whichever is more.
   (D)   The side and rear setback for an accessory dwelling unit shall be a
minimum of four feet regardless of zone. No lot coverage, floor area ratio,
open space, minimum lot size requirement, or another development standard shall
preclude the construction of an accessory dwelling unit up to 800 square feet.
   (E)   An accessory dwelling unit may not be constructed unless a main
dwelling exists on the site or will be constructed in conjunction with the
accessory dwelling unit.
   (F)   Owner occupancy shall not be required, and no land use agreement
requiring owner occupancy shall be recorded or enforced on properties
containing accessory dwelling units.
   (G)   Accessory dwelling units shall be provided with water, sewer, and
other utilities as determined by the building official.
   (H)   The accessory dwelling unit shall meet the requirements of the
California Building Standards Code, including the alternative means and methods
section as prescribed therein.
   (I)   Except as specifically set forth in this section, an accessory
dwelling unit regulated pursuant to this chapter shall meet all the
requirements of the zone district in which the accessory dwelling unit is
located, including, without limitation, requirements regarding fences, walls,
and hedges; site area, frontage width, and depth of sites; coverage; building
setback requirements; height of structures; and distances between structures.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.60.040 Accessory dwelling units, junior.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other regulation or definition of this code, a
junior accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted on parcels in zones where
single-family dwellings are an allowed use, where single-family structures
exist or are proposed on the site, and where the owner of the property occupies
the property as their primary place of residence.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, "junior accessory dwelling unit"
shall have the same meaning as defined in Cal. Gov’t Code § 65852.22.
   (C)   Junior accessory dwelling units must be attached to a single-family
dwelling, may be created in any part of an existing or proposed single-family
dwelling, and may be created in addition to a single-family dwelling.
   (D)   If the junior accessory dwelling unit includes a garage conversion,
the required parking spaces for the primary unit must be replaced on-site.
   (E)   Junior accessory dwelling units may be no larger than 500 square feet
in size.
   (F)   Junior accessory dwelling units shall contain, at a minimum, the
following features:
      (1)   An exterior entrance separate from that of the primary home.
      (2)   A cooking facility with appliances.
      (3)   A food preparation counter and storage cabinets of reasonable size
in relation to the size of the junior accessory dwelling unit.
   (G)   Junior accessory dwelling units may include separate sanitation
facilities or may share sanitation facilities with the primary dwelling.
   (H)   Junior accessory dwelling units that contain all the required features
of a dwelling unit will not be required to maintain an interior connection
between the junior accessory dwelling unit and the primary dwelling.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.60.050 Alcoholic beverages, on-sale and off-sale.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall consider all uses and businesses
proposing to sell alcoholic beverages to the public, or in the case of a
private club, its members, in accordance with
Chapter 10.80, Conditional Use Permits.
   (B)   The Planning Commission shall consider whether the proposed use or
business will detrimentally affect nearby properties or sensitive land uses,
including, but not limited to, residential neighborhoods, schools, churches,
hospitals, public playgrounds, or other similar uses.
   (C)   The sale of alcoholic beverages for temporary periods shall not be
subject to a conditional use permit but shall be subject to review and approval
by the Director and City Police Chief in accordance with
Chapter 10.76, Temporary Use Permits.
   (D)   The provisions of this section do not apply to wholesale businesses
providing services to retailers only.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.60.060 Animals
   Animals shall be regulated in accordance with Title 6 of the Tulare
Municipal Code in all zones.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.60.070 Bed and breakfast inns.
   (A)   Bed and breakfast inns shall be limited to a maximum of six rooms for
rent per site. No person who is paying rent in exchange for lodging shall
occupy a guest room on the premises for more than 14 consecutive nights.
   (B)   Food service at bed and breakfast inns shall be allowed for registered
guests only unless the use also qualifies as a restaurant.
   (C)   The scale and appearance of the bed and breakfast inn shall remain
primarily residential in character. All buildings and site improvements shall
be similar to and compatible in design with the surrounding neighborhood and
adjacent residences.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.60.080 Cottage food operations.
   (A)   Cottage foods operations operating in accordance with AB 1616 shall be
considered a home occupation and shall obtain a home occupation permit in
accordance with
Chapter 10.78 prior to commencement of the use.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of
Chapter 10.78, a cottage food operation is allowed to employ one full-time
equivalent employee on site.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the provisions of
Chapter 10.78, a cottage food operation may sell food produced on-site directly
to consumers at the site.
   (D)   A cottage food operation shall be conducted in the residence's
existing kitchen.
   (E)   An approved home occupation permit shall not be effective until the
appropriate permit is obtained from the County Health Department and shall
automatically expire and be null and void if the county permit or approval
expires, is disapproved, or is revoked.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.60.090 Drive-thru pick-up windows.
   (A)   All uses with a drive-thru pick-up window shall meet the following
standards unless otherwise modified by a conditional use permit issued in
accordance with
Chapter 10.80:
      (1)   Drive-thru lanes shall be located outside of all building setback
areas and all required landscaped areas.
      (2)   Drive-thru lanes shall be designed, located, and constructed in a
manner that avoids trapping vehicle emissions in a confined space.
      (3)   Drive-thru lanes shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from
existing residential uses and from residential zone districts and must be
separated from residential areas by buildings, extensively landscaped areas, or
decorative block walls.
      (4)   Drive-thru lanes shall be constructed with the necessary vehicle
stacking capacity so that vehicles using the drive-thru lane do not overflow
into public streets.
      (5)   Drive-thru lanes shall be shielded in a manner approved by the city
to eliminate vehicle headlight glare into adjoining land and on-coming traffic
approaching the drive-thru site property.
      (6)   The installation of a drive-thru pick-up window and associated
improvements shall not reduce the number of required parking spaces below the
minimum zoning requirement for parking upon the drive-thru site property.
      (7)   Drive-thru lanes shall not block or interfere with access to
parking lot spaces and shall function independently of parking lot aisles.
      (8)   Drive-thru lanes shall not extend onto the adjoining property
unless the owner of the drive-thru site property obtains a written easement or
another irrevocable right from the adjoining landowner to construct
improvements upon and use the adjoining property for the drive-thru use,
including, without limitations, the stacking of vehicles and the right to
maintain, repair, replace, and remove such improvements. The written document
shall be executed by the owner of the drive-thru site property and the owner of
the adjoining property and recorded against title to the adjoining property
prior to the commencement of construction of improvements upon the drive-thru
site property.
      (9)   A use with a single drive-thru lane shall accommodate a minimum of
six vehicle stacking spaces per lane, with a minimum of four stacking spaces
before the ordering speaker and two stacking spaces after the ordering speaker.
Each vehicle stacking space in a drive-thru lane shall be a minimum of 20 feet
in length. Uses known or anticipated to require additional stacking spaces may
be required to provide more than the minimum by the Director.
      (10)   A use with drive-thru lanes on each side of the use (two lanes)
shall accommodate a minimum of four vehicle stacking spaces per lane with a
minimum of two stacking spaces before the ordering speaker and two stacking
spaces after the ordering speaker in each drive-thru lane. Each vehicle
stacking space in a drive-thru lane shall be a minimum of 20 feet in length.
      (11)   Speaker noise levels measured at the property line shall not
exceed applicable city noise standards.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.60.100 Emergency shelter.
   (A)   Emergency shelters shall be limited to the number of beds or clients
served by the size of the building and the building code occupancy standards.
   (B)   Off-street parking shall be based upon demonstrated need and shall be
consistent with any pertinent parking requirements of the zone district where
the emergency shelter is located.
   (C)   Each emergency shelter shall have an interior on-site waiting and
client intake area sufficient in size as determined by the Director to admit
individuals to the shelter.
   (D)   Each emergency shelter shall have an on-site manager 24 hours a day.
   (E)   No emergency shelter may be located closer than 300 feet from another
similar shelter.
   (F)   Lighting of the property on which the facility is located should be
designed to provide a minimum maintained horizontal illumination of at least
one foot-candle of light on the parking surfaces and walkways.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.60.110 Garage or yard sales.
   (A)   The sale of personal possessions in outdoor areas or from the garage
of a dwelling, commonly referred to as garage or yard sales, within an R-1, R-
M, or R-H zone district shall be limited and conducted in accordance with Title
5 of the Tulare Municipal Code.
   (B)   Materials to be sold shall be personal possessions. No materials shall
be offered for sale that have been acquired solely for the purposes of the
resale.
   (C)   The driveway, yard, or other space used for the purposes of the sale
shall be restored to its normal residential character at the conclusion of the
sale, including the removal of all signs.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.60.120 Manufactured housing.
   The provisions of this section shall apply to all manufactured homes not
located in an approved mobile home park:
   (A)   Manufactured homes with wheels (i.e., mobile homes) are considered
mobile homes and are therefore only permitted in mobile home parks.
   (B)   All manufactured homes shall meet the following site or architectural
standards:
      (1)   All manufactured homes are subject to the development standards of
the zone district in which they are located.
      (2)   A manufactured home shall not be less than 20 feet wide.
      (3)   The parking requirements of Chapter 10.54 shall apply.
      (4)   All manufactured housing units and garages shall have a pitched
roof with a roof overhang on each of the perimeter walls such that the overhang
is architecturally integrated into the design of the dwelling unit.
      (5)   All manufactured housing units, garages, and carports located on
the lot shall have a roof constituted of asphalt composition, clay, tile,
concrete or metal tile or panels, slate, or built-up asphaltic-gravel
materials.
      (6)   All manufactured housing units and garages located on the lot shall
have similar exterior siding materials consisting of wood, masonry, concrete,
stucco, Masonite, or metal lap. The exterior siding material shall extend to
the ground level or the top of the foundation when a solid concrete or masonry
perimeter foundation is provided.
      (7)   All manufactured housing units, garages, and carports shall be
placed on a permanent foundation that meets the applicable building code
requirements and/or the provisions of Cal. Health and Safety Code § 18551 such
that the floor elevation of the dwelling is reasonably compatible with the
floor elevations of the surrounding dwelling units.
      (8)   The manufactured home electrical, gas, water, and drain connections
shall be made permanent in a manner applicable to permanent buildings. Gas
shut-off valves, meters, and regulators shall not be located beneath the
manufactured homes.
      (9)   The Director may approve deviations from one or more of the
standards of this section on the basis of a finding that the architectural
style proposed provides compensating design features and that the proposed
dwelling will be compatible and harmonious with existing structures in the
vicinity.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.60.130 Mobile home and manufactured home parks.
   (A)   No mobile home shall be parked, occupied, or used for any purposes,
including, without limitation, living or sleeping purposes, unless the mobile
home is located within a licensed mobile home park, except that a mobile home
may be used for the following temporary purposes outside of a mobile home park:
as an office for a construction project, circus, or carnival; as a residence of
a watchman on the site of a construction project or an industrial facility to
provide temporary living quarters for personnel in accordance with the
provisions of
Chapter 10.76.
   (B)   A mobile home park requires the approval of a conditional use permit
in accordance with the procedures of
Chapter 10.80.
   (C)   The site area standards for a mobile home park shall be as follows:
      (1)   The minimum area of a mobile home park shall be five acres. If the
area of the mobile home park is greater than five acres, the first phase of
mobile home park development shall not be less than five acres and shall
include all required recreational and service amenities.
      (2)   The residential unit density shall be consistent with the land use
designation of the Tulare General Plan.
      (3)   Each mobile home or manufactured home site shall be not less than
3,000 square feet in area, including pad, parking, private access, landscaping,
and private storage area.
   (D)   The following clearance and setback area requirements shall apply to
mobile home parks. No mobile home shall be located in any required building
setback area.
      (1)   The front building setback area shall be a minimum of 15 feet.
      (2)   The side and rear building setback areas shall be a minimum of ten
feet, or 15 feet when adjacent to public right-of-way.
   (E)   The following requirements shall apply to mobile home sites:
      (1)   No mobile home or manufactured home site shall be less than 30 feet
in width.
      (2)   The front building setback area shall be a minimum of ten feet.
      (3)   The side building setback area shall be a minimum of five feet.
Patio covers and carport, if open on three sides, may be located within three
feet of a side yard property line.
      (4)   The rear building setback areas shall be a minimum of ten feet.
      (5)   Each mobile home site shall have a hard-surfaced patio area of not
less than 200 square feet. A permanent porch greater than 20 square feet in
area may be counted as a part of the required patio area.
      (6)   Each mobile home site shall have a support pad of concrete or
asphalt concrete laid over a compacted surface base, which, in combination, are
adequate to support the mobile home on a level plane.
   (F)   The following requirements for parking shall apply to mobile home
parks.
      (1)   Each mobile home site shall provide parking for two automobiles.
Each parking stall shall not be less than ten feet wide and 20 feet in length.
All parking stalls shall be paved consistent with Tulare's Standards and
Specifications Manual; tandem parking may be allowed as a condition of the use
permit.
      (2)   Not less than one guest stall shall be provided for each five
mobile home sites.
      (3)   Parking shall be provided for park offices at a ratio of one
parking space for each 400 square feet of gross floor space.
      (4)   Supplemental parking for boats, recreation vehicles, and unoccupied
travel trailers shall be provided at a ratio of one parking space for each ten
mobile home sites and shall be used only by the mobile home park tenants. Such
parking shall be clustered, easily accessible via interior drives, and shall be
screened from view by means of a solid ornamental fence or wall and
landscaping.
      (5)   All parking areas and spaces shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 10.54.
   (G)   The following requirements for on-site streets shall apply to mobile
home parks.
      (1)   Entrance streets shall be located to assure safe access to and from
the public street system.
      (2)   Approved street names shall be provided and maintained by the
developer.
      (3)   Minor streets within the mobile home park shall be a minimum of 32
feet of paved width, and collector streets shall be a minimum of 40 feet of
paved width. Construction and paving of the streets shall be in accordance with
city standards.
      (4)   Drainage along the street shall be constructed to provide adequate
drainage.
      (5)   Parallel parking shall be permitted on both sides of collector
streets and only one side of a minor street. Such on-street parking shall be in
addition to the off-street parking requirements of this chapter.
      (6)   If streets within the mobile home park are to be dedicated to the
city, street standards shall be consistent with Tulare's Standards and
Specifications Manual.
   (H)   Driveways for individual mobile home sites, street signs, interior
street lighting, storm drainage facilities, and water and sewer systems shall
be installed subject to the approval of the City Engineer and in accordance
with city standards.
   (I)   All public utilities shall be installed underground, including
electrical, telephone, street lighting cable, community television antenna
connections, and ducts for cable television. Usage of an individual television
antenna will be permitted but must be located at the rear of the individual
mobile home space and shall project no more than two feet above the roof of the
mobile home.
   (J)   Accessory structures, such as storage buildings and greenhouses, shall
not be located within three feet of a side or rear yard property line or six
feet from a mobile home.
   (K)   Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with
Chapter 10.52.
   (L)   The following requirements for recreation areas and pedestrian ways
shall apply to mobile home parks.
      (1)   Common recreation areas in an aggregate total equal to 10% of the
gross area of the mobile home park shall be provided at a location or locations
that are easily accessible and convenient to park residents. The calculation of
the common recreation areas shall not include yard areas, pedestrian ways,
management offices, laundry and tenant storage areas, and parking areas.
      (2)   Recreation areas shall be landscaped and maintained, with all
landscaped areas irrigated by an automatic underground sprinkler system.
      (3)   Pedestrian walkways shall be provided throughout the mobile home
park, connecting all mobile home or manufactured home sites with each other and
with common recreation areas. Such pedestrian walkways shall be provided where
possible at locations away from the interior street system to avoid conflicts
in pedestrian and vehicle traffic.
      (4)   Common recreation areas may include parks and open space,
playgrounds, clubhouses, community centers, and similar recreational uses.
   (M)   Mobile home parks shall provide permanently maintained landscaped
areas and site screening as follows:
      (1)   A landscaped border along the front setback area and along the rear
setback area if it is adjacent to a public street.
      (2)   A seven foot masonry wall shall be provided along all public
streets. This wall shall be consistent with the setback distances in division
(C) above. Where the park adjoins land that is designated for residential,
commercial, or industrial uses, a wall shall be constructed on the property
line.
   (N)   Each mobile home park shall provide the following additional
facilities:
      (1)   A laundry building for clothes washing and drying.
      (2)   Trash enclosures at locations along the interior street system and
integrated with the guest parking areas, which are convenient for all residents
and for access by municipal refuse trucks.
   (O)   At the time of the placement on the site, all mobile homes and
manufactured homes shall be fitted with appropriate skirts from the floor level
of the mobile home to the ground to obscure stands, pads, and undercarriage
equipment.
   (P)   Mobile homes and manufactured homes may be displayed and sold within a
mobile home park similar to the sale of model homes within a residential
subdivision, provided such mobile homes are not sold for delivery to any
location other than within the park in which sold and are at all times placed
on mobile home sites and connected to all utility services. No more than four
mobile homes shall be offered for sale at any one time, and advertising for
such sales shall be limited to one non-illuminated sign not exceeding four
square feet in area on the site of each mobile home or manufactured home
offered for sale.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.60.140 Modular structures.
   (A)   A modular structure shall mean any designed, manufactured,
remanufactured, altered, used, or converted-for-use transportable building or
major component of a building designed for use by itself or for on-site
incorporation with similar units into a structure for residential, commercial,
professional, or industrial use. A modular structure includes all residential
units except as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 18008 and 18008.5.
   (B)   A permanent modular structure shall have the same meaning as a modular
structure but will exist on a parcel of land for two years or more.
   (C)   A temporary modular structure shall have the same meaning as a modular
structure but will exist on a parcel of land for less than two years. The
Planning Commission may set a time limit of less than two years where it deems
appropriate.
   (D)   A permanent modular structure may be approved by the Planning
Commission in accordance with
Chapter 10.80, Conditional Use Permits, subject to the following provisions:
      (1)   A conditional use permit shall be filed and approved for each
modular structure on a site.
      (2)   Each permanent modular structure shall be placed on a permanent
foundation.
      (3)   All permanent modular structures shall be of an architectural style
consistent with surrounding structures.
      (4)   Permanent parking spaces shall be provided as required by
Chapter 10.54, Parking and Loading.
      (5)   Landscaping shall be provided as required by
Chapter 10.52, Landscape Standards.
      (6)   Permanent modular structures shall comply with all applicable
federal, state, and local laws.
   (E)   A temporary modular structure may be approved by the Planning
Commission in accordance with
Chapter 10.80, Conditional Use Permits, subject to the following development
standards and regulations:
      (1)   All temporary modular structures shall be screened or located to
minimize visibility from street frontages.
      (2)   All temporary modular structures shall provide skirting around the
structure as required by the Planning Commission.
      (3)   A temporary modular structure shall be removed within 30 days of
the expiration of the time period approved by the Planning Commission.
      (4)   A bond in the amount set by the Planning Commission shall be posted
and filed with the Planning and Building Department prior to installation of
any temporary modular structure. The bond shall be executed by the City of
Tulare if the temporary modular structure is not removed after 30 days have
lapsed from the expiration of the time limit as approved by the Planning
Commission.
      (5)   Each temporary modular structure shall comply with all applicable
federal, state, and local laws.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.60.150 Outdoor assemblies.
   (A)   A conditional use permit shall be obtained in accordance with the
procedures outlined in
Chapter 10.116.
   (B)   Applicant shall provide a detailed site plan depicting areas to be
used for seating, parking, driveways, open space areas, and setbacks.
   (C)   Parking shall be provided at one space per three seats, or if no seats
are provided, one space per 40 square feet of area devoted to assembly use. All
parking areas shall be improved to include gravel, rock, dust binder, or other
surfacing material which will mitigate dust. All parking areas shall be
maintained to control dust.
   (D)   All outdoor music shall not exceed 65dbA at any property line
conterminous with any R-1 zone district.
   (E)   All public works improvements shall be provided as required by the
Public Works Director.
   (F)   No loudspeaker may be used for an outdoor assembly that produces
sounds that will cause a significant noise impact. An applicant who proposes
the use of a loudspeaker shall submit a plan to the Planning Commission
demonstrating that the use of a loudspeaker will not cause significant noise
impacts.
   (G)   In any residential zone, the property must contain a single-family
house that is owner-occupied by the applicant/holder of the use permit.
   (H)   Hours of operation shall be limited to 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. The
Planning Commission may impose additional requirements by restricting the use
to certain days of the week.
   (I)   The Planning Commission may require a time limit (sunset clause) on
any use permit.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.60.160 Outdoor dining areas.
   (A)   The purpose of this section is to promote increased business and
pedestrian traffic by providing safe and visually appealing opportunities to
create outdoor dining areas in public areas.
   (B)   The following definitions shall apply to this section:
   DINING ESTABLISHMENT. A structure whose principal use is the serving of food
to the general public.
   DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT. A structure whose primary use is the serving of
alcoholic beverages to the general public, and the serving of food is an
accessory use.
   OUTDOOR DINING AREA. The use of portions of public sidewalks, public rights-
of-way, and common sidewalk areas within a shopping center as identified in
this chapter and/or on-site open space used by a dining establishment or
drinking establishment for the serving and consumption of food and/or
beverages. Pass-through window and sidewalk counter service are also allowed
when an outdoor dining area is provided pursuant to this section.
   (C)   Where permissible, all outdoor dining areas must be located and
operated adjacent to and incidental to the operation of a dining establishment
or drinking establishment. Use of the sidewalk must be confined to the actual
sidewalk and public right-of-way frontage of a dining establishment and must
not encroach upon adjacent sidewalk or public right-of-way. Subject to the
provisions of this section, on-site open space areas may also be used as an
outdoor dining area.
      (1)   Outdoor dining enclosures need to enclose the entire outdoor café
area, leaving required exit width accommodations for occupancy of the facility.
      (2)   Take-out establishments, where food is purchased inside the
building, may have unscreened outdoor dining areas, provided that 48 inches of
clear space is maintained at all times for pedestrian movement. Street signage,
furniture, and landscaping shall not encroach on this 48 inches of clear space.
      (3)   Outdoor dining behind or to the side of a building is permitted.
Outdoor spaces should be buffered from parking areas or drive aisles by low
walls, landscaping, or other features to clearly define the edges of the space.
These outdoor spaces should be accessed from the building they serve.
   (D)   Required sidewalk width. Use of the sidewalk area for an outdoor
dining area is permitted only where the sidewalk is wide enough to allow for a
minimum of four consecutive feet of sidewalk width at every point in front of
the dining establishment, which is clear and unimpeded for pedestrian and
wheelchair traffic.
   (E)   Alcoholic beverages. The service of alcoholic beverages and
consumption by customers in an outdoor dining area shall be restricted as
follows:
      (1)   The outdoor dining area must be immediately adjacent to and
abutting the dining establishment or drinking establishment.
      (2)   The outdoor dining area, when serving alcohol and when permitted by
this section to be located on a sidewalk, must be clearly delineated from
pedestrian traffic with a minimum 30-inch to a maximum 36-inch-tall removable
open-style railing, fence or roped boundary or plants and flowers in ornamental
planter boxes and pots that are architecturally compatible with the structure
housing the dining establishment.
      (3)   The operator shall post a written notice to customers as approved
by the city, which states that the drinking or carrying of an alcoholic
beverage is prohibited and unlawful outside of the outdoor dining area.
      (4)   The service of alcoholic beverages in the outdoor dining area must
be licensed by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control and
comply with all licensing requirements.
   (F)   Health standards. Prior to serving any food or beverage in an outdoor
dining area, the outdoor dining area must be inspected and approved by the
County Health Department. All exterior surfaces within the outdoor dining area
shall be kept clean at all times. Restrooms shall be provided in the adjoining
dining establishment or drinking establishment. The operator shall maintain the
outdoor dining area, including, without limitation, the sidewalk surface and
furniture and adjacent areas, in a clean and safe condition at all times.
   (G)   Hours of operation. Hours of operation for outdoor dining areas are to
coincide with those of the dining establishment or drinking establishment or
the hours of operation set by the Alcohol Beverage Control license if alcohol
is served, whichever is more restrictive.
   (H)   Special closures. Outdoor dining is an interruptible or terminable
privilege. The city shall have the right and power, acting through the City
Manager or his or her designee, to prohibit the operation of an outdoor dining
area at any time because of anticipated or actual problems or conflicts in the
use of the sidewalk area. Such problems and conflicts may arise from but are
not limited to, scheduled festivals and similar events, parades or marches,
repairs to the street or sidewalk, or demonstrations or emergencies occurring
in the area. To the extent possible, the permittee shall be given prior notice
of any time period during which the operation of the outdoor dining area will
be prohibited by the city.
   (I)   Permit issuance, findings, and conditions. In order to operate an
outdoor dining area, a person must obtain an outdoor dining area permit issued
by the Director following review as set forth by the Site Plan Review
Committee. The application for an outdoor dining permit shall be processed as
an administrative use permit as provided in
Chapter 10.74. The application for the outdoor dining permit shall be
accompanied by a filing fee established by the City Council and an accurate
drawing showing the configuration of the outdoor dining area, including,
without limitation, table placement and the method of separating the outdoor
dining area from pedestrian traffic. The following conditions must be satisfied
before an outdoor dining permit can be issued:
      (1)   The proposed operation of the outdoor dining area satisfies all of
the applicable provisions of this section.
      (2)   An outdoor dining area located on a public sidewalk or public
right-of-way shall have the same floor elevation as the sidewalk or right-of-
way area.
      (3)   Such other conditions as the city may deem necessary, including,
without limitation, conditions to ensure public safety, to protect public
improvements, and to provide aesthetic improvements.
      (4)   No merchandise of any kind shall be displayed in the outdoor dining
area except as specifically allowed by the outdoor dining permit.
      (5)   Upon application being made for an outdoor dining permit, the
matter shall also be referred to the City Engineer for consideration of the
issuance of an encroachment permit. If required by the City Engineer, the
issuance of a permit shall be conditioned upon:
         (a)   Execution of an agreement holding the city harmless against
claims from the applicant, patrons of the outdoor dining area, and pedestrians
in a form acceptable to the City Attorney.
         (b)   Applicant's insurance meeting requirements acceptable to the
City's Risk Manager. The city shall be listed as additional insured on the
endorsement and tied to the permit number to specify the location and
circumstances.
         (c)   Such other conditions as are necessary for public safety or to
protect public improvements, as determined through site plan review.
         (d)   Such conditions as are necessary to restore the appearance of
the sidewalk to its original condition on termination of use.
   (J)   All outdoor dining furniture, including tables, chairs, umbrellas, and
planters, shall be movable. All outdoor furniture must be of commercial quality
to withstand the wear of outdoor use; plastic tables and chairs are not
permitted. Umbrellas must be secured with a minimum base of not less than 60
pounds.
   (K)   Term. The outdoor dining permit shall run with the land and shall
continue to be valid upon a change in ownership of the dining establishment,
subject to the conditions of approval.
   (L)   Violation/revocation. An outdoor dining permit may be revoked by the
City Council following notice to the permittee and a public hearing before the
Council. The permit may be revoked if one or more conditions of the permit or
of this chapter have been violated if the outdoor dining area is being operated
in a manner that constitutes a nuisance, or if the operation of the sidewalk
dining area unduly impedes or restricts the movement of pedestrians past the
outdoor dining area. Following the revocation of an outdoor dining permit, no
application for the same site shall be filed within six months from the date of
revocation.
   (M)   Appeal procedures. In accordance with the following provisions, any
applicant or other interested person dissatisfied with a decision made under
this chapter may appeal such decision. The decision of the Site Plan Review
Committee may be appealed to the Planning Commission provided such appeal is in
writing and filed within ten days of the Committee's decision. The Planning
Commission shall hold a public hearing on any such appeal. The receipt of a
written appeal shall stay all actions or put in abeyance all permits or other
discretionary approvals which may have been granted, pending the effective date
of the decision of the body hearing the appeal. Appeals shall be scheduled for
the earliest regular meeting of the Planning Commission, not less than 15 days
or more than 45 schedules of the Planning Commission. All appeals shall be
accompanied by a fee, set by resolution of the City Council, sufficient to
cover the cost of handling the request.
   (N)   Enforcement. The Director, Zoning Compliance Inspector, police
department, or other person authorized by the City Manager, shall be authorized
to enforce provisions of this section and to take such action as may be
necessary to ensure compliance with this section.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.60.170 Outdoor sale of merchandise.
   (A)   The purpose of the regulations and standards in this section is to
allow, consistent with public health, safety, and welfare, increased business
and pedestrian traffic by providing safe and visually appealing opportunities
for outside display and sales of merchandise, in conjunction with an existing,
enclosed commercial business activity, in public rights-of-way and private
sidewalk areas open to the public, in the City of Tulare. Nothing in this title
shall prevent the lawful operation of itinerant sidewalk sales.
   (B)   Outside display and sale of merchandise shall mean the use of
immediately adjacent sidewalks either public or private, open for public use,
and public rights-of-way by an existing, enclosed commercial business
establishment for the display and sale of merchandise.
   (C)   Permit required. No outside display and sale of merchandise shall be
allowed on sidewalks and public rights-of-way without an outside display and
sales permit as set forth in this chapter.
   (D)   Locations permissible. Outside display and sale of merchandise are not
permitted where the speed, volume, or proximity of vehicular traffic is not
compatible with such activity or any other element of public safety, health, or
welfare. All outside display and sale of merchandise areas must be adjacent to
and incidental to the operation of an indoor, enclosed commercial business. Use
of the sidewalk must be confined to the actual sidewalk and public right-of-way
frontage of the indoor commercial business building and must be clearly
delineated from adjacent business and pedestrian traffic, utilizing sidewalk
striping or other non-permanent methods.
   (E)   Required sidewalk width. Outside display and sale of merchandise are
permitted only where the sidewalk is wide enough to adequately accommodate both
the usual pedestrian traffic in the area and the operation of the proposed
activity. The outside display and sale of merchandise area shall leave not less
than four consecutive feet of sidewalk width at every point which is clear and
unimpeded for pedestrian traffic.
   (F)   Hours of operation for outside display and sale of merchandise areas
shall coincide with those of the adjacent commercial business activity.
   (G)   Permit process.
      (1)   Applicants for outside display and sale of merchandise permits
shall submit a written application to the Director on a city form. The
application shall be accompanied by a fee set by the City Council by
resolution. The Director, or his or her designee, and the City Engineer, or his
or her designee, shall review the application and the site. A permit shall be
granted if it is determined that:
         (a)   The proposed display and sale will not significantly interfere
with pedestrian traffic or otherwise constitute a health and safety risk.
         (b)   The application complies with all the provisions of this
chapter.
      (2)   Where found necessary and appropriate, conditions may be imposed on
the permit, provided such conditions are consistent with this chapter. A
blanket temporary permit to be applicable to multiple designated businesses for
use in conjunction with a recognized and approved community activity event
(such as Camp Town Days, farmers' market, etc.,) may be issued to a single
applicant who shall be responsible for compliance with the ordinance by all
participating businesses.
   (H)   Special limitations. An outside display and sales area permit is an
interruptible or terminable privilege. The city shall have the right and power,
acting through the Community Development Director or his or her designee, to
prohibit the operation of an outside display and sales area at any time because
of anticipated or actual problems or conflicts in the use of the sidewalk area
or any factors that impact public health, safety or welfare. Such problems and
conflicts may arise from but are not limited to, scheduled festivals and
similar events, or parades or marches, or repairs to the street or sidewalk, or
from demonstrations or emergencies occurring in the area. To the extent
possible, the permittee shall be given prior notice of any time period during
which the operation of the outside display and sales area will be prohibited by
the city.
   (I)   Encroachment permit. At the time the outside display and sale of
merchandise permit is issued, the City Engineer may require the issuance of an
appropriate encroachment permit.
   (J)   Permit revocation. An outside display and sales permit may be revoked
by the Community Development Director, following written notice to the
permittee, if one or more of the conditions of the permit or of this chapter
have been violated or if the outside display and sales area is being operated
in a manner which constitutes a nuisance, or unduly impedes or restricts the
movements of pedestrians. Following revocation, no application for the same
site shall be filed for a period of six months.
   (K)   Appeal process. A permittee may appeal a notice of revocation and an
applicant or any other interested party may appeal the granting or denial of a
permit application. Such an appeal shall be made, in writing, within ten days
of the decision and shall be filed with the City Manager.
   (L)   Term. An outside display and sales of merchandise permit shall run
with the adjacent commercial business activity, and the land upon which the
business is located, subject to the conditions of approval and the requirements
of this chapter; provided that a temporary permit shall expire in one year and
must be renewed annually.
   (M)   Enforcement. The Director, his or her designee, or any other person
authorized by the City Manager, shall be authorized to enforce the provisions
of this chapter and to take such action as may be necessary to ensure
compliance with the regulations, general provisions, and conditions imposed
upon any permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
   (N)   Penalty. Any violation of this chapter shall be treated as a strict
liability offense regardless of intent. Any person, firm, and/or corporation
that violates any portion of this section shall be subject to prosecution and/
or administrative enforcement under
Chapters 1.12 and
1.61.
   (O)   Severance clause. The provisions of this chapter are declared to be
severable and if any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter shall
for any reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decisions shall
not affect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses, and
phrases of this chapter, but they shall remain in effect, it being the
legislative intent that this chapter shall stay and notwithstanding the
validity of any part.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.60.180 Commercial or industrial outdoor storage areas.
   In all commercial and industrial zones, outdoor storage of materials or
equipment that occupies a volume of more than 60 cubic feet and is visible from
any abutting public street or abuts property used for residential purposes meet
the following standards. This section does not apply to temporary storage, such
as storage during construction.
   (A)   Outdoor storage areas shall be enclosed by a view-obscuring fence or
wall at least six feet in height. All gates provided for ingress and egress in
any required fence or wall shall be at least six feet in height and shall be of
view-obscuring construction. The use of galvanized chain-link or wood fence
material is not allowed, especially adjacent to streets. Chain link with vinyl
slats for screening purposes is permitted.
   (B)   Materials shall be stacked in outdoor storage areas to a height no
greater than that of any building, wall, fence, or gate enclosing the storage
area. This section shall not apply to a junk yard, wrecking yard, or salvage
facility.
   (C)   No storage shall be permitted in any required front or side yard
setbacks adjacent to a public street or highway.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.60.190 Recycling collection facilities.
   Small and large collection recycling facilities shall meet the following
standards:
   (A)   Recyclable materials shall be stored in a permanent structure on a
foundation.
   (B)   An adequate on-site refuse container for disposal of non-hazardous
waste and a container for customers to pour remaining liquids into from their
CRV materials shall be provided.
   (C)   The collection facilities and surrounding area shall be cleaned and
washed, and all litter surrounding the site removed as needed to maintain a
safe and healthy environment.
   (D)   The operator shall post a sign advising that it is illegal to take
shopping carts or that possession of stolen shopping carts is a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.60.200 Sale of new and used automobiles and trucks.
   In all zone districts, the off-site sale of new and used automobiles and
trucks is prohibited.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.60.210 Sale of vehicle fuel.
   (A)   A conditional use permit is required for a business engaged in the
sale of vehicle fuel or diesel fuel.
   (B)   The following are development standards and location criteria for
businesses engaged in the sale of vehicle fuel:
      (1)   Service stations, convenience stores, and mini-markets shall have a
minimum lot size of not less than 15,000 square feet, with not less than 125
feet of frontage on a public street (this requirement shall not apply to the
redevelopment of a preexisting service station use).
      (2)   Except for truck refueling stations, service stations, convenience
stores, and mini-markets shall be permitted only at the intersection of a major
arterial or arterial street as shown on the General Plan, except in the case of
an integrated commercial shopping center, where the Planning Commission, at its
discretion, may allow the development of a service station, provided that the
service station can be made a functional part of the center; that it will blend
architecturally with the center; and that it will not disrupt either the
internal or external traffic flow in and around the center.
      (3)   Utility trailers and rental trucks may be stored (for rental
purposes) on a service station site, provided they are screened from view and
adequate space is provided in addition to the minimum size requirement. Utility
trailers and other rental equipment shall not be permitted in a C-1 district or
in shopping centers.
      (4)   All merchandise shall be stored and displayed within the service
station building, with the exception of lubricating items and accessories,
which may be displayed and maintained in movable cabinets or racks specially
designed for the display of such items.
      (5)   All repair works and servicing operations shall be conducted within
a completely enclosed building. No outdoor storage of disabled vehicles,
vehicles under repair, automobile parts, or repair equipment shall be allowed
at any time. No dismantling of automobiles for the purposes of selling parts
shall be allowed.
      (6)   No body or fender work, automobile painting, or tire recapping
shall be permitted.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.60.220 Shipping containers.
   (A)   Shipping containers, also known as C-trains, may only be used for
storage in the C-4, PL, PR, M-1, and M-2 zones, on city-owned sites in any
zone, and during construction to temporarily store equipment or material in any
zone.
   (B)   Shipping containers shall be incidental to the primary use of the site
and/or shopping center. They are not permitted as an accessory use on a stand-
alone parking lot. They are not permitted on vacant property.
   (C)   The maximum number of shipping containers allowed on a site shall be
limited to one per each 20,000 square feet of building area. For buildings less
than 20,000 square feet, one shipping container is allowed.
   (D)   Shipping containers used during construction to temporarily store
equipment or material shall be removed upon occupancy of the building and/or
expiration of the building permit, whichever occurs first.
   (E)   Shipping containers shall be located, screened, or painted so as to be
difficult to view from a public right-of-way, state highway, or residential
zone district to the greatest extent feasible as determined by the Director.
   (F)   Shipping containers shall be kept in good condition and free of
damage, rust, graffiti, signs, banners, etc. Repairs shall be made within 48
hours of being damaged. Graffiti shall be removed within 24 hours.
   (G)   Shipping containers may not be used to store flammable liquids or
other hazardous materials, as determined by the Fire Chief.
   (H)   Shipping containers shall not obstruct adequate access or fire
clearance as determined by the Fire Chief.
   (I)   There shall be no utility connections to the shipping container unless
specifically allowed through a building permit.
   (J)   Residential and/or commercial use. Shipping containers converted for
residential or commercial use, or any other such occupied space, shall secure
all entitlements that are required of conventional structures, shall comply
with all provisions of the zone district in which they are located, other
applicable provisions of the Municipal Code, and shall secure a building
permit.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.60.230 Swimming pools.
   (A)   New below-ground swimming pools shall be constructed at least three
feet from any property line.
   (B)   Swimming pools shall be entirely closed by structures, fences, or
walls in compliance with Cal. Gov’t Code § 115920 - The Swimming Pool Act.
   (C)   Fences and walls used to enclose a swimming pool shall have a minimum
height of five feet. Such fences shall be substantial and shall be constructed
so there are no openings greater than three inches when all gates are closed.
All gates, five feet or less in width, in enclosing fences shall be self-
closing and self-latching. All gates greater than five feet in width shall be
provided with a means of latching said gate closed. All latches on gates in
enclosing fences shall be a minimum of four feet above grade.
   (D)   No swimming pool shall be filled with water until the enclosing fence
or wall has been constructed and approved by the building inspector.
Surrounding structures, existing fences, and gates shall suffice for this
requirement if they comply with all requirements of this section as determined
by the building inspector.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.60.240 Vending machines.
   The preferred location for vending machines is inside buildings. Vending
machines installed outdoors shall meet the following requirements:
   (A)   Outdoor vending machines shall be located along the face of a building
or against a structure designed to accommodate them.
   (B)   A minimum walkway of four feet is required in front of all outdoor
vending machines.
   (C)   Outdoor vending machines shall be an ancillary use to an approved
primary use and may not be located on an unimproved lot.
   (D)   Outdoor vending machines shall not be placed in a location that will
block parking areas or create an unsafe situation.
   (E)   Vending machines are permitted to cover up to a maximum of ten feet of
the length of the primary building frontage, or 20 feet, whichever is less.
   (F)   Vending machine installations shall not have exposed conduits, piping,
or overhead utility connections.
   (G)   All outdoor machines shall be maintained in a clean and attractive
condition.
   (H)   Any graffiti on an outdoor vending machine shall be removed within 24
hours.
   (I)   If the outdoor machine is removed, the area shall be cleaned and
restored, including the removal of any conduits or other connection hardware.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.60.250 Wireless communication facilities and towers.
   See
Chapter 10.68 for standards for wireless communication facilities and towers.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.60.260 Adult entertainment establishments.
   See
Chapter 10.62 for standards for adult entertainment establishments.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.62: ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
   Section
   
10.62.010   Purpose and intent.
   
10.62.020   Definitions.
   
10.62.030   Establishment and classification of businesses regulated.
   
10.62.040   Measurement of distance.
   
10.62.050   Location of sexually oriented business.
   
10.62.060   Non-conforming uses.
   
10.62.070   Injunction.
   
10.62.080   Exception for certain nude modeling.
§ 10.62.010 Purpose and intent.
   (A)   It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate sexually
oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare
of the citizens of Tulare and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations
to prevent any deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented
businesses within the city, thereby reducing or eliminating the adverse
secondary effects from such sexually oriented businesses. The provisions of
this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or
restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually
oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter
to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected
by the First Amendment or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of
sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the
intent nor effect of the ordinance to condone or legitimatize the distribution
of obscene material.
   (B)   One of the important purposes of the regulations set forth in this
chapter is to discourage and minimize the opportunity for criminal conduct. As
such, nothing in this chapter shall permit or be interpreted to permit any use,
conduct, and/or activity that is specifically prohibited under the following
California Penal Code sections, including:
      (1)   Receipt of money for placement of a person for purposes of
cohabitation (Cal. Penal Code § 266d).
      (2)   Purchase of a person for purposes of prostitution or placement of a
person for immoral purposes (Cal. Penal Code § 266e).
      (3)   Sale of a person for immoral purposes (Cal. Penal Code § 266f).
      (4)   Pimping (Cal. Penal Code § 266h).
      (5)   Pandering (Cal. Penal Code § 266i).
      (6)   Lewd or obscene conduct (Cal. Penal Code § 314).
      (7)   Houses of ill-fame (Cal. Penal Code § 315).
      (8)   Disorderly houses which disturb the immediate neighborhood (Cal.
Penal Code § 316).
      (9)   Places of prostitution (Cal. Penal Code § 317).
      (10)   Place of prostitution; place of lewdness; place used as bathhouse
permitting conduct capable of transmitting AIDS (Cal. Penal Code § 11225).
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to permit any use,
conduct, and/or activity which violates any federal, state, local law, or
regulation.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.62.020 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words are defined as
follows.
   EMPLOYEE. A person who works or performs in and/or for a sexually oriented
business, regardless of whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage, or
other compensation by the operation of said business.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Any of the following:
      (1)   The opening or commencement of any such business as a new business.
      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this
chapter.
      (3)   The addition of any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in
this chapter to any other existing sexually oriented business.
      (4)   The relocation of any such sexually oriented business.
      (5)   The substantial enlargement of any such sexually oriented business.
   NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY. (a) the appearance or display of a human bare
buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or the areola or nipple of the
female breast; or (b) a state of dress which fails to opaquely and fully cover
a human buttock, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region or areola or
nipple of the female breast.
   OPERATOR. The owner, permit holder, custodian manager, operator, or person
in charge of any permitted or licensed premises.
   PERMITTED or UNLICENSED PREMISES. Any premises that require a license and/or
permit that is classified as a sexually oriented business.
   PERMITTEE AND/OR LICENSEE. A person in whose name a permit and/or license to
operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual
listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or license.
   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association
or other legal entity.
   PUBLIC BUILDING REGULARLY FREQUENTED BY CHILDREN. Any building owned,
leased, or held by the United States, the state, the county, the city, any
special district, school district, or any other agency or political subdivision
of the state or the United States, which building is used as a library,
community center, children's center, or any other use having special attraction
to children, or which building is often visited by children for social
activities unaccompanied by their parents or other adult custodians.
   PUBLIC PARK or RECREATION AREA. Public land that has been designated for
park or recreational activities, including, but not limited to, a park,
playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball
or tennis courts, open space wilderness areas, or similar public land within
the city which is under the control, operation, or management of the city park
and recreation authorities.
   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. Any church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or building
that is primarily for religious worship and related religious activities, as
identified on the latest equalized tax roll.
   SCHOOL. Any public or private educational facility, including, but not
limited to, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools,
primary schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools,
high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools,
special education schools, junior colleges, and universities. School includes
the school grounds but does not include the facilities used primarily for
another purpose and only incidentally as a school.
   SEMI-NUDE. A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region, and areolae of the female breast, as well as portions
of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
   SENSITIVE LAND USES. Residences and residential neighborhoods, child daycare
facilities, cemeteries, religious institutions, schools, boys' clubs, girls'
clubs, or similar existing youth organizations, public parks, or any public
building regularly frequented by children.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES. An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult
novelty shop, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, massage parlor, sexual encounter establishment,
escort agency, or nude model studio. Those businesses defined as follows:
   ADULT ARCADE. An establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or
more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors, similar machines, or
other image-producing machines for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are
regularly available or used to show films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the
depiction or description of SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL
AREAS.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE, or ADULT VIDEO STORE. A commercial
establishment that (a) has as a significant or substantial portion of its
stock-in-trade; or (b) derives a significant or substantial portion of its
revenues; or (c) devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior
floor or display space; or (d) devotes a significant or substantial portion of
its business activities or employees' time, or advertising, to the sale, rental
or viewing for any form of consideration, of any one or more of the following:
         (a)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other visual
representations that are characterized by the depiction or description of
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
         (b)   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use
in connection with SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
         (c)   An establishment may have other significant or substantial
business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale, rental, or viewing
of materials, depicting or describing SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIED
ANATOMICAL AREAS, and still be categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to
exempt such establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult
novelty store, or adult video store so long as one of its significant or
substantial business purposes is offering for sale or rental for some form of
consideration, the specified materials which depict or describe SPECIFIED
ANATOMICAL AREAS or SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant, "bottle club," or similar
commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served that
regularly features: (a) persons who appear nude or in a state of nudity or
semi-nude; (b) live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS, or by SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES, or (c) films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions
which are characterized by the depiction or description of SPECIFIED SEXUAL
ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
   ADULT MOTEL. A motel, hotel, or similar commercial establishment that (a)
offers public accommodations for any form of consideration and which regularly
provides or makes available to patrons closed-circuit television transmissions,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS and which advertises
the availability of this sexually oriented type of material by means of a sign
visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of any off-premises
advertising, including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or
leaflets, radio or television; or (b) offers a sleeping room for rent for a
period of time less than ten hours; or (c) allows a tenant or occupant to rent
or sub-rent the sleeping room for a time period of less than ten hours.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions
depicting or describing SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL
AREAS are regularly shown for any form of consideration.
   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial
establishment which, for any form or consideration, regularly features persons
who appear in a state of nudity or live performances that are characterized by
exposure of SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS or by SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
   NUDE MODEL STUDIO. Any place where a person, who appears in a state of
nudity or displays SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS is provided for money or any form
of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. This term does not
include a modeling class operated by a proprietary school, licensed by the
State of California; a college, junior college, or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation; by a private college or university that
maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable
to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation; or in a structure which has no sign visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available
for viewing, where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at
least three days in advance of the class, and where no more than one nude model
is on the premises at any one time.
   REGULARLY FEATURES or REGULARLY SHOWN. With respect to an adult cabaret,
adult theater, or adult motion picture theater means at least three times
within any 30-day period or carried on as part of the business's routine
scheduling of events or activities and not so infrequently as to constitute a
single, rare or unusual event or occurrence.
   SIGNIFICANT or SUBSTANTIAL PORTION. Such a percentage of its activities,
space allocation, revenues, advertising targeting, stock in trade, floor or
display space, business receipts, revenues, or other business undertakings as
to indicate to a reasonable person that a sexually oriented portion of the
business is one of its important activities, though not necessarily its only or
even primary activity; for this purpose, evidence that 25% or more of its
revenues are derived from such sexually oriented activities or materials, or
that 25% or more of its interior floor space or display space is devoted to
such sexually oriented activities or materials, or that 25% or more of its
actual stock in trade regularly displayed and immediately available for use,
rental, purchase, viewing or perusal is comprised of such sexually oriented
materials, all as defined in §
10.62.020 of this chapter, shall be evidence that a SIGNIFICANT OR SUBSTANTIAL
PORTION of the business is devoted to such uses.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. As used in this chapter means and includes any
of the following:
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the
top of the areolae.
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. As used in this chapter, means and includes any
of the following:
      (1)   The fondling or other intentional touching of buttocks for the
purpose of sexual arousal, or fondling or other intentional touching of human
genitals, pubic region, anus, or female breasts.
      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy.
      (3)   Masturbation, actual or simulated.
      (4)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or
tumescence.
      (5)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in divisions (1) through (4) of this definition.
   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An increase in the
floor areas occupied by the business as the floor areas existed on the affected
date of this chapter.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Any of the
following:
      (1)   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business.
      (2)   The transfer of securities that constitute a controlling interest
in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.62.030 Establishment and classification of businesses regulated.
   The establishment of any sexually oriented business shall be permitted only
in the zone district permitted and shall be subject to the following
restrictions: No person shall cause or permit the establishment of any sexually
oriented businesses, as defined above, within 1,000 feet of any sensitive land
use, as defined above. These limitations apply to sexually oriented businesses
classified as follows:
   (A)   Adult arcade.
   (B)   Adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store.
   (C)   Adult cabaret.
   (D)   Adult motel.
   (E)   Adult motion picture theater.
   (F)   Adult theater.
   (G)   Nude model studio.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.62.040 Measurement of distance.
   The distance between any sexually oriented business and any sensitive land
use shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects from property line to property line.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.62.050 Location of sexually oriented business.
   The City of Tulare's zoning ordinance requires that sexually oriented
businesses shall be allowed only in a zone where such uses are specifically
permitted. Permits for sexually oriented businesses shall be required and
governed by the procedures and policies specified in the City of Tulare
Municipal Code. In addition, any sexually oriented business shall be subject to
the following restrictions:
   (A)   The person commits a misdemeanor if he operates, or causes to be
operated, a sexually oriented business outside of a permitted zone.
   (B)   The person commits a misdemeanor if he operates, or causes to be
operated, a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of any sensitive land
use, as defined above.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.62.060 Non-conforming uses.
   (A)   Any sexually oriented businesses operating at the effective date of
this chapter that is in violation of §
10.62.030 shall be deemed a non-conforming use. A non-conforming use will be
permitted to continue for a two-year period, with possible extensions for
extenuating circumstances to be granted by the City Council only upon a
convincing showing of extreme financial hardship. Such extensions shall not
exceed a total of three years in addition to the initial amortization period.
Any such non-conforming business loses its right to operate as a non-conforming
use if, for any reason, it voluntarily discontinues its business operation for
a period of 30 days or more or if its license to operate is revoked, and such
revocation is not overturned by a court of competent jurisdiction. Such non-
conforming uses, while non-conforming, shall not be increased, enlarged,
extended, or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use.
   (B)   A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is
not rendered a non-conforming use by the location subsequent to the grant or
renewal of the sexually oriented business permit and/or license within 1,000
feet of a sensitive land use. This provision applies only to the renewal of a
valid permit and/or license, but this provision does not apply when an
application for a permit and/or license is submitted after a permit and/or
license has expired or has been revoked.
   (C)   Abandonment. Notwithstanding the above, any discontinuance or
abandonment of the use of any lot or structure as an adult-oriented business
shall result in a loss of legal, non-conforming status of such use.
   (D)   Amortization. Any adult-oriented business which was of legal use at
the time of the annexation of the property and which is located in the city but
which does not conform to the provisions of §
10.62.030 shall be terminated within two years of the date of annexation unless
an extension of time has been approved by the City Council in accordance with
the provisions of §
10.62.060(A).
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.62.070 Injunction.
   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business
without having a valid permit due to location restrictions is subject to a suit
for injunction as well as prosecution for the misdemeanor punishable by a fine
of $1,000 and/or 180 days imprisonment or by both such fine and imprisonment.
If an injunction is sought and granted, the sexually oriented business shall be
obligated to pay the city, attorneys' fees, and costs of the city, at the
discretion of the court.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.62.080 Exception for certain nude modeling.
   It is a defense to prosecution under this chapter if a person appearing in a
state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
   (A)   By a proprietary school licensed by the State of California, a
college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation.
   (B)   By a private college or university that maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation.
   (C)   In a structure:
      (1)   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no
other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing.
      (2)   Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at
least three days in advance of the class.
      (3)   Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one
time.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.64: RIGHT TO FARM
   Section
   
10.64.010   Purpose.
   
10.64.020   Objectives.
   
10.64.030   Definitions.
   
10.64.040   Nuisance.
   
10.64.050   Disclosure statement.
   
10.64.060   Responsibility.
§ 10.64.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to reduce conflicts between urbanization in
the City of Tulare and adjacent agricultural operations.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.64.020 Objectives.
   The objectives of this chapter are as follows:
   (A)   Protect the economic viability of agricultural operations that
surround and are located in the City of Tulare.
   (B)   Reduce conflicts between urban and agricultural uses.
   (C)   Notify persons about the inherent nature and potential problems
associated with living near or owning land adjacent to farming operations.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.64.030 Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADJACENT TO. Properties that are next to each other sharing a common
property line.
   AGRICULTURAL LAND. Those lands within the City of Tulare that are zoned as
Agriculture (A) or Rural Residential (R-A) or lands within the unincorporated
areas of Tulare County that are zoned to an agricultural zone district.
   AGRICULTURAL OPERATIONS. The cultivation and tillage of soil, dairying, the
production, irrigation, frost protection, cultivation, growing, spraying,
harvesting and processing of any agricultural commodity, including timber,
viticulture, agriculture or horticulture, the raising of livestock, fur-bearing
animals, fish or poultry, and any commercial practices incidental to, or in
conjunction with, such agricultural operations, including preparation for
market, delivery to storage or to market, or to carriers for transportation to
market.
   INHERENT PROBLEMS. Problems associated with agricultural operations,
including, but not limited to, noise, odors, dust, chemicals, smoke, and
extended hours of operation.
   URBANIZATION. The development of land for non-agricultural purposes,
including, but not limited to, residential, commercial, industrial, and
institutional land uses.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.64.040 Nuisance.
   No agricultural operation, conducted or maintained for commercial purposes,
and in a manner consistent with the property and accepted customs and standards
established and followed by similar agricultural operations in the same
locality, shall be or shall become a nuisance, private or public, due to any
changed condition in or about the locality, after the same has been in
operation for more than three years, if it was not a nuisance at the time it
began.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.64.050 Disclosure statement.
   (A)   Upon the division of any land by parcel map or subdivision map, where
the subject land is adjacent to agricultural operations, a disclosure
statement, as prescribed by the Department, shall be recorded at the time of
recording the map and shall become a permanent disclosure statement on the deed
to the owner or prospective owner stating that the subject property is adjacent
to farming operations and, if operated consistent with this title, the farming
operations have the right to continue.
   (B)   The disclosure statement shall read as follows: "If the property in
which you are taking an interest is located adjacent to agricultural lands or
operations, or is included within an area zoned for agricultural purposes, you
may be subject to inconveniences or discomfort arising from such operations
including, but not limited to, noise, odors, fumes, dust, smoke, insects,
operations of machinery (including aircraft) during any 24-hour period, storage
and disposal of manure, and the application (by spraying or otherwise) of
chemical fertilizers, soil amendments, herbicides, and pesticides. One or more
of the inconveniences described herein may occur as a result of any such
agricultural operation that is in conformance with existing laws and
regulations and accepted customs and standards. If you live adjacent to an
agricultural operation, you should be prepared to accept such inconveniences
and discomfort as a normal and necessary aspect of living in a city with a
strong rural character and an active agricultural sector in the region."
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.64.060 Responsibility.
   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the City of Tulare to require
compliance with this chapter by applying, as conditions of approval of any
division or land pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act.
   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner of the property
being subdivided to record a disclosure statement as outlined in §
10.64.050.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.66: FARMLAND MITIGATION
   Section
   
10.66.010   Title.
   
10.66.020   Purpose and intent.
   
10.66.030   Objectives.
   
10.66.040   Definitions.
   
10.66.050   Mitigation obligation.
   
10.66.060   Optional mitigation alternatives.
   
10.66.070   Requirements for mitigation land and agricultural conservation
easements.
   
10.66.080   Requirements for qualified entities.
   
10.66.090   Approval and completion.
   
10.66.100   Right to appeal.
   
10.66.110   Miscellaneous.
§ 10.66.010 Title.
   This chapter may be cited as the “Farmland Mitigation Ordinance” of the City
of Tulare.
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 4-15-2025; Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.66.020 Purpose and intent.
   The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the specific criteria and
guidelines, consistent with the City of Tulare (Tulare) General Plan policies
for the mitigation of agricultural land converted to nonagricultural uses,
within the city's urban development boundary (UDB) and outside the city limits.
The intent of this chapter is to protect the City of Tulare's agricultural
lands from conversion to non- agricultural uses.
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 4-15-2025; Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.66.030 Objectives.
   The objectives of this chapter are as follows:
   (A)   Protect agriculture as a crucial component of Tulare's economy and
cultural heritage;
   (B)   Protect and preserve agricultural lands from the effects of urban
encroachment;
   (C)   Balance the need for agricultural land conservation with other public
goals in Tulare, including the need for housing, commercial, industrial, and
infrastructure development; and
   (D)   Foster coordination and cooperation by the City of Tulare with the
County of Tulare, Local Agency Formation Commission, and neighboring cities,
including the City of Visalia, to facilitate an integrated and comprehensive
regional approach to agricultural land conservation.
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 4-15-2025; Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.66.040 Definitions.
   Except where the context of this chapter otherwise expressly requires, the
following definitions shall govern the construction of this chapter.
Furthermore, the definition of a word or phrase applies to any of that word's
or phrase's variants. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply.
   ADJUSTMENT FOR INFLATION. For costs other than the purchase price of
agricultural conservation easements, adjustment for inflation refers to
adjustments to reflect increases in the Consumer Price Index applicable to
Tulare. For the purchase price of agricultural conservation easements,
adjustment for inflation refers to adjustment to reflect increases in the House
Price Index applicable to Tulare, as compiled by the Office of Federal Housing
Enterprise Oversight.
   ADMINISTRATIVE FEE. That amount paid to a qualified entity as an
administrative fee sufficient to satisfy the requirements as set forth in §
10.66.050(C) of this chapter.
   AGRICULTURAL CONSERVATION EASEMENT. A perpetual easement or servitude,
comparable to a conservation easement, as provided for in Cal. Civil Code §§
815 to 816, or an open space easement, provided for in Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 51070
to 51097, limiting the use of the encumbered land to agricultural and accessory
uses, which easement or servitude is used to satisfy the mitigation obligation
imposed by this chapter.
   AGRICULTURAL DESIGNATION. Land that is within the City of Tulare or within
the City of Tulare's Urban Development Boundary and is labeled as Open Space/
Agriculture per the latest City of Tulare General Plan Land Use Map, or land
within the County of Tulare designated for agricultural use in the latest
Tulare County General Plan Land Use Map.
   AGRICULTURAL LAND. Land, residing within the UDB of the City of Tulare, but
outside the city's incorporated limits, which is either currently in
agricultural use or substantially undeveloped and capable of agricultural use.
   AGRICULTURAL LAND APPRAISAL. The evaluation of rural AGRICULTURAL LAND
obtained from a licensed appraiser with substantial experience in AGRICULTURAL
LAND APPRAISALS.
   AGRICULTURAL USE. Use of land to produce food, fiber, or livestock for
commercial purposes.
   AGRICULTURAL ZONE. Land that is within the City of Tulare and is labeled as
Open Space/Agriculture per the latest City of Tulare Zoning Map, or land within
the County of Tulare zoned for agricultural use in the latest Tulare County
Zoning Map.
   APPLICANT. Any natural person, joint venture, joint stock company,
partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, or
organization seeking approval or authorization from the City of Tulare on an
application or permit for property which is outside the Tulare city limits at
the time the ordinance codified in this chapter becomes effective.
   CHAPTER. Chapter includes all sections and provision within this Farmland
Mitigation Ordinance.
   CITY. The City of Tulare, State of California.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Tulare.
   CONVERSION. Those conversions of land requiring mitigation as identified in
§
10.66.040 of this chapter. To develop land through construction or improvement
of land associated with approval of a project such that land may be converted
back to agricultural use.
   CONVERTED LAND. The area of land that would be converted as a result of a
project approval as set forth in this Ordinance.
   CRITICAL FARMLAND. Land designated "Prime," "Farmland of Statewide
Importance," "Unique Farmland," or "Grazing Land" by the California Department
of Conservation as shown on their latest Important Farmland Map.
   EASEMENT VALUE. The fair market value of the agricultural conservation
easement equal to (1) the fair market value of the mitigation land unencumbered
by the easement less (2) the fair market value of the mitigation land as
encumbered by the easement, each as determined on or about the date of
acquisition by an appraisal report prepared by a licensed appraiser with
experience in agricultural land appraisals.
   EASEMENT VALUE OF CITY PROPERTY. The EASEMENT VALUE as defined herein
obtained on or about the date of acquisition utilizing an AGRICULTURAL LAND
APPRAISAL or an UPDATED CITY APPRAISAL.
   ENDOWMENT COST. An amount sufficient to endow the cost of monitoring,
administering and enforcing the agricultural conservation easement in
perpetuity.
   FALLOW. Removal of land from agricultural production regardless of whether
the fallowing or removal from agricultural production is temporary or long term
or fallowed under a voluntary removal program.
   LEGAL PARCEL. A parcel of land lawfully subdivided in accordance with the
Subdivision Map Act, whether or not a Certificate of Compliance has been issued
for the parcel. The existence of a distinct Assessor's Parcel Number for a
parcel does not, by itself, demonstrate that it is a legal parcel.
   LEGISLATIVE BODY. A jurisdiction's decision-making body.
   MITIGATION CREDIT. The difference between the larger area of land proposed
for conversion to an agricultural conservation easement and a smaller area
required for mitigation as set forth in §
10.66.050 of this chapter.
   MITIGATION LAND. Land encumbered by an agricultural conservation easement or
under an alternative mitigation option approved by the Community Development
Director or designee pursuant to §
10.66.060 of this chapter to satisfy the mitigation obligation imposed by this
chapter.
   QUALIFIED ENTITY. An entity qualified and approved to hold agricultural
conservation easements in compliance with §
10.66.080 of this chapter.
   SMALL PROJECT. A development project that is less than twenty acres in size.
A small project does not include one phase or portion of a larger project
greater than twenty acres that is subject to a master, specific or overall
development plan.
   SOUTHERN SAN JOAQUIN VALLEY. That area located in Fresno, Kern, Kings,
Madera and Tulare Counties.
   UPDATED CITY APPRAISAL. An update of an AGRICULTURAL LAND APPRAISAL
commissioned by the city establishing EASEMENT VALUE which is obtained within
five years of the original EASEMENT VALUE APPRAISAL.
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 4-15-2025; Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.66.050 Mitigation obligation.
   This chapter and the following mitigation obligations shall apply to the
conversion to a nonagricultural use of one or more acres of critical farmland,
as defined in this chapter, regardless of the General Plan land use designation
or zoning applicable to the land.
   (A)   As mitigation for the conversion of critical farmland, the applicant
shall arrange for the imposition of an agricultural conservation easement on no
less than one acre of mitigation land for each acre of land proposed for
conversion. The applicant shall convey, or arrange for the conveyance of, such
agricultural conservation easement to a qualified entity. The mitigation land
shall be comparable to the land proposed for conversion, as provided in §
10.66.070 of this chapter.
   (B)   For the purposes of calculating the mitigation obligation under §
10.66.050(A), the area requiring mitigation shall be the full area of the legal
parcel affected by conversion and not merely any lesser portion of the parcel
that may be sought to be developed or converted to another use at the time
conversion is proposed.
   (C)   The applicant shall pay to the qualified entity an administrative fee
sufficient to compensate for all administrative costs reasonably necessary for
the qualified entity to acquire and hold the agricultural conservation easement
and implement this chapter, including all of the following:
      (1)   Establishment of an endowment to provide for monitoring,
administration, enforcement, and all other services necessary to ensure that
the conservation purposes of the agricultural conservation easement are
maintained in perpetuity; and
      (2)   The qualified entity's administrative costs in evaluating the
mitigation land and reviewing and accepting the agricultural conservation
easement.
   (D)   It is the applicant's responsibility to identify, propose for approval
mitigation land, and arrange for imposition of an agricultural conservation
easement that satisfies the requirements in §
10.66.070 of this chapter.
   (E)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to compel an applicant for
conversion to convey to the City of Tulare or to a qualified entity an
agricultural conservation easement in property owned by the applicant.
   (F)   The mitigation obligation set forth in this chapter shall not apply to
a legal parcel that is less than one acre in area. However, this exemption
shall not apply to a parcel that is one phase or portion of a larger project.
The City of Tulare may disallow the use of this exemption if it finds that the
subject property has been subdivided into one-acre or smaller parcels in whole
or in part to avoid the mitigation obligation.
   (G)   The following public uses are exempt from the mitigation obligation
imposed by this chapter: public parks or public recreational facilities,
permanent natural open space, and trails and developed open space that are open
to the public.
   (H)   Projects designed solely to preserve, create, or enhance wildlife
habitat on agricultural land shall be exempt from the mitigation obligation in
this chapter.
   (I)   At its sole option, an applicant may choose to arrange for the
imposition of an agricultural conservation easement on a larger area of land
than the area of land proposed for conversion and thereby generate a mitigation
credit equal to the excess net acreage encumbered with the easement.
   (J)   Any excess area encumbered with the agricultural conservation easement
shall fully comply with all requirements of this chapter and shall be
comparable to the land proposed for conversion to the same degree as the
portion of the land offered to satisfy the mitigation obligation in this
chapter, including, but not limited to, the requirements for mitigation land in
§
10.66.070 and the review and approval process in §
10.66.090.
   (K)   The administrative fee paid by an applicant choosing to create
mitigation credits shall include the acreage covered by the mitigation credits.
The applicant may pass that fee through to a later purchaser of the credits.
   (L)   Mitigation credits created under this chapter may be conveyed and used
as provided in §
10.66.060.
   (M)   The qualified entity shall maintain a ledger indicating:
      (1)   The amount of mitigation credits created under this section;
      (2)   The holder of those mitigation credits;
      (3)   The administrative fees paid by the creator of the mitigation
credits attributable to the mitigation land covered by the mitigation credits;
and
      (4)   Any subsequent transactions involving those credits.
   (N)   Exemptions. The following land uses are exempt from the mitigation
requirements of this article:
      (1)   The following projects: permanently affordable housing, public
schools, community farms and gardens, land conserved in a natural state and
habitat for native plants or wildlife, and public trails or parks.
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 4-15-2025; Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.66.060 Optional mitigation alternatives.
   As an alternative to providing the mitigation required by this chapter, the
applicant may choose to seek approval to implement one of the following
alternative mitigation options.
   (A)   As authorized by the City of Tulare, an applicant for conversion of
critical farmland may satisfy the mitigation obligation set forth in this
chapter by paying to a qualified entity a fee in lieu ("in-lieu fee") of
conveying an agricultural conservation easement.
   (B)   Payment of an in-lieu fee is available only for conversion of legal
parcels that are smaller than 20 acres.
   (C)   Any in-lieu fee shall include each of the following components:
      (1)   The purchase price of an agricultural conservation easement in
mitigation land that complies with all of the requirements in §
10.66.070. This component shall be adjusted for inflation based on an estimate
of the time required to acquire mitigation land following payment of the fee or
the easement value set by the City of Tulare for property owned by the city in
which an agricultural conservation easement is granted as defined in §
10.66.040 of this chapter.
      (2)   All transaction costs associated with acquisition of the
agricultural conservation easement.
      (3)   An amount equal to the endowment cost of monitoring, administering,
and enforcing the agricultural conservation easement in perpetuity as defined
in §
10.66.040 of this chapter.
      (4)   The applicant's pro rata share of the qualified entity's
administrative costs in implementing the in-lieu fee program.
      (5)   A reasonable amount to cover additional contingencies.
   (D)   In no event shall the in-lieu fee established pursuant to this section
exceed a reasonable estimate of the total of:
      (1)   The cost of acquiring and managing the agricultural conservation
easement that the applicant would otherwise be required to create to satisfy
its mitigation obligation under this chapter; and
      (2)   The cost of administering the in-lieu fee.
   (E)   In-lieu fees received by the qualified entity shall be expended solely
for the purpose of acquiring and managing agricultural conservation easements
in mitigation land that meets the criteria set forth in §
10.66.070 and funding the qualified entity's cost of implementing the in-lieu
fee program.
   (F)   If authorized by the City of Tulare, an applicant for conversion of
critical farmland may satisfy the mitigation obligation set forth in this
chapter by acquiring mitigation credits created under §
10.66.050(I), (J) and (K), which are permitted to be passed through to another
purchaser.
   (G)   The city, in conjunction with a qualified entity, shall make available
to any applicant who requests it, the ledger of mitigation credits provided for
in §
10.66.050(M). The City of Tulare shall have no further responsibility for
facilitating any private transaction involving mitigation credits.
   (H)   Mitigation credits may be used to satisfy the mitigation obligation
created by this chapter only after the Community Development Director or
designee has made the findings required by §
10.66.070 with respect to the land proposed for conversion and the mitigation
land covered by the mitigation credits.
   (I)   An applicant choosing to use mitigation credits to comply with this
chapter shall pay the qualified entity administering the credits a fee in the
amount equivalent to the inflation adjustment on the administrative fee that
the creator of the mitigation credits originally paid pursuant to §
10.66.050(K), if in fact the creator of the mitigation credits passed through
the administrative fee for the creation of the credits to a future purchaser of
those credits.
   (J)   An applicant proposing conversion of critical farmland may propose an
alternative method of mitigation for review and approval by the Community
Development Director or designee subject to satisfying all of the following
criteria:
      (1)   The proposed mitigation must result in permanent protection of
mitigation land;
      (2)   The applicant must bear all costs of reviewing, approving,
managing, and enforcing the mitigation;
      (3)   The proposed mitigation must be in substantial compliance with the
requirements for mitigation land and agricultural conservation easements set
forth in §
10.66.070; and
      (4)   The proposed mitigation must be in all respects at least as
protective of agricultural land as the mitigation required by this chapter.
   (K)   The mitigation obligation imposed by this chapter is that set forth in
§
10.66.050. Each alternative mitigation option in this section is wholly
optional and made available solely for the applicant's convenience. Under no
circumstances shall the City of Tulare require any applicant to implement any
such alternative mitigation option, if applicant is willing to implement the
mitigation obligations imposed in §
10.66.050.
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 4-15-2025; Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.66.070 Requirements for mitigation land and agricultural conservation
easements.
   (A)   Agricultural conservation easements in mitigation land shall be held
in perpetuity by a qualified entity as defined in §
10.66.080.
   (B)   Mitigation land shall be comparable in nature to the agricultural land
proposed for conversion. A mitigation land is deemed comparable in nature if it
complies with the below requirement under §
10.66.070(C).
   (C)   The Community Development Director or designee shall not approve
proposed mitigation for conversion of critical farmland unless it finds that
the mitigation land complies with each of the following requirements:
      (1)   The mitigation land is located in the Southern San Joaquin Valley
as defined herein, outside of any city's limits or sphere of influence, with
preference given to mitigation land within ten miles of the City of Tulare
limits.
      (2)   The mitigation land is subject to an agricultural designation in
the General Plan and zoned for agricultural use. Any legal nonconforming use of
the mitigation land has been or will be abandoned prior to execution of the
agricultural conservation easement, or if maintained, will not interfere with
agricultural use of the mitigation land.
      (3)   The mitigation land consists of one or more legal parcels of at
least ten net acres in size, exclusive of the area occupied by any existing
home and the area of any road or right-of-way easement, unless the land
proposed for conversion is smaller than ten acres.
      (4)   The soil quality of the mitigation land has the agricultural
productive capacity at least equal to that of the critical farmland proposed
for conversion.
      (5)   The available water supply for the mitigation land is at least
equal to that of the land proposed for conversion in terms of quantity,
quality, and security.
      (6)   The mitigation land is not already subject to an encumbrance or
interest that would legally or practicably prevent converting the land, in
whole or in part, to a nonagricultural use, such as a conservation easement,
open space easement, flowage easement, avigation easement, long term
agricultural lease, profit, or an interest in the subsurface estate that would
preclude development of the surface estate. A contract entered pursuant to the
Land Conservation Act, Cal. Gov't Code §§ 51200 et seq. (Williamson Act) shall
not constitute an encumbrance for purposes of this section. However, this is
not to prevent the stacking of an agricultural conservation easement, with
other encumbrances, easements, or interests in the property, so long as the
multiple encumbrances do not contradict or prevent the effectiveness of each
independent encumbrance for which the land is conserved in perpetuity.
      (7)   There are no physical conditions or contamination on the mitigation
land that would legally or practicably prevent converting the land, in whole or
in part, to a nonagricultural use.
      (8)   The mitigation land has no existing home, unless the land proposed
for conversion includes an existing home.
      (9)   The mitigation land is not owned by any public agency.
   (D)   The Community Development Director or designee shall not approve
proposed mitigation land unless it finds that the agricultural conservation
easement complies with each of the following requirements:
      (1)   The type of agricultural related activity allowed on the mitigation
land is specified in the easement and is at least as restrictive as the
requirements of the City of Tulare's Open Space/Agriculture (A) Zoning
District.
      (2)   The agricultural conservation easement prohibits all residential,
commercial, or industrial development and any other land uses or activities
that substantially impair or diminish the agricultural productive capacity of
the mitigation land or that are otherwise inconsistent with the conservation
purposes of this chapter.
      (3)   The agricultural conservation easement prohibits the landowner from
entering into any additional easement, servitude, or other encumbrance that
could prevent or impair the potential agricultural use of the mitigation land.
      (4)   The agricultural conservation easement limits the construction of
structures to those designed to facilitate agricultural use of the property,
except that this division shall not prohibit replacement of an existing home
allowed by §
10.66.070(C)(10).
      (5)   The easement provides that the mitigation land will retain water
rights at least equal to that of the land proposed for conversion in terms of
quantity, quality, and security.
      (6)   The agricultural conservation easement will be either obtained from
a willing seller, voluntarily conveyed by the applicant, or conveyed by a
public entity.
      (7)   Any deed of trust or other servitude or encumbrance on the
mitigation land shall be subordinated to the agricultural conservation easement
except as set forth in §
10.66.070(C)(6).
      (8)   The agricultural conservation easement shall be approved by the
qualified entity that will hold the easement and executed by all parties with
an interest in the mitigation land.
      (9)   The agricultural conservation easement is in recordable form and
contains an accurate legal description of the mitigation land.
      (10)   The agricultural conservation easement names the qualified entity
as an intended beneficiary and authorizes it to enforce all terms of the
easement.
      (11)   The agricultural conservation easement recites that it is intended
to satisfy the mitigation obligation imposed by this chapter and that it is
subject to the requirements set forth in this chapter.
      (12)   If the agricultural conservation easement is an instrument other
than a conservation easement created under Cal. Civil Code §§ 815 to 816 or an
open space easement created under Cal. Gov't Code §§ 51070 to 51097, both the
qualified entity and the City of Tulare have certified that the easement will
run with the land and bind successor owners of the mitigation land in
perpetuity.
      (13)   The agricultural conservation easement provides that if the
qualified entity holding the easement ceases to exist, ownership of the
easement shall pass to another qualified entity.
      (14)   The agricultural conservation easement has been approved as to
form by the City of Tulare.
   (E)   Division (D) does not prevent inclusion in an agricultural
conservation easement of requirements that are more protective of agricultural
use than the requirements set forth in that division.
   (F)   Before approving any alternative mitigation option, the Community
Development Director or designee shall determine that such option is consistent
with the requirements in §
10.66.070(C) and §
10.66.070(D).
   (G)   After the Community Development Director or designee has approved an
agricultural conservation easement, the easement shall not be amended without
further approval by the City Council, approval as to form by the City Attorney,
and compliance with any approval requirements imposed by the Attorney General
of the State of California for the amendment.
   (H)   If a court issues a judgement declaring that the purposes of this
chapter and of an agricultural conservation easement can no longer be fulfilled
by enforcement of that easement, the qualified entity holding that easement may
extinguish the easement by selling it to the fee owner of the mitigation land,
if the following requirements are met:
      (1)   Either the action was contested and the judgement was not entered
pursuant to stipulation, or the City of Tulare was a party to the action and
stipulated to the judgement; and
      (2)   The qualified entity shall use the proceeds of sale to acquire an
agricultural conservation easement in other mitigation land in compliance with
this chapter.
   (I)   In the event the agricultural conservation easement is conveyed by the
City of Tulare on its real property as mitigation land, it shall do so subject
to the payment by the applicant of the following components:
      (1)   Unless otherwise authorized by the City Council, the easement value
to be paid for by the applicant for the mitigation land shall be as defined
above as determined by the city as confirmed pursuant to an agricultural land
appraisal or updated city appraisal prepared by a licensed appraiser with
substantial experience in agricultural land appraisals;
      (2)   All transaction costs associated with acquisition of the
agricultural conservation easement;
      (3)   As determined by the City of Tulare, an amount sufficient to endow
the cost of monitoring, administering and enforcing the agricultural
conservation easement in perpetuity;
      (4)   As determined by the city, the applicant’s pro rata share of the
qualified entities administrative costs in implementing the program; and
      (5)   As determined by the city, a reasonable amount to cover additional
contingencies.
   (J)   In no event shall the easement value as defined herein on mitigation
land conveyed by the City of Tulare for an agricultural conservation easement
be for a value that is less than 20% of the appraised value of the mitigation
land unencumbered by said agricultural conservation easement. This minimum
amount shall be known as the minimum city easement value.
      (1)   As it determines what is in the best interest of the city, the City
Council reserves the power to amend, modify or waive the minimum city easement
value for economic development incentive purposes in the City of Tulare.
   (K)   Prior to conveyance by the City of Tulare of an agricultural
conservation easement on its real property as mitigation land, the Community
Development Director or designee shall approve the various components described
in §
10.66.070(I).
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 4-15-2025; Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.66.080 Requirements for qualified entities.
   (A)   To be considered a qualified entity, an entity must be a nonprofit
public benefit corporation, operating within the State of California, the state
or any city, county, city and county, district, or other state or local
governmental entity, if otherwise authorized to acquire and hold title to real
property and if the conservation easement is voluntarily conveyed, a federally
recognized California Native American tribe or a non-federally recognized
California Native American tribe that is on the contact list maintained by the
Native American Heritage Commission to protect a California Native American
prehistoric, archaeological, cultural, spiritual, or ceremonial place, if the
conservation easement is voluntarily conveyed, and that is qualified to hold
conservation easements under Cal. Civil Code § 815.3 and in compliance with the
requirements of Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65965 et seq., and be approved by the City
Council for the purpose of holding and managing agricultural conservation
easements.
   (B)   In considering whether to approve an entity as a qualified entity, the
Community Development Director or designee shall consider the following
criteria:
      (1)   Whether the entity's principal purpose includes holding and
administering easements for the purposes of conserving and maintaining lands in
agricultural production;
      (2)   Whether the entity has an established record of holding and
administering easements for the purposes of conserving and maintaining lands in
agricultural production;
      (3)    The extent and duration of the entity's involvement in
agricultural land conservation within the San Joaquin Valley, specifically
Tulare County;
      (4)   Whether the entity has been accredited by the Land Trust
Accreditation Commission;
      (5)   Whether the entity is a member in good standing of an established
and widely recognized California statewide association of land trusts; and
      (6)   Any other information or requirements the city finds relevant under
given circumstances.
   (C)   No qualified entity shall sell, lease, hypothecate, or encumber any
interest in any mitigation land without the prior approval of the Community
Development Director or designee.
   (D)   A qualified entity shall use fees provided by an applicant solely for
purposes of acquiring, administering, monitoring, and enforcing agricultural
conservation easements acquired pursuant to this chapter.
   (E)   If a qualified entity intends or reasonably expects to cease
operations, it shall assign any agricultural conservation easements it holds to
another qualified entity.
   (F)   The qualified entity shall monitor the use of all mitigation land
subject to agricultural conservation easements held by the entity and enforce
compliance with the terms of those agricultural conservation easements.
   (G)   On or before February 15 of each year after a qualified entity is
approved by the Community Development Director, the entity shall provide to the
City of Tulare Planning Division an annual report for a period of time equal to
the previous calendar year describing the activities undertaken by the entity
under this chapter. That report shall describe the status of the mitigation
land and/or agricultural conservation easements held by the entity, including a
summary of all action taken to enforce its agricultural conservation easements,
and an accounting of the use of administrative and in-lieu fees remitted to it
by applicants.
   (H)   In March of each year at a general meeting of the City of Tulare, and
after receipt of all reports from the qualified entities, the Community
Development Director or designee shall provide the City Council with an
informational report regarding all farmland mitigation activity pursuant to
this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 4-15-2025; Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.66.090 Approval and completion.
   (A)   All mitigation proposed by an applicant to comply with this chapter,
including any alternative mitigation option proposed by the applicant, shall be
reviewed by the Planning Commission for consistency with the terms and purposes
of this chapter. The Planning Commission shall recommend approval, conditional
approval, or disapproval to the City Council. The Planning Commission shall not
recommend approval of the proposed mitigation unless it finds that mitigation
to be consistent with the requirements for mitigation land and agricultural
conservation easements set forth in §
10.66.070.
   (B)   The City Council shall consider the Planning Commission's
recommendation and shall either approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove
the proposed mitigation.
   (C)   The City of Tulare shall not issue any permit or other approval for
any project involving a conversion subject to the mitigation obligation under
this chapter unless the City Council has previously approved proposed
mitigation in compliance with this chapter. Issuance of any such permit or
approval shall be conditioned on the applicant's completion of mitigation in
compliance with §
10.66.090(D) and (E).
   (D)   The applicant for conversion must complete all required mitigation
prior to the earliest of either:
      (1)   Issuance of any building, grading, or encroachment permit allowing
for installation of underground utilities; or
      (2)   Where changes are made that are irreversible and prohibitive of the
converted farmland to be returned to agriculturally productive use.
   (E)   Mitigation shall be deemed complete when the approved agricultural
conservation easement has been recorded and the applicant has paid the required
administrative fee. However, if the applicant elects to seek approval of an
alternative mitigation option, mitigation shall be deemed complete when the
City of Tulare provides the applicant with a letter indicating that mitigation
is complete.
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 4-15-2025; Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.66.100 Right to appeal.
   A Code interpretation by the Community Development Director or designee may
be appealed to the City Council. The following procedures shall apply:
   (A)   The applicant or any interested person adversely affected may upon
payment of an appeal fee, as may be established by resolution of the Tulare
City Council, appeal any interpretation of the Community Development Director
or designee by filing a notice thereof, in writing, with the City Clerk,
setting forth in detail the interpretation and the grounds upon which the
appeal is based within ten days after the interpretation that is subject to the
appeal. Such notice shall state specifically where it is claimed that there was
an error or abuse of discretion by the Director.
   (B)   Upon filing of an appeal, the City Council shall set the matter for
hearing. Such hearing shall be held within 30 days after the date of filing the
appeal.
   (C)   In holding the hearing on the matter, the City Council may receive any
and all information pertinent to the matter. Upon the close of the hearing, the
City Council shall vote to either confirm the decision of the Community
Development Director or designee, overturn the interpretation or confirm the
interpretation with modifications.
   (D)   The City Council may continue the item to the next meeting if
necessary to direct staff to prepare a conforming resolution with findings,
which shall be considered by the Council at the next scheduled City Council
meeting.
   (E)   In the case of a tie vote, the interpretation of the Community
Development Director or designee shall stand and shall be considered final as
of the date of the Council vote.
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 4-15-2025)
§ 10.66.110 Miscellaneous.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall only apply to the extent that
their application would not violate the constitution or laws of the United
States, or of the State of California. The City Council shall apply the chapter
to avoid such unconstitutionality or illegality.
   (B)   If any portion of this chapter is held to be unconstitutional, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter. The City Council declares that it would have enacted this chapter and
each section, division, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase thereof even if
a portion of the chapter were declared unconstitutional.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abridge or narrow the
City of Tulare's police powers. The City Council retains its full power and
discretion its ability to deny a proposed conversion on the basis that the
proposed conversion is inconsistent with the public health, safety, or welfare
because of the loss of agricultural land or otherwise, which the City Council
is tasked with safeguarding.
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 4-15-2025; Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.68: WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES AND TOWERS
Section
   
10.68.010   Purpose and application.
   
10.68.020   Definitions.
   
10.68.030   Principle or accessory use.
   
10.68.040   Measurement.
   
10.68.050   Effect on non-conforming uses.
   
10.68.060   General standards.
   
10.68.070   Co-location of facilities.
   
10.68.080   Exemptions.
   
10.68.090   Permitted and conditional uses.
   
10.68.100   Application process.
   
10.68.110   Review criteria.
   
10.68.120   Federal and state regulations.
   
10.68.130   Building codes and safety standards.
   
10.68.140   Appeals.
   
10.68.150   Removal of abandoned antennas, towers, supporting equipment, and
structures.
§ 10.68.010 Purpose and application.
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote and maintain the purposes and
objectives of the City of Tulare zoning ordinance; to ensure the co-location of
new and existing tower and antenna sites whenever possible; to ensure the
location of towers and antennas are in areas where the adverse impact on the
community is minimal; to ensure that towers and antennas are designed in a way
that minimizes the adverse visual impact on the community; and to protect the
public safety and general welfare of the community.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.68.020 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise defined, the following
words and phrases when used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   ANTENNA. A system of poles, panels, rods, reflecting discs, or similar
devices used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic signals,
including, but not limited to, digital signals, analog signals, radio waves
(excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunication signals, and microwaves.
   ANTENNA, AMATEUR RADIO. A ground, building, or tower-mounted antenna
operated by a federally licensed amateur radio operator as part of the Amateur
Radio Service and as designated by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC).
   ANTENNA ARRAY. One or more rods, panels, discs, or similar devices used for
the transmission or reception of radio frequency signals, which may include an
omnidirectional antenna (rod), directional antenna (panel), and parabolic
antenna (disc). The antenna array does not include the support structure as
defined below.
   ANTENNA, BUILDING MOUNTED. An antenna that is fully or partially supported
by the roof or exterior wall of a building or structure, and that transmits or
receives electromagnetic signals.
   ANTENNA, DIRECT BROADCAST SATELLITE SERVICE (DBS). An antenna that is
typically a small home receiving dish designed to receive direct broadcast from
a satellite.
   ANTENNA, MULTIPOINT DISTRIBUTION SERVICES (MDS). An antenna designed to
receive video programming services via multipoint distribution services,
including multipoint multichannel distribution services, instructional
television fixed services, and local multipoint distribution services.
   ANTENNA STRUCTURE. An antenna array and its associated support structure,
such as a mast or tower, (but not to include a suspended simple wire antenna)
that is used for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving electromagnetic
signals, including, but not limited to, radio waves and microwaves.
   ANTENNA STRUCTURE, FREESTANDING. An antenna structure or mast that is not
attached to a building, fence, or other structure. Freestanding antenna
structures include, without limitation, communications towers, wooden utility
poles, standard or decorative concrete and steel monopoles. If the total height
of the structure, including the antenna, exceeds 20 feet, it shall be treated
as a monopole.
   ANTENNA STRUCTURE, MONOPOLE. An antenna structure, often tubular in shape,
made of metal, reinforced concrete, or wood which is at least 20 feet in
height.
   ATTACHED WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY (ATTACHED WCF). An antenna array
that is attached to an existing building or structure (attachment structure),
which structures shall include, but not be limited to, utility poles, signs,
water towers, with any accompanying pole or device (attachment device) which
attaches the antenna array to the existing building or structure and associated
connection cables, and an equipment facility which may be located either inside
or outside of the attachment structure.
   CO-LOCATE or CO-LOCATION. Use of a common WCF or common site by two or more
wireless license holders or by one wireless license holder for more than one
type of communications technology and/or placement of a WCF on a structure
owned or operated by a utility or other public entity.
   EQUIPMENT FACILITY. Any structure used to contain ancillary equipment for a
WCF which includes cabinets, shelters, a buildout of an existing structure,
pedestals, and other similar structures.
   FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
   HEIGHT. The distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the
WCF, including the antenna array.
   PRE-EXISTING TOWER AND ANTENNA. Any tower or antenna for which a permit has
been properly issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in
this chapter.
   PROVIDER. A person, as defined in §
1.04.130 of the Tulare Municipal Code, pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
   STEALTH FACILITY. Any communication facility that is designed to blend into
the surrounding environment, and is visibly unobtrusive. Examples of stealth
facilities may include architectural screened roof-mounted antennas; facade-
mounted antennas painted and treated as architectural elements to blend with
existing buildings; and facilities camouflaged as trees or appropriate
structures. Also known as concealed telecommunication facilities.
   TOWER. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the
purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice
towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. This definition includes radio and
television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers,
cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like.
   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY (WCF). Any unstaffed facility for the
transmission and/or reception of wireless telecommunications services, usually
consisting of an antenna array, connection cables, an equipment facility, and a
support structure to achieve the necessary elevation.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.68.030 Principle or accessory use.
   Antennas and towers may be considered either principal or accessory uses. A
different existing use or an existing structure on the same lot shall not
preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.68.040 Measurement.
   (A)   For purposes of determining compliance with development standards in
this title, including, but not limited to, setback requirements, lot coverage
requirements, and other applicable requirements, the dimensions of the entire
lot shall be considered, even though the antennas or towers may be located on
leased areas within such lots.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, all distances shall be measured in a
straight line without regard to intervening structures, from the nearest point
of the proposed major wireless telecommunications facility to the nearest point
of another major wireless telecommunications facility. For purposes of
measurement, separation distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities
located in the city irrespective of municipal and county jurisdictional
boundaries.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.68.050 Effect on non-conforming uses.
   Towers that are constructed, and antennas that are installed, in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to constitute the
expansion of a non-conforming use or structure.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.68.060 General standards.
   The following requirements and standards shall apply to the construction and
installation of all new WCFs:
   (A)   All standards as set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   Any applicable federal, state, and local laws, regulations, and
ordinances.
   (C)   All applicable provisions of the Tulare Municipal Code, Tulare zoning
ordinance, public works improvements standards, and all applicable fees that
are not in conflict with the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   The Uniform Building Code, National Electrical Code, Uniform Plumbing
Code, Uniform Mechanical Code, and Uniform Fire Code, where applicable.
   (E)   All FCC and FAA rules, regulations, and standards.
   (F)   Towers and antennas shall be regulated and permitted pursuant to this
section and shall not be regulated or permitted as essential services, public
utilities, or private utilities.
   (G)   Franchises. Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall
certify that all franchises required by law for the construction and/or
operation of a wireless telecommunication system in the city have been obtained
and shall file a copy of all required franchises with the Director.
   (H)   The city encourages the users of towers and antennas to submit a
single application for approval of multiple towers and/or antenna sites.
Applications for multiple sites shall be given priority in the review process,
in compliance with the Permit Streamlining Act.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.68.070 Co-location of facilities.
   (A)   When technically and economically feasible, a new WCF shall be
attached to an existing structure (attached WCF), shall co-locate with another
WCF, or create sites that will accommodate future co-location of other WCFs in
the future.
   (B)   Any site plan review application proposed in accordance with
Chapter 10.72 proposing the construction of a new WCF with a supporting
structure shall specifically identify the actions taken by the applicant to
locate, construct, and operate the new WCF at a co-location. If co-location is
not feasible, the application shall specifically identify the locations
considered and the reasons why such locations are unacceptable for the
construction and operation of the new WCF.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.68.080 Exemptions.
   (A)   The following WCFs shall be exempt from the requirements of §
10.68.090, and a building permit is not required.
      (1)   Construction of an antenna under a permit issued by the California
Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) or a permit issued in accordance with the
rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) that
specifically allows for the construction of the antenna.
      (2)   Direct broadcast satellite (DBS) antennas, multipoint distribution
services (MDS) antennas, and television broadcast service (TVBS) antennas that
are one meter (three feet three and three-eights inches) or less in diameter or
in diagonal measurement, are located entirely on-site and are not located
within the front setback area of the lot on which they are located. This
locational requirement is necessary to ensure that such antenna installations
do not become attractive nuisances and/or result in safety hazards.
   (B)   The following WCFs shall be exempt from the requirements of §
10.68.090 of this chapter, however, a building permit is required.
      (1)   Satellite Earth Station (SES) antennas that are two meters (six
feet and six and three- quarter inches) or less in diameter or in diagonal
measurement, are located in a C-4 or M zone district and are located on the top
of buildings as far away as possible from the edges of rooftops so that they
cannot be viewed from a public right-of-way.
      (2)   Amateur radio antenna structures that are 24 inches or less in
diameter or in diagonal measurement, and where no portion of the antenna
overhangs any property line.
      (3)   Modification to an existing, approved antenna/tower where the
modification does not result in an increase in the height of the existing,
approved antenna/tower and does not provide for more than three communication
providers on a single antenna/tower.
      (4)   Installation of buildings or other support equipment used with a
previously approved WCF antenna/tower that meets all requirements of the zone
district in which the building or other support equipment is to be located, and
that does not result in an increase in the size of the overall WCF site.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.68.090 Permitted and conditional uses.
   Wireless communications facilities that are not exempt per §
10.68.080 shall be either permitted or conditional uses in accordance with this
section. If this section appears to conflict with the table in §
10.08.030 then this section shall apply.
   (A)   The following WCFs shall be permitted uses. Site plan review approval
issued in accordance with
Chapter 10.72 and a building permit is required.
      (1)   Installation of a monopole on an existing structure, located in the
PF zone district, A zone district, or in any commercial or industrial zone
district, where the height of the monopole is not higher than 20 feet above the
height of the existing structure and has a 100-foot setback from residential
zones.
      (2)   Installation of buildings or other support equipment used with a
previously approved WCF antenna/tower that meets all requirements of the zone
district in which the building or other support equipment is to be located, and
that results in less than a 30% increase in the size of the overall WCF site.
   (B)   The following WCFs shall obtain a conditional use permit prior to
construction or installation in accordance with
Chapter 10.80. Site plan review approval issued in accordance with
Chapter 10.72 and a building permit is also required:
      (1)   Installation of a new concealed or disguised stealth antenna
located on the ground and/or attached to a building in any zone district where
the antenna does not exceed 70 feet in height.
      (2)   Installation of a new non-camouflaged, free-standing antenna/tower
up to 50 feet in height with a 100-foot setback from residential zones.
      (3)   Installation of a new non-camouflaged free-standing antenna/tower
that exceeds 50 feet in height but not greater than 70 feet in height, with a
300-foot setback from residential zones, except where existing tall structures,
such as water towers or buildings, utilizing only antenna transmitting or
receiving screens or dishes need not comply with the 300-foot setback.
      (4)   Installation of a new free-standing antenna/tower in any industrial
zone district where the antenna exceeds the maximum height limits of the zone
district in which it is located up to 150 feet in height, provided the Planning
Commission makes the following findings:
         (a)   That the additional height is needed for public safety or for
radio/television transmission.
         (b)   That there is a minimum of 300-foot separation between the
antenna and residential zoning.
         (c)   That there are special circumstances that justify the additional
height of 150 feet at the requested location.
      (5)   Modification to an antenna/tower approved by conditional use permit
where the modification results in an increase of more than 20% of the height of
the approved antenna/tower.
   (C)   Administrative adjustment. The Director may allow an increase in the
height of any permitted antenna, not to exceed 20% above the height limitations
described in the chapter, based upon the following findings:
      (1)   There is no feasible alternative to allowing the height increase or
the result of not allowing the height increase would result in an increase in
the number of antennas necessary.
      (2)   Approval would not result in a significant negative impact to the
immediate neighborhood.
      (3)   There are other tall structures or trees that require the antenna
to be taller to provide service.
   (D)   Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, a WCF shall obtain a
conditional use permit prior to construction or installation in accordance with
Chapter 10.80 if it is located in the Airport Overlay District and shall meet
all requirements of
Chapter 10.42.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.68.100 Application process.
   Every application must include the following information:
   (A)   Consistent with applicable laws. This section shall apply, to the
fullest extent allowed by and consistent with applicable federal, state, and
California Public Utility laws and regulations, to all new wireless towers and
facilities, including towers and antennas proposed to be located on private or
public property, as well as proposed to be located in, along, or across the
public right-of-way.
   (B)   Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or
tower shall provide to the Director an inventory of its existing towers,
antennas, or sites approved for towers or antennas, that are in the Tulare
Urban Area Boundary (UAB), including specific information about the location,
height, and design of each tower. The Director may share such information with
other applicants applying for administrative approvals or conditional use
permits under this section or other organizations seeking to locate antennas
within the jurisdiction of the city, provided, however, that the Director is
not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that
such sites are available or suitable.
   (C)   Amateur radio station operators/receive-only antennas. This section
shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is under
the height limitation of the relevant zone and is owned and operated by a
federally-licensed amateur radio station operator, or is used exclusively for
receive only.
   (D)   Pre-existing towers or antennas. Pre-existing towers and pre-existing
antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this section unless
the applicant proposes to increase the height of the antenna.
      (1)   Type of technology. A written description of the types of
technology to be provided to its customers over the next five years, (e.g.,
Cellular, PCS, ESMR).
      (2)   Radio frequencies. A description of the radio frequencies to be
used for each technology.
      (3)   Services. The type of consumer services (voice, video, data
transmission) and consumer products (mobile phones, laptop PCs, modems) to be
offered.
      (4)   All facilities. Provide a list of all existing, existing to be
upgraded or replaced, and proposed cell sites within the city for these
services by the company.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.68.110 Review criteria.
   Every application must comply with the following development standards:
   (A)   Radio frequency. The applicant must submit documentation demonstrating
that use of the WCF will not result in levels of radio frequency emissions that
will exceed FCC standards. Such documentation shall not be required for amateur
radio antenna structures or for antennas installed for home entertainment
purposes.
   (B)   Structural integrity. WCF with support structures must be constructed
to Electronic Industries Association/Telecommunications Industries Association
(EIA/TIA) 222 Revision F Standard titled "Structural Standards for Steel
Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting Structures" (or equivalent), as it may be
updated or amended. Antenna/towers supported by guy wires are prohibited within
the city.
   (C)   Co-location. Support structures and site areas for wireless
telecommunications antenna shall be designed and of adequate size to allow at
least one additional wireless service provider to co-locate on the structure.
Co-location shall be encouraged in all cases where feasible and reasonable to
do so.
   (D)   Required separation. An antenna shall not be located within 1,000-foot
radius of any other co- locatable antenna, measured from the base of the tower
to the base of the tower, unless the Director makes the following findings:
      (1)   The granting of the reduction will not substantially impair the
intent and purpose of this title or the goals, policies, and objectives of the
adopted General Plan.
      (2)   The reduction is not requested exclusively on the basis of economic
hardship to the applicant.
      (3)   The reduction is necessary and essential to providing the
applicant's wireless service based on the technical constraints and the lack of
other available appropriately zoned land outside the radius.
      (4)   Evidence has been submitted to the satisfaction of the city
demonstrating that co-location on existing tower structures is not available or
is not technically feasible. Evidence may include a written statement from the
service provider with the existing facility that co-location is not feasible.
   (E)   The Planning Commission may impose conditions they believe are
reasonable, on any conditionally permitted antenna.
   (F)   Lighting. WCF shall not be artificially lighted, except for:
      (1)   Security and safety lighting of equipment buildings if such
lighting is appropriately shielded to keep light within the boundaries of the
site.
      (2)   Lighting of the tower or antenna may be required by the Federal
Aviation Administration or other applicable authority. Said lighting is to be
installed in a manner to minimize impacts on adjacent properties.
   (G)   Security. WCF with tower/antenna structures shall be enclosed by a
security fence not less than six feet in height and the structure shall be
equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device.
   (H)   Landscaping shall be in accordance with the requirements combined in
Chapter 10.52 Landscape Standards.
   (I)   Safety. For the protection of emergency response personnel, each
telecommunications facility shall have an on-site emergency "kill switch" to
de-energize all RD-related circuitry/componentry at the site.
   (J)   Setbacks. Antennas and accessory structures in compliance with height
restrictions of this chapter shall also comply with the required building
setbacks for the zoning district in which the facility is located. Antennas
shall not be located within the required front yard area of any parcel.
   (K)   Noise. A description of all audible noise-generating equipment,
including the times and decibel levels of the noise that will be produced shall
be submitted with the application for the project. No equipment shall be
operated at a WCF that produces noise in excess of the applicable noise
standards stated in the Tulare Municipal Code. Backup generators shall only be
operated during power outages and for testing and maintenance purposes. Testing
and maintenance shall only take place on weekdays between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
   (L)   Painting. All equipment, antennas, poles, or towers shall have a non-
reflective finish and shall be painted or otherwise treated to minimize visual
impacts. Antennas that will be viewed primarily against the skyline shall be
painted light gray, light blue, or other sky-blending color. WCF with tower
antenna structures shall be designed and painted to blend in with existing
surroundings to the extent feasible as determined by the Community Development
Department, including the use of compatible colors. Equipment facilities shall,
to the extent practicable, use materials, colors, and textures that will blend
with the natural setting and existing building environment.
   (M)   Fencing. All proposed fencing shall be decorative and compatible with
the adjacent buildings and properties within the surrounding area and shall be
designed to limit graffiti.
   (N)   Signage. A permanent, weather-proof identification sign, approximately
16 inches by 32 inches in size, must be placed on the gate of the fence
surrounding the facility or, if there is no fence, on the facility itself. The
sign must identify the facility operator(s), provide the operator's address,
and specify a 24-hour telephone number at which the operator can be reached so
as to facilitate emergency services.
   (O)   Traffic. Traffic shall be limited to no more than one round-trip per
day on an average annual basis once construction is complete, except for
emergency maintenance purposes.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.68.120 Federal and state regulations.
   (A)   All towers/antenna structures must meet or exceed current standards
and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, the CPUC, and any other agency of the
federal or state government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas.
   (B)   If said standards and regulations are modified or amended and require
pre-existing WCFs to comply with the new or amended standards or regulations,
the owners and operators of the towers and antennas shall bring their towers
and antennas into compliance with the revised standards and regulations within
six months of the effective date of the new standards and regulations, unless
the new standards or regulations or the applicable federal or state agency
identify a different and specific compliance period, in which case the owners
and operators of the towers and antennas shall bring their towers and antennas
into compliance within that specific compliance period.
   (C)   Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with the revised
standards and regulations shall constitute a violation of this chapter and the
city may require removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.68.130 Building codes and safety standards.
   (A)   To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower
shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in
applicable state or local building codes and the applicable standards for
towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended
from time to time.
   (B)   If, upon inspection, the city concludes that a tower fails to comply
with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property,
then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have
30 days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards. Failure to
bring such tower into compliance within 30 days shall constitute grounds for
removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.68.140 Appeals.
   Appeals to a decision of the reviewing authority of an application shall be
submitted and processed consistent with the procedures in
Chapter 10.70.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.68.150 Removal of abandoned antennas, towers, supporting equipment, and
structures.
   (A)   Any antenna, tower, supporting equipment, and structure that is not
operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned,
and the owner of such antenna tower, or owner of the land on which it is
located shall remove said antenna, tower, or supporting equipment within 90
days of receipt of notice from the Director notifying the owner of such
abandonment. If such antenna or tower is not removed within said 90 days, the
city may remove such antenna or tower at the owner's expense. If there are two
or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective
until all users cease using the tower.
   (B)   If the cost of removal of the antenna or tower is not paid within 30
days after the date on which the notice of request for payment is mailed to the
owner of the property, the City Council may direct the county tax assessor to
place the unpaid costs, including administrative fees associated with the
removal on the county tax roll, as a special assessment against the property
pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 25845. The assessment shall be collected at the
same time and in the same manner as ordinary county taxes are collected, and
shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case
of delinquency as provided for ordinary county taxes. All laws applicable to
the levy, collection, and enforcement of county taxes shall be applicable to
such special assessment.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.70: PERMITS AND APPLICATIONS
Section
   
10.70.010   Permit application and review.
   
10.70.020   Application form and submittal items.
   
10.70.030   Authority to file an application.
   
10.70.040   Applications acceptability of signatures.
   
10.70.050   Application filing and numbering.
   
10.70.060   Application withdrawal.
   
10.70.070   Decision processes for planning applications.
   
10.70.080   Environmental review.
   
10.70.090   Hearings.
   
10.70.100   Notice requirements.
   
10.70.110   Notice wording.
   
10.70.120   Hearing rules and procedures.
   
10.70.130   Continuation of hearing.
   
10.70.140   Testimony at hearing.
   
10.70.150   Planning Commission recommendation.
   
10.70.160   Review authority decision.
   
10.70.170   Notice of decision.
   
10.70.180   Effective date of decision.
   
10.70.190   Refiling of a denied application.
   
10.70.200   Appeals.
   
10.70.210   Change of ownership.
   
10.70.220   Subsequent permits.
   
10.70.230   Suspension and revocation of approved permit.
   
10.70.240   Expiration of approved permit.
   
10.70.250   Extension of expiration date of approved permit.
   
10.70.260   Succession to a county permit upon annexation.
   
10.70.270   Minor adjustment to approved permit.
   
10.70.280   Amendment to approved permit.
§ 10.70.010 Permit application and review.
   An application for a permit or other land use matter required by this title
shall be filed, processed, heard, and either approved, denied, or approved with
conditions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the specific
chapter within this title related to the processing of that permit.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.70.020 Application form and submittal items.
   (A)   The Director shall prescribe and make available the form in which
applications are made for a permit or other land use matter and maintain a list
specifying the materials, information, and fees to be submitted with each
application for a permit or other land use matter filed in accordance with this
title. The list may be revised from time to time to comply with revisions to
local, state, or federal law, regulation, or policy. An application shall be
made in the form prescribed by the Director on the date the application is
filed unless otherwise specified by this title or state law.
   (B)   All filing fees required to be paid upon the filing of any application
shall be set forth from time to time by City Council resolution.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.70.030 Authority to file an application.
   The following persons shall have the authority to file an application:
   (A)   The record owner of the real property that is the subject of the
permit or other matter.
   (B)   The property owner's authorized agent.
   (C)   Any person who can demonstrate a legal right, interest, or entitlement
to use the real property subject to the application.
   (D)   The Director, City Manager, Planning Commission, or City Council.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.70.040 Applications acceptability of signatures.
   If signatures of persons other than the owners of the property making the
application are required or offered in support of, or in opposition to, an
application, they may be received as evidence of notice having been served upon
them of the pending application, or as evidence of their opinion on the pending
issue, but they shall in no case infringe upon the free exercise of the powers
vested in the city as represented by the Planning Commission and the City
Council.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.70.050 Application filing and numbering.
   Applications filed pursuant to this title shall become a part of the
permanent official records, and there shall be attached thereto and permanently
filed copies of all notices and actions, with any certificates and affidavits
of applicable posting, mailing, or publication.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.70.060 Application withdrawal.
   Any person authorized to file an application may withdraw an application
that has been filed at any time, provided the withdrawal is in writing. If an
application is withdrawn after a notice of public hearing has been mailed or
posted, the application shall be amended so that the withdrawal of the
application can be announced publicly.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.70.070 Decision processes for planning applications.
   (A)   Applications for permits or other land use matters identified in this
title shall be acted upon in accordance with one of the decision processes
depicted in
Table 10.70.070-1 (Role of Review Authority Planning Permit Applications).
Table 10.70.070-1 determines the role of each review authority in the decision-
making process and shall not describe or limit the scope, meaning, or intent of
any other provisions of this title.
Table 10.70.070-1 only describes the processes that may be required by this
title and does not describe other decision processes that may be required by
other agencies. Subdivision processes and procedures are identified in Title
16.
Table 10.70.070-1
Role of Review Authority Planning Permit Applications
Application Type Director Planning Commission City Council
Table 10.70.070-1
Role of Review Authority Planning Permit Applications
Application Type                     Director  Planning Commission City Council
Non-Discretionary Applications
Sign Permit                          Decision  Appeal              Appeal
Administrative Use Permit            Decision  Appeal              Appeal
Site Plan Review                     Decision  Appeal              Appeal
Home Occupation Permit               Decision  Appeal              Appeal
Minor Deviation                      Decision  Appeal              Appeal
Interpretation of Ordinance          Decision  Appeal              Appeal
Temporary Conditional Use Permit     Decision  Appeal              Appeal
Discretionary Applications
Conditional Use Permit               Recommend Decision            Appeal
Planned Unit Development Permit      Recommend Recommend           Decision
Variance                             Recommend Decision            Appeal
Zoning Ordinance Amendment/Zone      Recommend Recommend           Decision
Change
General Plan Amendment/Specific Plan Recommend Recommend           Decision
Amendment
Annexation                           Recommend Recommend           Decision
Williamson Act Cancellations         Recommend Recommend           Decision
 
   (B)   All applications heard by the Planning Commission or City Council
according to
Table 10.70.070-1 shall be at public hearings in accordance with §
10.70.090.
   (C)   Where a project requires multiple decisions by the Planning Commission
and City Council, the Planning Commission decisions on such project shall not
be final, but shall be advisory to the City Council, which shall be vested with
the final decision-making powers pertaining to the project.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.70.080 Environmental review.
   All discretionary applications will be reviewed by the Director to determine
if the project is subject to environmental review in accordance with the
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)
   Guidelines, as currently adopted and amended from time to time. All non-
discretionary applications are deemed to not be subject to environmental
review, pursuant to CEQA Guidelines § 15268.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.70.090 Hearings.
   A public hearing is a noticed session before the Planning Commission, City
Council, or other approval body, as appropriate, to receive original evidence
or testimony from the applicant and the general public on discretionary
applications regulated by this title.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.70.100 Notice requirements.
   Notice of time and place of public hearings shall be given in the following
manner. Noticing may take place earlier than required if other laws or policies
require a longer notice period.
   (A)   A notice of any public hearing shall be given by at least one
publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city not less than ten
days before the date of the public hearing.
   (B)   A notice of public hearing shall be given by mailing a written notice
not less than ten days prior to the date of such hearing to the applicant and
to owners of property within a radius of 300 feet of the exterior boundaries of
the property that is the subject of the application, using for this purpose the
name and address of such owners and properties, as shown on the latest adopted
county tax roll. Notice shall also be mailed to interested persons who have
filed a written request for notification with the Director.
   (C)   In the event that the number of owners of property to whom notice may
be sent pursuant to division (B) of this section would result in more than
1,000 notices, notice may alternatively be given at least ten days prior to the
hearing by either of the following procedures:
      (1)   By placing a display advertisement of at least one-eighth page in a
newspaper having general circulation within the area affected by the proposed
ordinance or amendment.
      (2)   By placing a written notice with any generalized mailing sent by
the city to property owners in the area affected by the proposed ordinance or
amendment, such as billings for city services.
   (D)   In addition, not less than 20 days but not more than 60 days prior to
the hearing on any general plan amendment, specific plan, zone change, or
conditional use permit, the applicant shall post signs on the property
indicating the date, time, and place of the hearing on the proposed general
plan amendment, specific plan, zone change, or conditional use permit.
      (1)   One sign shall be posted for every 300 feet of street frontage, or
portion thereof, with a maximum of two signs per street frontage. If no portion
of the property fronts an existing public street, at least one sign shall be
posted on the property nearest the point of legal access from a public street
or as otherwise directed by the Director.
      (2)   For general plan amendment, specific plan, zone change, and
conditional use permit on an undeveloped site, the size of the signs shall be
eight feet wide by four feet high.
      (3)   For a conditional use permit on a developed site in all
nonresidential zones, the size of the signs shall be four feet wide by four
feet high. The signs shall be posted along the street frontage, but not in the
public right-of-way. Alternatively, a smaller sign (e.g., 11 inches by 17
inches), at the discretion of the Director, shall be placed in the window of
the facility where the activity will occur.
      (4)   The applicant shall file with the Planning Department, on a form
provided by the city, photograph(s) of the posted sign(s) and a declaration,
signed under penalty of perjury, that the property has been posted according to
the requirements of this section.
      (5)   If the applicant fails to post the signs within the specified time,
and if the photographs and declaration are not filed with the Planning
Department within five days of the signs being posted, the public hearing may
be postponed until the signs are posted and proof of posting has been
submitted.
      (6)   The applicant shall remove all signs posted pursuant to this
section within ten days after final city action on the general plan amendment,
specific plan, zone change, or conditional use permit. Should the applicant
withdraw their application for a general plan amendment, specific plan, zone
change, or conditional use permit, all signs posted shall be removed within ten
days of the withdrawing of the application.
      (7)   Should the applicant fail to remove any sign within the specified
time, the city may remove any such sign and the costs thereof shall be borne by
the applicant.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.70.110 Notice wording.
   Public notice of hearings shall begin with the words similar to "Notice of
Proposed Change of Zone District" or "Notice of Proposed Variance" or "Notice
of Proposed Conditional Use Permit," as the case may be, and set forth the
description of the property under consideration, the nature of the proposed
change or use, identification of the hearing body, and the time and place at
which the public hearing on the matter will be held.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.70.120 Hearing rules and procedures.
   Public hearings before the City Council and the Planning Commission shall be
conducted in accordance with
Chapter 10.70.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.70.130 Continuation of hearing.
   If, for any reason, a public hearing cannot be completed on the date set for
such hearing, the person presiding at such public hearing may, before
adjournment or recess thereof, publicly announce the time and place at which
the hearing will be continued, and no further notice shall be required.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.70.140 Testimony at hearing.
   A summary of all pertinent testimony offered at public hearings held in
connection with an application filed pursuant to this title and the names of
persons testifying shall be recorded and made a part of the permanent files of
the application.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.70.150 Planning Commission recommendation.
   For applications requiring a final decision by the City Council, the
Planning Commission shall first hold a public hearing on the matter. For such
hearing, the Planning Commission shall, by resolution, recommend to the City
Council approval or denial of the request, including the findings for the
recommendation. Upon receipt of the recommendation from the Planning
Commission, the City Council shall hold a public hearing after noticing is
completed.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.70.160 Review authority decision.
   The review authority responsible for making a final determination for any
application, as identified by
Table 10.70.070-1, shall announce its findings by formal resolution, or in the
case of a change to the text of this title or to the Zoning Map, by ordinance.
Specific plans may be adopted by resolution or by ordinance. Non-discretionary
permits may be approved by letter. The resolution shall recite, among other
things, the facts and reasons which, in the opinion of the hearing body, make
the approval or denial of the permit necessary to carry out the provisions and
general purpose of this title, and shall order that the permit or other action
be approved, denied, or approved subject to conditions that it may impose.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.70.170 Notice of decision.
   Not later than ten days following the adoption of a resolution or other
applicable document ordering that a permit or other action be approved or
denied, a copy of said resolution or other applicable document shall be mailed
to the applicant and to any other parties requesting notice of the action. The
resolution or other applicable document shall also be filed and maintained as
public record by the Director.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.70.180 Effective date of decision.
   The decision of the review authority identified in
Table 10.70.070-1 for any permit or other non- legislative decision shall be
effective and final ten days following the adoption of the resolution, unless,
within such period of time, the applicant or other interested party files a
written appeal of the decision.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.70.190 Refiling of a denied application.
   Where an application has been denied by a review authority and that action
has become final, no new application for substantially the same request shall
be accepted for filing for a period of one year after the effective date of the
denial, unless that reviewing authority specifies in its decision that the
denial is made without prejudice.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.70.200 Appeals.
   (A)   A decision of the Director may be appealed to the Planning Commission
by any interested person within ten days following the decision of the
Director. Any decision of the Planning Commission, including a decision on an
appeal, may be appealed to the City Council by any interested person within ten
days following the decision of the Planning Commission.
   (B)   Appeals to the Planning Commission or to the City Council shall be
conducted as a public hearing in accordance with the public hearing noticing
and hearing procedures in this chapter.
   (C)   A decision on an application that has been appealed may be upheld,
overturned, or modified. The appeal decision shall be adopted by resolution or
other applicable document.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.70.210 Change of ownership.
   Subject to the other provisions of this chapter, a permit that is effective
and final pursuant to this chapter shall continue to be valid upon a change of
ownership of the site or structure that was the subject of the permit, except
for a home occupation permit as determined by §
10.78.070.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.70.220 Subsequent permits.
   Before any building, grading, encroachment, or other development permit is
issued for any building, excavation, or other structures proposed as a part of
an approved permit, the Director shall determine that the proposed building
location, facilities, and improvements are in substantial conformance with the
approved permit and any conditions of approval.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.70.230 Suspension and revocation of approved permit.
   (A)   Upon the violation of any applicable provision of this title, the
provisions of any conditional use permit, or upon the failure to comply with or
satisfy any condition of approval related thereto, the permit or approval
issued pursuant to this chapter shall be automatically suspended. Written
notice of the suspension shall be sent by the Director to the person to whom
the use permit was issued, or to their successor if known, advising them of the
suspension and the violations causing the suspension.
   (B)   No building, grading, encroachment, or other development permit shall
be issued for any building, excavation, or other structures proposed as a part
of a permit that has been suspended. For any construction activity taking place
on the site that is the subject of the suspended permit, the Building Official
shall issue a stop work order.
   (C)   The City Council shall hold a public hearing and hear evidence from
city staff, the holder of the permit, and other interested persons. Should the
City Council find that there has been a violation of this title, the provisions
of the permit, or a failure to comply with or satisfy any condition of approval
related thereto, the City Council may either revoke the permit or take such
other action as the City Council deems necessary to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this title, the permit, and the related conditions of approval.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.70.240 Expiration of approved permit.
   (A)   An approved permit shall expire and shall become null and void three
years after the date of approval unless, prior to expiration, one of the
following occurs:
      (1)   A building permit is issued by the building official and
construction is commenced and diligently pursued toward completion on the
property that was the subject of the approved permit.
      (2)   The use for which the permit was approved has commenced.
   (B)   If a use for which a permit was approved has commenced and then is
later abandoned for a continuous period of one year, the permit shall expire
and become null and void.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.70.250 Extension of expiration date of approved permit.
   Prior to the expiration of a permit, a person having the authority to file
an application may file a written request with the Director for an extension of
a permit that may otherwise expire. The request for extension shall be taken to
the Planning Commission, which may extend the expiration date of the permit by
one year. The Planning Commission may grant up to a total of three one-year
extensions.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.70.260 Succession to a county permit upon annexation.
   (A)   If a parcel of real property is considered for annexation to the city
is subject to a permit previously approved pursuant to the provisions of the
Tulare County zoning ordinance and the use has commenced on the date that the
City Council initiates annexation, then the city shall succeed to the permit
and shall administer and enforce the permit in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
   (B)   If a parcel of real property is considered for annexation that is
subject to a permit previously approved pursuant to the provisions of the
Tulare County zoning ordinance and the use has not yet commenced on the date
that the City Council initiates annexation, then the city shall declare in its
resolution of annexation initiation whether it will or will not succeed to the
permit. If the city declares that it will not succeed to a permit, then the
permit shall be deemed null and void on the effective date of annexation.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.70.270 Minor adjustment to approved permit.
   (A)   Upon written request by a person having authority to file an
application, a permit approved in accordance with this chapter that has not
expired may be adjusted by the Director provided that the Director determines
that the adjustment is minor, does not contradict the intent of the review
authority's approval, does not increase the approved use's impact on adjacent
properties, does not increase the intensity or character of the use that was
approved, and is consistent with the General Plan.
   (B)   If the Director determines that the findings in division (A) of this
section required to approve a minor adjustment cannot be met, then the
applicant may apply for an amendment to the permit.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.70.280 Amendment to approved permit.
   A person having the authority to file an application may apply for an
amendment to an approved permit that has not expired. The amendment application
shall be processed with the same procedures as if the application were for a
new permit.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.72: SITE PLAN REVIEW
Section
   
10.72.010   Purpose.
   
10.72.020   Applicability.
   
10.72.030   Exemptions.
   
10.72.040   Site plan application contents.
   
10.72.050   Site Plan Review Committee.
   
10.72.060   Administration of site plan approval.
   
10.72.070   Action of the Site Plan Review Committee.
   
10.72.080   Appeals to the Planning Commission.
   
10.72.090   Site plan permit issuance.
   
10.72.100   Required improvements.
   
10.72.110   Building permit.
   
10.72.120   Lapse of site plan review approval.
   
10.72.130   Revocation.
   
10.72.140   Site plan to run with the land.
§ 10.72.010 Purpose.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety,
and general welfare through the review of proposed projects to verify
conformity with applicable statutes, ordinances, regulations, and other fixed
standards, including, the City's General Plan, Municipal Code, and policies and
improvement standards of the city and the state.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any new, expanded or
remodeled use/development. The total combined use area shall be subject to site
plan permit procedures and all applicable conditions.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.72.020 Applicability.
   The following projects shall be processed through the site plan review
process:
   (A)   Divisions of land or adjustments to property lines.
   (B)   New construction of multi-family, office, commercial, industrial, or
quasi-public development.
   (C)   Any public development, including but not limited to administration,
public safety or recreation buildings; schools; and any county, state, or
federal buildings.
   (D)   Mobile home or trailer parks.
   (E)   Conversion of single-family dwellings to non-residential uses,
including offices, retail stores, and "bed and breakfast" type establishments.
   (F)   Conversion of apartments, office, commercial, or industrial buildings
into condominiums.
   (G)   Any project involving an intensification of land use, including
conversion of service from either commercial or industrial use to a retail
commercial use or occupancy of the structure.
   (H)   Other non-residential improvements to land or buildings subject to the
site plan review process.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.72.030 Exemptions.
   Construction of, or additions to, one single-family dwelling shall be exempt
from the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.72.040 Site plan application contents.
   (A)   Information. The applicant shall submit a minimum of ten prints of the
site plan to the Community Development Department. The site plan shall be drawn
to a scale that clearly indicates all dimensions and includes all of the
following information:
      (1)   Address.
      (2)   Assessor's parcel number.
      (3)   Vicinity map on cover sheet.
      (4)   Scale and north arrow.
      (5)   Dimensions of property.
      (6)   Location of existing and proposed buildings and/or structures,
showing dimensions/distance from property lines, and the intended use for each.
      (7)   Location, height, and material of existing and/or proposed fences,
walls, and the like.
      (8)   Location of off-street parking. Indicate the number of parking
spaces and type of paving, with directional arrows and parking space
dimensions.
      (9)   Location and width of drive approaches.
      (10)   Method of on-site drainage.
      (11)   Location of existing and/or proposed public improvements (such as
curbs, gutters, sidewalks, utility poles, fire hydrants, street lights, traffic
signal devices, etc.).
      (12)   Method of sanitary disposal.
      (13)   Location of signs, their size, height, type of illumination, and
type of building material.
      (14)   Location of trash refuse area.
      (15)   Location and type of existing trees.
      (16)   A preliminary or conceptual landscape plan must be submitted for
site plan review. A final specific landscape plan must be submitted prior to
the issuance of building permits. This plan shall comply with
Chapter 10.52 and shall include species, quantity, size, location, and
irrigation system.
      (17)   Loading and storage areas, indicating any fences and walls to be
used as screening.
      (18)   Location and height of all roof-mounted structures.
      (19)   Lighting, including the location of all exterior fixtures.
      (20)   Such other data as may be required to permit the Site Plan Review
Committee to make the required findings.
      (21)   Elevations, if required by the nature of the proposed project, to
ensure compliance with the development standards found in the City's Municipal
Code.
      (22)   Additional information as required in order for the Historic
Preservation Advisory Board to ensure that the proposed project meets the
standards for historic preservation found in the City's Municipal Code.
   (B)   Submittal. Plans submitted by 3:00 p.m. on a Thursday shall be
reviewed by the Site Plan Review Committee at their regular meeting at 1:30
p.m. on the following Wednesday. Additional time may be required for site plans
which must be reviewed by other agencies and/or city committees.
   (C)   If all of the required information as outlined within this chapter is
not submitted, the application shall not be processed by the Community
Development Department. Acceptance by staff of the filing shall not be
considered approval or confirmation that all required information has been
submitted or waiver of any of the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.72.050 Site Plan Review Committee.
   (A)   Members. The Site Plan Review Committee shall be comprised of staff
representatives of the fire, engineering, traffic, building, planning, solid
waste, police, and community services functions of the city. At Site Plan
Review Committee meetings with applicants, the Committee shall be represented
by the planning, engineering, and building representatives, or their designees.
In addition, the Community Development Director, or his/her designee, may
request input from, or attendance by, additional representatives of any other
city department or public agency, subject to City Council policies.
   (B)   Powers and duties. The Site Plan Review Committee shall review and
either i) approve; ii) conditionally approve; or iii) deny, any site plan
permit application submitted for a development that requires a site plan
permit, pursuant to applicable city codes and ordinances.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.72.060 Administration of site plan approval.
   Any project listed in §
10.72.020, by which the area of an existing building or lot is being expanded
by less than 25%, may be processed administratively by the Community
Development Director. Within ten days of approving a site plan, the Community
Development Director shall prepare an administrative agreement, consistent with
administrative approval, which shall include and record the decision of the
Director and any conditions of approval. This agreement shall be signed by the
applicant and the Director prior to the issuance of a building permit. The
Director's decision shall be final unless appealed to the Planning Commission,
consistent with the requirements contained in
Chapter 10.70.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.72.070 Action of the Site Plan Review Committee.
   (A)   Within 30 working days after submission, the Site Plan Review
Committee shall either i) approve; ii) conditionally approve; or iii)
disapprove the proposed site plan pursuant to the purpose, objectives, and
requirements of this chapter. In approving the site plan, the Site Plan Review
Committee shall make the following specific findings:
      (1)   That all applicable provisions of the Municipal Code, General Plan,
and applicable state law have been complied with.
      (2)   That the following elements are designed to conform to the
applicable statutes, ordinances, regulations, and other fixed standards,
including, the City's General Plan, Municipal Code, and policies and
improvement standards of the city and the state:
         (a)   Facilities, improvements, and utilities.
         (b)   Vehicular ingress, egress, and internal circulation.
         (c)   Setbacks.
         (d)   Location of service use areas.
         (e)   Walls.
         (f)   Landscaping.
   (B)   In making the required findings, the Site Plan Review Committee shall
ensure a project is consistent with established policies and regulations
relating to public improvements, as approved and adopted by the City Council,
including necessary dedications and traffic safety measures or improvements.
The Site Plan Review Committee shall not, through the site plan review process,
possess independent authority to create and impose discretionary conditions on
a project.
   (C)   Upon completion of site plan review, Community Development Department
staff shall notify the applicant of the approval, conditions of approval, or
denial, along with a copy of any final and approved site plan.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.72.080 Appeals to the Planning Commission.
   The applicant, or any interested person, may appeal the decision of the Site
Plan Review Committee to the Planning Commission, in writing setting forth the
reason for such appeal to the Commission. Such appeal shall be filed with the
Community Development Director within ten calendar days after notification of
the decision from which the appeal is made. The appeal shall be placed on the
agenda for the Commission's next regular meeting. If the appeal is filed within
five calendar days of the next regular meeting of the Commission, the appeal
shall be placed on the agenda for the Commission's second regular meeting
following the filing of the appeal. The Commission shall review the site plan
and shall approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove, based on the factors
set forth in §
10.72.070. The decision of the Commission shall be final unless appealed to the
City Council pursuant to
Chapter 10.70.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.72.090 Site plan permit issuance.
   After the final site plan has been approved, the Community Development
Department staff shall grant the applicant permission to "proceed" or "revise
and proceed" for application of required preliminary permits. If there are no
preliminary permits or approvals required at this time, building permits also
may be issued. No permits may be issued for the erection or enlargement of any
building or structure, and no persons shall perform, or engage in, any
development or construction activities on the site unless and until all
provisions of this chapter have been complied with.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.72.100 Required improvements.
   (A)   The Site Plan Review Committee shall be required to make a finding
that the Project includes the construction of any and all improvements required
under the applicable statutes, ordinances, regulations, and other fixed
standards, including, the City's General Plan, Municipal Code, and policies and
improvement standards of the city and the state.
   (B)   All improvements shall be to city standards existing at the time the
site plan is approved and shall be installed simultaneously with the approved
development. Where it is found by the Community Development Director that it is
impractical to install any or all improvements simultaneously with the approved
development, a written agreement to make such improvements by an identified
future date may be accepted in lieu thereof. The terms of any such agreement
shall be in conformity with applicable statutes, ordinances, regulations, and
other fixed standards, including, the City's General Plan, Municipal Code, and
policies and improvement standards of the city and the state.
   (C)   Without regard to the timing of the improvements, the applicant shall
enter into a written agreement with the city identifying all improvements to be
made and memorializing the city's and applicant's understanding and agreement,
rights, and responsibilities, relating to said improvements before any building
permit may be issued.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.72.110 Building permit.
   Prior to issuance of a building permit for any structure or building for
which a site plan has been approved, the Community Development Director, or
his/her designee, shall make a finding that any required dedications have been
recorded and that the applicant has provided appropriate improvement security
(e.g., bond, cash deposit or instrument of credit) to cover the reasonable cost
of all proposed off-site improvements.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.72.120 Lapse of site plan review approval.
   (A)   A site plan review approval shall lapse and become void three years
after the date on which it became effective unless (1) the permit's conditions
provide for a shorter or greater time limit; or (2) prior to the expiration of
the three years, a building permit is issued by the city, construction is
commenced, and completion of construction is being diligently pursued, as
determined by the Community Development Department Director, or his/her
designee.
   (B)   An extension of time, up to two additional years, may be granted by
the Planning Commission, provided that, prior to the expiration date, a written
application for renewal is filed with the Community Development Department. An
application of renewal shall identify the reason for any delay in the
development of the site, the applicant's plan and estimated timeline to
completion of the development if renewal is granted, and the number of months/
years of extension requested.
   (C)   The Planning Commission may approve, approve with conditions, or deny
any application for renewal of a site plan review. The Planning Commission
shall only have the ability to condition the granting of a renewal based on the
timeline of the project. In the case of a planned residential development, the
recording of a final map and improvements thereto shall be deemed the same as a
building permit in relation to this section.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.72.130 Revocation.
   Where the city finds that site use, operating under an approved site plan,
does not comply with the site plan conditions identified at the time of
approval, operation of the non-complying use shall be suspended consistent with
the procedures outlined in §
10.02.120, Enforcement.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.72.140 Site plan to run with the land.
   An approved site plan shall run with the land and shall continue to be valid
upon change of ownership of the use, property, or building.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.74: ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMITS
Section
   
10.74.010   Purpose.
   
10.74.020   Applicability.
   
10.74.030   Application procedure.
   
10.74.040   Findings.
   
10.74.050   Appeals.
   
10.74.060   Life of permits and extensions of time.
   
10.74.070   Revocation.
§ 10.74.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of requiring the administrative approval of certain uses is to
determine whether or not a particular use meets the standards set forth in this
title that are specific to that use, with the intent that uses that meet all of
the standards will be approved.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.74.020 Applicability.
   This chapter shall apply to all uses listed as permitted uses subject to
administrative approval.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.74.030 Application procedure.
   Applications for an administrative use permit shall be filed pursuant to
Chapter 10.70 with the Director and processed consistent with §
10.70.050 and, if applicable, §
10.70.060.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.74.040 Findings.
   In order for an application to receive administrative approval, the
following findings must be made by the reviewing authority listed in
Chapter 10.70:
   (A)   The use meets the standards and requirements in this title that are
specific to that use.
   (B)   The use would be compatible with existing land uses and future
permitted land uses within the zoning district in which the proposed use is to
be located.
   (C)   The use is consistent with the General Plan.
   (D)   The proposed location, size, design, and operating characteristics of
the use would not be detrimental to the public interests, health, safety,
convenience, or welfare of the city, and any incompatible impacts of the
proposed use are mitigated by conditions of approval.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.74.050 Appeals.
   Appeals to a decision of the reviewing authority of an administrative use
permit shall be submitted and processed consistent with the procedures in §
10.70.200.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.74.060 Life of permits and extensions of time.
   The life and extension of time of an administrative use permit shall be
consistent with the requirements in §§
10.70.240 and
10.70.250.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.74.070 Revocation.
   Revocation of an administrative use permit shall be conducted consistent
with procedures and notice requirements in
Chapter 10.70.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.76: TEMPORARY USE PERMITS
   Section
   
10.76.010   Purpose.
   
10.76.020   Temporary uses exempt from permit requirements.
   
10.76.030   Temporary use permit required.
   
10.76.040   Development standards.
   
10.76.050   Temporary improvements on a site.
   
10.76.060   Findings.
   
10.76.070   Conditions.
§ 10.76.010 Purpose.
   A temporary use permit provides a mechanism for administrative review and
determination for proposed and qualifying short-term uses and activities to
ensure that such activities are consistent with the General Plan and the
provisions of this title. In a review of temporary use permits, the
accessibility for persons with disabilities must be a consideration.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.76.020 Temporary uses exempt from permit requirements.
   The following temporary activities and uses are allowed by right and
expressly exempt from the requirement of first obtaining a temporary use
permit, provided they conform to the listed development standards:
   (A)   Construction yards, storage sheds, and construction offices (on-site)
in conjunction with an approved construction project where the yard and/or shed
are located on the same site as the approved project.
   (B)   Emergency public health and safety facilities established by a public
agency.
   (C)   Entertainment and assembly events held within auditoriums, stadiums,
or other public assembly facilities, provided the proposed use is consistent
with the intended use of the facility.
   (D)   Entertainment and assembly events as part of an allowed permanent use
(e.g., race at a raceway, concert at a concert venue).
   (E)   Events held exclusively on city property and that are in conjunction
with the city use.
   (F)   Events held exclusively at a school site that are in conjunction with
the school's use.
   (G)   Events held exclusively on a place of assembly or facility site and
that are in conjunction with that place of assembly or facility use.
   (H)   Garage and yard sales held on private property.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.76.030 Temporary use permit required.
   The following temporary activities and uses may be allowed, subject to the
issuance of a temporary use permit prior in accordance with this chapter and
Chapter 10.70:
   (A)   Any use listed in Table 10.08.020 or Table 10.08.030 that is
identified as a temporary use.
   (B)   Construction yards, storage sheds, and construction offices (off-site)
in conjunction with an approved construction project, where the yard is located
on a site different from the site of the approved construction project.
   (C)   Entertainment and assembly events, including carnivals, circuses,
concerts, fairs, festivals, food events, fundraisers, haunted houses, outdoor
entertainment/sporting events, and similar events designed to attract large
crowds and when not otherwise part of or consistent with a permitted use (e.g.,
race at a raceway).
   (D)   Farmers markets.
   (E)   Temporary sales, including swap meets, flea markets, rummage sales,
and similar events in locations not specifically designed for such events.
   (F)   Temporary outdoor sales, sidewalk sales, and temporary parking lot
sales lasting more than three days in association with a permitted business for
which there is an enclosed building. No off-site signs shall be permitted and
no more than six of these events will occur on the subject property per
calendar year.
   (G)   Sales of Christmas trees and fireworks stands are reviewed and
approved by the Fire Marshal.
   (H)   Seasonal sales occurring outdoors when not related to an existing
business.
   (I)   Temporary sales offices.
   (J)   Temporary community food banks.
   (K)   Other temporary activities that the Director determines are similar in
nature and intensity to those identified above.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.76.040 Development standards.
   Standards for height, off-street parking spaces, setbacks, and other
structure and property development standards that apply to the category of use
or the zoning district of the subject parcel shall apply to all temporary
activities. The Director may waive requirements for long-term improvements that
exceed the duration of the temporary use, including, but not limited to,
landscaping and paving of parking lots.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.76.050 Temporary improvements on a site.
   (A)   Improvement to property at a level less than what is required by this
title may be allowed to support temporary operations on the property yet still
ensure public health, safety, and general welfare. This allowance shall not be
used to circumvent or deviate from the requirements for public improvements
required at the time of subdivision of property.
   (B)   The allowance described in division (A) shall be conducted through the
temporary use permit process. The permit shall clearly identify what
improvements are to be completed and what requirements are being waived for a
limited period of time, as well as the time period for which the permit is
valid. A temporary use permit allowing improvements less than required shall
only be approved if the improvements to be completed are those minimally
necessary to ensure public health, safety, and welfare.
   (C)   At the conclusion of the period authorized by the temporary use
permit, either the property shall be brought into compliance with the
requirements of this title or use of the property shall cease.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.76.060 Findings.
   The reviewing authority shall make all of the following findings to approve
or conditionally approve a temporary use permit:
   (A)   The use is a temporary use and will be limited to the specific
duration of time that is identified in the temporary use permit not to exceed
six months unless otherwise extended by the Planning Commission.
   (B)   The temporary use will not be detrimental to the health, safety, or
general welfare of persons, property, or improvements in the vicinity of the
proposed use, or to the general welfare of the city.
   (C)   The site is adequate in size and location and has proper accessibility
to accommodate the use and there are adequate public services, including fire
protection, water supply, wastewater disposal, and police protection to serve
the use.
   (D)   Egress and ingress and off-street parking facilities are properly
designed and adequate to serve the use and the use will not restrict access to
required parking areas.
   (E)   Approved measures for the removal of the use and site restoration have
been required to ensure that no changes to the site would limit the range of
possible future land uses otherwise allowed by this title.
   (F)   The approval includes provisions to ensure that each site occupied by
a temporary use shall be cleaned of debris, litter, or any other evidence of
the temporary use upon completion or removal of the use.
   (G)   The use is consistent with the General Plan, applicable specific
plans, and the provisions of this title.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.76.070 Conditions.
   The Director may place conditions on the temporary use permit, including,
but not limited to, buffers, hours of operation, maintenance, lighting,
improvements, parking, performance guarantees, property maintenance, signs,
surfacing, time limits, and traffic circulation. Conditions must be deemed
reasonable and necessary to protect the health, safety, or general welfare.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.78: HOME OCCUPATION PERMITS
   Section
   
10.78.010   Purpose.
   
10.78.020   Application.
   
10.78.030   Prohibited home occupation uses.
   
10.78.040   Operating standards.
   
10.78.050   Issuance of home occupation permit.
   
10.78.060   No transferability.
   
10.78.070   Revocation.
§ 10.78.010 Purpose.
   The provisions of this chapter provide for the conduct of home occupations
inside a residence that are incidental to and compatible with surrounding
residential uses. A home occupation represents a legal income-producing
activity by the occupant of the dwelling.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.78.020 Application.
   Applications for a home occupation permit shall be filed and processed
pursuant to the applicable sections of
Chapter 10.70.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.78.030 Prohibited home occupation uses.
   (A)   The following uses are, without limitation, examples of land uses that
are not incidental to nor compatible with residential activities in residential
zones and are prohibited as home occupations:
      (1)   Barbershop, hair salon, nail care, massage therapy, or day spa.
      (2)   Commercial photography studio.
      (3)   Organized instruction or school of music or dance.
      (4)   Fortune telling.
      (5)   Kennel or animal boarding.
      (6)   Laboratory, general or medical.
      (7)   Mini-warehouse or self-storage facility.
      (8)   Motor vehicle repair or service, minor or major.
      (9)   Office; medical, dental, or optometry.
      (10)   Pet grooming.
      (11)   Repair shop, large appliance or equipment.
      (12)   Specialty construction or trade service where construction
activities take place at the site.
      (13)   Tattooing or body art.
      (14)   Any other use determined by the Director to be not incidental nor
compatible with residential activities.
   (B)   A home occupation permit may be denied if the Director finds that land
use proposed for a home occupation is listed in this section, or that the land
use is not incidental nor compatible with residential activities.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.78.040 Operating standards.
   (A)   A home occupation shall comply with all of the following operating
standards:
      (1)   A home occupation shall not alter the appearance of the dwelling
unit as seen from any public right-of-way.
      (2)   There shall be no window displays or show window identifying the
home occupation.
      (3)   There shall be no signs other than those allowed by
Chapter 10.56.
      (4)   There shall be no advertising in any publication, on the internet,
or otherwise, that identifies the home occupation by street address.
      (5)   The home occupation shall be confined to one room located within
the dwelling. A portion of a garage or carport may be used for home occupation
purposes if it does not prevent the garage or carport from being used for
parking vehicles. Horticulture activities may be conducted outdoors within the
rear of the lot only.
      (6)   Only one vehicle no larger than a three-quarter-ton truck may be
used by the occupant directly or indirectly in connection with a home
occupation.
      (7)   The home occupation shall not encroach into any required parking,
setback, or open space areas.
      (8)   There shall be no use of mechanical equipment not recognized as
being part of a normal household or hobby use.
      (9)   Activities conducted and equipment or material used shall not
change the fire safety or occupancy classifications of the premises.
      (10)   Utility consumption shall not exceed normal residential usage.
      (11)   The home occupation shall not create or cause noise, dust, light,
vibration, odor, gas, fumes, toxic/hazardous materials, smoke, glare or
electrical interference or other hazards or nuisances to an extent that would
exceed the conditions of normal residential activities.
      (12)   Only the occupants of the dwelling may be engaged in the home
occupation, except as specifically modified by other sections of this title.
      (13)   The home occupation shall not generate pedestrian or vehicular
traffic in excess of that customarily associated with the land use district in
which it is located.
      (14)   No home occupation shall commence until a current business license
is obtained, pursuant to this title.
      (15)   No more than one home occupation shall be located within a
dwelling unit at one time.
      (16)   If the home occupation is to be conducted on rental property, the
property owner's written authorization for the proposed use shall be obtained
prior to the submittal of a home occupation permit.
      (17)   No space shall be rented out to others in association with a home
occupation.
      (18)   A home occupation that is a cottage food operation shall meet the
requirements of
Chapter 10.78.
   (B)   The Director may require additional operating standards when approving
the home occupation permit if deemed necessary to carry out the intent of this
title.
   (C)   A home occupation permit may be denied if the Director finds that
there is a failure or inability to meet one or more of the operating standards
of this section.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.78.050 Issuance of home occupation permit.
   (A)   Home occupations may be processed as an administrative matter by the
Director, or his/her designee. Following a review of a home occupation
application, the Director shall take action on the home occupation. The
Director can approve subject to the conditions listed in §
10.78.040, or deny the home occupation permit. Following a decision by the
Director, an administrative agreement shall be prepared that outlines the
findings and conditions of the decision.
   (B)   The Director's decision shall be final unless appealed to the Planning
Commission consistent with the procedures in §
10.70.200.
   (C)   Approval of a home occupation permit will entitle the applicant to
secure a city business license for the use for which the permit was issued.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.78.060 No transferability.
   (A)   Notwithstanding §
10.70.210, if property ownership changes on property subject to a valid home
occupation permit, the home occupation permit shall not be transferable to a
new property owner.
   (B)   If the holder of a valid home occupation permit relocates to another
site, the home occupation shall not transfer to the new site. A new home
occupation permit shall be approved before the use may continue at the new
site.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.78.070 Revocation.
   A home occupation permit may be revoked, terminated, or modified in
accordance with §
10.70.230 if any one of the following findings are made:
   (A)   The home occupation has become detrimental to the public health,
safety, or traffic, or constitutes a nuisance.
   (B)   The home occupation permit was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud.
   (C)   The condition of the premises, or the area of which it is a part, has
changed so that the home occupation is no longer justified under the meaning
and intent of this title.
   (D)   One or more of the operating standards of the home occupation permit
have not been met.
   (E)   The home occupation violates federal, state, or local statute,
ordinance, law, or regulation.
   (F)   The home occupation has ceased for a period of six months.
   (G)   The applicant who secured the permit has moved from the residence for
which the permit was issued.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.80: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
   Section
   
10.80.010   Purpose.
   
10.80.020   Application procedure.
   
10.80.030   Findings.
   
10.80.040   Conditions of approval.
   
10.80.050   Notice of decision.
   
10.80.060   Appeals.
   
10.80.070   Amendments
   
10.80.080   Life of permits and extensions of time.
   
10.80.090   Revocation.
§ 10.80.010 Purpose.
   In certain districts, specific uses listed in this title are permitted
subject to receiving a conditional use permit. Because of their unusual
characteristics, or the unique area in which they are proposed, these uses
require special consideration so that they may be located properly with respect
to the purpose and objectives of this title and with respect to their effects
on surrounding properties.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.80.020 Application procedure.
   Applications for a conditional use permit shall be filed and processed
pursuant to the applicable sections of
Chapter 10.70.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.80.030 Findings.
   (A)   Before a conditional use permit can be approved, all the following
findings shall be made by the reviewing authority identified in
Chapter 10.70:
      (1)   The proposed use will comply with the purpose and objectives of
this title and the purposes of the district in which the subject site is
located.
      (2)   The proposed use would be compatible with existing land uses and
future permitted land uses within the zoning district in which the proposed use
is to be located.
      (3)   The site for the proposed use is adequate in size, shape and
location to accommodate the use the district for which it is proposed.
      (4)   The proposed use is consistent with the General Plan.
      (5)   The proposed use will not have a significant impact on the
environment.
      (6)   The proposed location, size, design, and operating characteristics
of the proposed use would not be detrimental to the public interests, health,
safety, convenience, or welfare of the city or materially injurious to
properties or improvements in the vicinity, and that any incompatible impacts
of the proposed use are mitigated by conditions of approval.
   (B)   A conditional use permit may be denied if the reviewing authority
finds one or more of the findings in this section cannot be made.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.80.040 Conditions of approval.
   The reviewing authority may place conditions of the approval on the
conditional use permit that promote the public interests, health, safety,
convenience, or welfare of the city or that mitigate any impacts to surrounding
properties. Conditions may involve the operation of the use, and maintenance of
the property or specific aspects associated with development, including storage
and display of goods; grading, surfacing, and drainage improvements; vehicular
ingress and egress; parking and loading; landscaping and irrigation and
maintenance thereof; regulation of light, vibration, odors, and noise;
appearance of buildings, signs and other structures; and street dedication and
improvements. Conditions set forth in a use permit shall pertain to the purpose
and objectives of this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.80.050 Notice of decision.
   A notice of decision of a conditional use permit shall be processed
consistent with
Chapter 10.70.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.80.060 Appeals.
   Appeals to a decision of the reviewing authority of a conditional use permit
shall be submitted and processed consistent with the procedures in
Chapter 10.70.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.80.070 Amendments.
   Amendments to an approved conditional use permit shall be subject to the
same approval process and findings outlined in this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.80.080 Life of permits and extensions of time.
   (A)   The initial life and subsequent extensions of time for a conditional
use permit shall be per
Chapter 10.70, except that when any conditional use permit that is approved in
conjunction with a tentative
subdivision map or parcel map pursuant to
Chapter 8.24, the conditional use permit shall not expire unless the tentative
subdivision map or parcel map also expires, and an extension of the tentative
subdivision map or parcel shall be deemed to be an extension of the conditional
use permit.
   (B)   A conditional use permit shall run with the land and shall continue to
be valid upon change of ownership of the property or structure that was the
subject of the use permit application.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.80.090 Revocation.
   Revocation of an approved conditional use permit shall be conducted
consistent with procedures and notice requirements in
Chapter 10.70.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.82: DENSITY BONUS
   Section
   
10.82.010   Purpose of chapter.
   
10.82.020   Eligibility for bonus, incentives, or concessions.
   
10.82.030   Allowed density bonuses.
   
10.82.040   Allowed incentives or concessions.
   
10.82.050   Effect on non-conforming uses.
   
10.82.060   Bonus and incentives for developments with childcare facilities.
   
10.82.070   Continued availability.
   
10.82.080   Location and type of designated units.
   
10.82.090   Density bonus agreement.
   
10.82.100   Control of resale.
   
10.82.110   Judicial relief, waiver of standards.
§ 10.82.010 Purpose of chapter.
   As required by Cal. Gov't Code § 65915, this chapter offers density bonuses
and incentives or concessions for the development of housing that is affordable
to the types of households and qualifying residents identified in §
10.82.020 Eligibility for bonus, incentives, or concessions below. This chapter
is intended to implement the requirements of Cal. Gov't Code §§ 65915 et seq.
and the Housing Element of the General Plan.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.82.020 Eligibility for bonus, incentives, or concessions.
   In order to be eligible for a density bonus and other incentives or
concessions as provided by this chapter, a proposed housing development shall
comply with the following requirements and shall satisfy all other applicable
provisions of this title, except as provided by §
10.82.040 Allowed incentives or concessions.
   (A)   Resident requirements. A housing development proposed to qualify for a
density bonus shall be designed and constructed so that it includes at least
any one of the following:
      (1)   Ten percent of the total number of proposed units are for lower-
income households, as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 50079.5.
      (2)   Five percent of the total number of proposed units are for very
low-income households, as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 50105.
      (3)   The project is a senior citizen housing development as defined in
Cal. Civil Code §§ 51.3 and 51.12, or is a mobile home park that limits
residency based on age requirements for housing older persons in compliance
with Cal. Civil Code §§ 798.76 or 799.5.
      (4)   Ten percent of the total dwelling units in a common interest
development as defined in Cal. Civil Code § 4100 is for persons and families of
moderate income, as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 50093, provided
that all units in the development are offered to the public for purchase.
   (B)   Applicant selection of basis for bonus. For purposes of calculating
the amount of the density bonus in compliance with §
10.82.030 Allowed density bonuses below, the applicant who requests a density
bonus shall elect whether the bonus shall be awarded on the basis of divisions
(A)(1), (2), (3), or (4) above.
   (C)   Bonus units shall not qualify a project. A density bonus granted in
compliance with §
10.82.030 Allowed density bonuses, below, shall not be included when
determining the number of housing units that is equal to the percentages
required by division (A) above.
   (D)   Minimum project size to qualify for density bonus. The density bonus
provided by this chapter shall be available only to a housing development of
five or more dwelling units.
   (E)   Condominium conversion projects. A condominium conversion project for
which a density bonus is requested shall comply with the eligibility and other
requirements specified in Cal. Gov't Code § 65915.5.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.82.030 Allowed density bonuses.
   The review authority shall determine the amount of a density bonus allowed
in a housing development in compliance with this section. For the purposes of
this chapter, "density bonus" means a density increase over the otherwise
maximum allowable residential density under the applicable General Plan Land
Use designation and zone as of the date of application by the applicant to the
city.
   (A)   Density bonus. A housing development that complies with the
eligibility requirements specified in §§
10.82.020(A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), or (A)(4) above, shall be entitled to density
bonuses as follows unless a lesser percentage is proposed by the applicant.
      (1)   Bonus for units for lower-income households. A housing development
that is eligible for a bonus in compliance with the criteria specified in §
10.82.020(A)(1), (10% of units for lower-income households) shall be entitled
to a density bonus calculated as follows:
Table 10.82.030-1
Bonus for Lower-Income Households
Percentage of Low-Income Units Proposed Percentage of Density Bonus
Table 10.82.030-1
Bonus for Lower-Income Households
Percentage of Low-Income Units Proposed Percentage of Density Bonus
10                                      20
11                                      21.5
12                                      23
14                                      26
15                                      27.5
17                                      30.5
18                                      32
19                                      33.5
20                                      35
 
   (2)   Bonus for units for very low-income households. A housing development
that is eligible for a bonus in compliance with the criteria specified in §
10.82.020(A)(2), (5% of units for very low-income households) shall be entitled
to a density bonus calculated as follows:
Table 10.82.030-2
Bonus for Very Low-Income Households
Percentage of Very Low-Income Units Proposed Percentage of Density Bonus
Table 10.82.030-2
Bonus for Very Low-Income Households
Percentage of Very Low-Income Units Proposed Percentage of Density Bonus
5                                            20
6                                            22.5
7                                            25
8                                            27.5
9                                            30
10                                           32.2
11                                           35
 
   (3)   Bonus for senior citizen development. A housing development that is
eligible for a bonus in compliance with the criteria in §
10.82.020(A)(3), (senior citizen development or mobile home park) shall be
entitled to a density bonus of 20%.
   (4)   Bonus for moderate-income units in common interest development. A
housing development that is eligible for a bonus in compliance with the
criteria specified in §
10.82.02(A)(4), (10% of units in a common interest development for persons and
families of moderate income) shall be entitled to a density bonus calculated as
follows:
Table 10.82.030-3
Bonus for Moderate-Income Households
Percentage of Moderate-Income Units Proposed Percentage of Density Bonus
Table 10.82.030-3
Bonus for Moderate-Income Households
Percentage of Moderate-Income Units Proposed Percentage of Density Bonus
10                                           5
11                                           6
12                                           7
13                                           8
14                                           9
15                                           10
16                                           11
17                                           12
18                                           13
19                                           14
20                                           15
21                                           16
22                                           17
23                                           18
24                                           19
25                                           20
26                                           21
27                                           22
28                                           23
29                                           24
30                                           25
31                                           26
32                                           27
33                                           28
34                                           29
35                                           30
36                                           31
37                                           32
38                                           33
39                                           34
40                                           35
 
   (5)   Density bonus for land donation. When an applicant for a tentative
map, parcel map, or other residential development approval donates land to the
city in compliance with this division, the applicant shall be entitled to a
density bonus for the entire development, as follows; provided, that nothing in
this division shall be construed to affect the authority of the city to require
a developer to donate land as a condition of development.
      (a)   Basic bonus. The applicant shall be entitled to a 15% increase
above the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the applicable
Land Use Plan designation and zone for the entire development, and an
additional increase as follows:
Table 10.82.030-4
Basic Bonuses
Percentage of Very Low-Income Units Proposed Percentage of Density Bonus
Table 10.82.030-4
Basic Bonuses
Percentage of Very Low-Income Units Proposed Percentage of Density Bonus
10                                           15
11                                           16
12                                           17
13                                           18
14                                           19
15                                           20
16                                           21
17                                           22
18                                           23
19                                           24
20                                           25
21                                           26
22                                           27
23                                           28
24                                           29
25                                           30
26                                           31
27                                           32
28                                           33
29                                           34
30                                           35
 
         (b)   Increased bonus. The increase identified in Table 10.82.030-
4 above shall be in addition to any increase in density required by divisions
(A)(1) through (A)(4), up to a maximum combined mandated density increase of
35% if an applicant seeks both the increase required in compliance with this
division (A)(5), as well as the bonuses provided by divisions (A)(1) through
(A)(4).
         (c)   Eligibility for increased bonus. An applicant shall be eligible
for the increased density bonus provided by this division if all of the
following conditions are met:
            1.   The applicant donates and transfers the land no later than the
date of approval of the final map, parcel map, or residential development
application.
            2.   The developable acreage and zoning classification of the land
being transferred is sufficient to allow construction of units affordable to
very low-income households in an amount not less than 10% of the number of
residential units of the proposed development.
            3.   The transferred land is at least one acre in size, or of
sufficient size to allow the development of at least 40 units; has the
appropriate Land Use Plan designation; is appropriately zoned for development
as affordable housing; and is or will be served by adequate public facilities
and infrastructure. The land shall have appropriate zoning and development
standards to make the development of affordable units feasible.
            4.   No later than the date of approval of the final map, parcel
map, or of the residential development, the transferred land shall have all of
the permits and approvals, other than building permits, necessary for the
development of the very low-income housing units on the transferred land,
except that the city may subject the proposed development to subsequent site
plan review to the extent authorized by Cal. Gov't Code § 65583.2(i) if the
site plan and associated details have not been reviewed by the city before the
time of transfer.
            5.   The transferred land and the affordable units shall be subject
to a deed restriction ensuring continued affordability of the units consistent
with §
10.82.070 Continued availability, which shall be recorded on the property at
the time of dedication.
            6.   The land is transferred to the city or to a housing developer
approved by the city. The city may require the applicant to identify and
transfer the land to the approved housing developer.
            7.   The transferred land shall be within the boundary of the
proposed development or, if the city agrees, within one-quarter mile of the
boundary of the proposed development.
   (B)   Greater or lesser bonuses. The city may choose to grant a density
bonus greater than provided by this section for a development that meets the
requirements of this section or grants a proportionately lower density bonus
than required by this section for a development that does not fully comply with
the requirements of this section.
   (C)   Density bonus calculations. The calculation of a density bonus in
compliance with this section that results in fractional units shall be rounded
up to the next whole number, as required by state law. For the purpose of
calculating a density bonus, the residential units do not have to be based on
individual subdivision maps or parcels.
   (D)   Requirements for amendments or discretionary approval. The granting of
a density bonus shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a
General Plan amendment, Zoning Map amendment, or other discretionary approval.
   (E)   Location of bonus units. The developer may locate density bonus units
in the housing project in areas other than where the units for lower-income
households are located.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.82.040 Allowed incentives or concessions.
   (A)   Applicant request and city approval.
      (1)   An applicant for a density bonus in compliance with this chapter
may submit to the city a proposal for the specific incentives or concessions
listed in division (C) Type of incentives, below, that the applicant requests
in compliance with this section, and may request a meeting with the Director.
The applicant may file a request either before filing an application for city
approval of a proposed project or concurrently with an application for project
approval. The review authority shall grant an incentive or concession request
that complies with this section unless the review authority makes either of the
following findings in writing, based on substantial evidence:
         (a)   The incentive or concession is not required to provide for
affordable housing costs, or for rents for the targeted units to be set as
specified in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 50052.5.
         (b)   The incentive or concession would have a specific adverse
impact, as defined in Cal. Gov't Code § 65589.5(d)(2), upon public health and
safety or the physical environment, or on any real property listed in the
California Register of Historical Resources and for which there is no feasible
method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without
rendering the development unaffordable to low- and moderate-income households.
      (2)   The applicant shall show that a waiver or modification of
development standards is necessary to make the housing units economically
feasible.
   (B)   Number of incentives. The applicant shall receive the following number
of incentives or concessions.
      (1)   One incentive or concession. One incentive or concession for a
project that includes at least 10% of the total units for lower-income
households, at least 5% for very low-income households, or at least 10% for
persons and families of moderate income in a common interest development.
      (2)   Two incentives or concessions. Two incentives or concessions for a
project that includes at least 20% of the total units for lower-income
households, at least 10% for very low-income households, or at least 20% for
persons and families of moderate income in a common interest development.
      (3)   Three incentives or concessions. Three incentives or concessions
for a project that includes at least 30% of the total units for lower-income
households, at least 15% for very low-income households, or at least 30% for
persons and families of moderate income in a common interest development.
   (C)   Type of incentives. For the purposes of this chapter, concession or
incentive means any of the following:
      (1)   A reduction in the site development standards of this title (e.g.,
site coverage limitations, setbacks, reduced parcel sizes, and/or parking
requirements) (see also §
10.82.050 Parking requirements in density bonus projects), or a modification of
architectural design requirements that exceed the minimum building standards
approved by the California Building Standards Commission in compliance with
Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 18901 et seq., that would otherwise be required,
that results in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost
reductions.
      (2)   Approval of mixed-use land uses not otherwise allowed by this title
in conjunction with the housing development if non-residential land uses will
reduce the cost of the housing development, and the non-residential land uses
are compatible with the housing project and the existing or planned development
in the area where the project will be located.
      (3)   Other regulatory incentives proposed by the applicant or the city
that will result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost
reductions.
   (D)   Effect of incentive or concession. The granting of a concession or
incentive shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a General Plan
amendment, Zoning Map amendment, or other discretionary approval.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.82.050 Effect on non-conforming uses.
   (A)   Applicability. This section applies to a development that meets the
requirements of §
10.82.020 Eligibility for density bonus, incentives, and concessions, above,
but only at the request of the applicant. An applicant may request additional
parking incentives or concessions beyond those provided in this section in
compliance with §
10.82.040 Allowed incentives or concessions, above.
   (B)   Number of parking spaces required.
      (1)   At the request of the applicant, the city shall require the
following vehicular parking ratios for a project that complies with the
requirements of §
10.82.020 Eligibility for density bonus, incentives, and concessions, above,
inclusive of handicapped and guest parking.
         (a)   Zero to one bedroom: One on-site parking space.
         (b)   Two to three bedrooms: Two on-site parking spaces.
         (c)   Four and more bedrooms: Two and one half on-site parking spaces.
      (2)   If the total number of parking spaces required for a development is
other than a whole number, the number shall be rounded up to the next whole
number.
   (C)   Location of parking. For purposes of this section, a development may
provide on-site parking through uncovered parking, but not through on-street
parking.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.82.060 Bonus and incentives for developments with childcare facilities.
   Housing developments. A housing development that complies with the resident
and project size requirements of §
10.82.020(A) and (B) above, and also includes as part of that development a
childcare facility other than a large or small family day care home, that will
be located on the site of, as part of, or adjacent to the development, shall be
subject to the following additional bonus, incentives, and requirements.
   (A)   Additional bonuses and incentives. The city shall grant a housing
development that includes a childcare facility in compliance with this section
either of the following:
      (1)   An additional density bonus that is an amount of floor area in
square feet of residential space that is equal to or greater than the floor
area of the childcare facility.
      (2)   An additional incentive that contributes significantly to the
economic feasibility of the construction of the childcare facility.
   (B)   Requirements to qualify for additional bonuses and incentives.
      (1)   The city shall require, as a condition of approving the housing
development, that:
         (a)   The childcare facility shall remain in operation for a period of
time that is as long as or longer than the period of time during which the
density bonus units are required to remain affordable in compliance with Cal.
Gov't Code § 65915 as amended.
         (b)   Of the children who attend the childcare facility, the children
of very low-income households, lower-income households, or families of moderate
income shall equal a percentage that is equal to or greater than the percentage
of dwelling units that are required for very low-income households, lower-
income households, or families of moderate income in compliance with §
10.82.020(A) Resident requirements, above.
      (2)   The city shall not be required to provide a density bonus for a
childcare facility in compliance with this section if it finds, based on
substantial evidence, that the community has adequate childcare facilities.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.82.070 Continued availability.
   The units that qualified the housing development for a density bonus and
other incentives and concessions shall continue to be available as affordable
units in accordance with the requirements, of Cal. Gov't Code § 65915 as
amended.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.82.080 Location and type of designated units.
   (A)   Location/dispersal of units. Designated units shall be reasonably
dispersed throughout the project where feasible, shall contain on average the
same number of bedrooms as the non-designated units in the project, and shall
be compatible with the design or use of remaining units in terms of appearance,
materials, and finish quality.
   (B)   Phasing. If a project is to be phased, the density bonus units shall
be phased in the same proportion as the non-density bonus units, or phased in
another sequence acceptable to the city.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.82.090 Density bonus agreement.
   (A)   Agreement required. An applicant requesting a density bonus shall
agree to enter into a density bonus agreement (referred to as the "agreement")
with the city in the city's standard form of agreement. The applicant shall
prepare the draft agreement for submission to the city for review.
   (B)   Agreement provisions.
      (1)   Project information. The agreement shall include at least the
following information about the project:
         (a)   The total number of units approved for the housing development,
including the number of designated dwelling units.
         (b)   A description of the household income group to be accommodated
by the housing development, and the standards and methodology for determining
the corresponding affordable rent or affordable sales price and housing cost
consistent with HUD guidelines.
         (c)   The marketing plan for the affordable units.
         (d)   The location, unit sizes (square feet), and number of bedrooms
of the designated dwelling units.
         (e)   Tenure of the use restrictions for designated dwelling units of
the time periods required by §
10.82.070 Continued availability.
         (f)   A schedule for completion and occupancy of the designated
dwelling units.
         (g)   A description of the additional incentives and concessions being
provided by the city.
         (h)   A description of the remedies for breach of the agreement by the
owners, developers, and/or successors-in-interest of the project.
         (i)   Other provisions to ensure successful implementation and
compliance with this chapter.
      (2)   Minimum requirements. The agreement shall provide, at minimum,
that:
         (a)   The developer shall give the city the continuing right of first
refusal to lease or purchase any or all of the designated dwelling units at the
appraised value.
         (b)   The deeds to the designated dwelling units shall contain a
covenant stating that the developer or successors-in-interest shall not assign,
lease, rent, sell, sublet, or otherwise transfer any interests for designated
units without the written approval of the city.
         (c)   When providing the written approval, the city shall confirm that
the price (rent or sale) of the designated dwelling unit is consistent with the
limits established for low and very low-income households, as published by HUD.
         (d)   The city shall have the authority to enter into other agreements
with the developer, or purchasers of the designated dwelling units, to ensure
that the required dwelling units are continuously occupied by eligible
households.
         (e)   Applicable deed restrictions, in a form satisfactory to the City
Council, shall contain provisions for the enforcement of owner or developer
compliance. Any default or failure to comply may result in foreclosure,
specific performance, or withdrawal of the certificate of occupancy.
         (f)   In any action taken to enforce compliance with the deed
restrictions, the City Attorney shall, if compliance is ordered by a court of
competent jurisdiction, take all action that may be allowed by law to recover
all of the city's costs of action including legal services.
         (g)   Compliance with the agreement will be monitored and enforced in
compliance with the measures included in the agreement.
      (3)   For-sale housing conditions. In the case of a for-sale housing
development, the agreement shall provide for the following conditions governing
the initial sale and use of designated dwelling units during the applicable
restriction period:
         (a)   Designated dwelling units shall be owner-occupied by eligible
households, or by qualified residents in the case of senior housing.
         (b)   The initial purchaser of each designated dwelling unit shall
execute an instrument or agreement approved by the city which:
            1.   Restricts the sale of the unit in compliance with this
chapter, or other applicable city policy or ordinance, during the applicable
use restriction period.
            2.   Contains provisions that the city may require to ensure
continued compliance with this chapter and state law.
            3.   Shall be recorded against the parcel containing the designated
dwelling unit.
      (4)   Rental housing conditions. In the case of a rental housing
development, the agreement shall provide for the following conditions governing
the use of designated dwelling units during the applicable restriction period:
         (a)   The rules and procedures for qualifying tenants, establishing
affordable rent, filling vacancies, and maintaining the designated dwelling
units for qualified tenants.
         (b)   Provisions requiring owners to annually verify tenant incomes
and maintain books and records to demonstrate compliance with this chapter.
         (c)   Provisions requiring owners to submit an annual report to the
city, which includes the name, address, and income of each person occupying the
designated dwelling units, and which identifies the bedroom size and monthly
rent or cost of each unit.
         (d)   The applicable use restriction period shall comply with the time
limits for continued availability in §
10.82.070 Continued availability, above.
   (C)   Execution of agreement.
      (1)   Following approval of the agreement, and execution of the agreement
by all parties, the city shall record the completed agreement on the parcels
designated for the construction of designated dwelling units, at the County
Recorder's Office.
      (2)   The approval and recordation shall take place at the same time as
the final map or, where a map is not being processed, before issuance of
building permits for the designated dwelling units.
      (3)   The agreement shall be binding on all future owners, developers,
and/or successors-in- interest.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.82.100 Control of resale.
   In order to maintain the availability of for-sale affordable housing units
constructed in compliance with this chapter, the following resale conditions
shall apply.
   (A)   Limits on resale price. The price received by the seller of an
affordable unit shall be limited to the purchase price plus an increase based
on the local consumer price index, an amount consistent with the increase in
the median income since the date of purchase, or the fair market value,
whichever is less. Before offering an affordable housing unit for sale, the
seller shall provide written notice to the city of their intent to sell. The
notice shall be provided by certified mail to the Director.
   (B)   Units to be offered to the city. Homeownership affordable units
constructed, offered for sale, or sold under the requirements of this section
shall be offered to the city or its assignee for a period of at least 90 days
from the date of the notice of intent to sell is delivered to the city by the
first purchaser or subsequent purchasers. Homeownership affordable units shall
be sold and resold from the date of the original sale only to households as
determined to be eligible for affordable units by the city in compliance with
this section. The seller shall not levy or charge any additional fees nor shall
any "finder's fee" or other monetary consideration be allowed other than
customary real estate commissions and closing costs.
   (C)   Declaration of restrictions. The owners of any affordable unit shall
attach and legally reference in the grant deed conveying the title of the
affordable ownership unit a declaration of restrictions provided by the city,
stating the restrictions imposed in compliance with this section. The grant
deed shall afford the grantor and the city the right to enforce the declaration
of restrictions. The declaration of restrictions shall include all applicable
resale controls, occupancy restrictions, and prohibitions required by this
section.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.82.110 Judicial relief, waiver of standards.
   (A)   Judicial relief. As provided by Cal. Gov't Code § 65915(d)(3), the
applicant may initiate judicial proceedings if the city refuses to grant a
requested density bonus, incentive, or concession.
   (B)   Waiver of standards preventing the use of bonuses, incentives, or
concessions.
      (1)   As required by Cal. Gov't Code § 65915(e), the city shall not apply
a development standard that will have the effect of precluding the
construction of a development meeting the criteria of §
10.82.020(A) Resident requirements, above, at the densities or with the
concessions or incentives allowed by this chapter.
      (2)   An applicant may submit to the city a proposal for the waiver or
reduction of development and zoning standards that would otherwise inhibit the
utilization of a density bonus on a specific site, including minimum parcel
size, side setbacks, and placement of public works improvements.
      (3)   The applicant shall show that the waiver or modification is
necessary to make the housing units economically feasible.
   (C)   City exemption. Notwithstanding the provisions of divisions (A) and
(B), above, nothing in this section shall be interpreted to require the city
to:
      (1)   Grant a density bonus, incentive, or concession, or waive or reduce
development standards, if the bonus, incentive, concession, waiver, or
reduction would have a specific, adverse impact, as defined in Cal. Gov't Code
§ 65589.5(d)(2), upon health, safety, or the physical environment, and for
which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the
specific adverse impact.
      (2)   Grant a density bonus, incentive, or concession, or waive or reduce
development standards, if the bonus, incentive, concession, waiver, or
reduction would have an adverse impact on any real property that is listed in
the California Register of Historical Resources.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.84: VARIANCES AND MINOR DEVIATIONS
Section
   
10.84.010   Purpose.
   
10.84.020   Prohibited variances or minor deviations.
   
10.84.030   Application procedure.
   
10.84.040   Minor deviation findings.
   
10.84.050   Variance findings.
   
10.84.060   Notice of decision.
   
10.84.070   Appeals.
   
10.84.080   Life of permits and extensions of time.
   
10.84.090   Revocation.
§ 10.84.010 Purpose.
   This section allows variances and minor deviations from the development
standards of this title when, because of special circumstances applicable to
the property, including location, shape, size, surroundings, topography, or
other physical conditions, the strict application of the standards denies the
property owner privileges enjoyed by other property owners in the vicinity and
in the same zoning district.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.84.020 Prohibited variances or minor deviations.
   A variance or minor deviation may be granted to waive or modify any
development standard of this title except to:
   (A)   Allow a land use not otherwise allowed in the zone district.
   (B)   Increase the maximum allowed residential density.
   (C)   Waive a specifically identified prohibition.
   (D)   Waive or modify a procedural requirement.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.84.030 Application procedure.
   Applications for a variance or minor deviation shall be filed and processed
pursuant to the applicable sections of
Chapter 10.70.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.84.040 Minor deviation findings.
   (A)   Before a minor deviation may be approved, all the following findings
shall be made by the reviewing authority identified in
Chapter 10.70:
      (1)   The minor deviation is for the adjustment of a measurable
development standard.
      (2)   The minor deviation would allow an adjustment to a measurable
development standard of not more than 10%.
      (3)   The minor deviation is consistent with the purposes of this title.
      (4)   The minor deviation will be consistent with the General Plan.
   (B)   A minor deviation may be denied if the reviewing authority finds one
or more of the findings in this section cannot be made.
   (C)   Any application for a minor deviation that is denied may be reapplied
for as a variance.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.84.050 Variance findings.
   (A)   Before a variance may be approved, all the following findings shall be
made by the reviewing authority identified in
Chapter 10.70:
      (1)   There are special circumstances applicable to the property,
including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings, are such that the
strict application deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other
properties in the vicinity that are in the same zone district.
      (2)   The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a
substantial property right possessed by other property in the vicinity and that
is in the same zone district and denied to the property for which the variance
is sought.
      (3)   The variance will not be materially detrimental to the public
health, safety, or welfare, or injurious to the property or improvements in the
vicinity and that are in the same zone district in which the property is
located.
      (4)   The variance does not constitute a special privilege inconsistent
with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and that are in the
same land use district in which such property is located.
      (5)   The variance does not allow a use or activity that is prohibited in
the zone district where the property is located.
      (6)   The variance is consistent with the purposes of the zoning
ordinance.
      (7)   The variance will be consistent with the General Plan.
   (B)   The Commission can approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
variance based on the findings listed above. A variance may be denied if the
reviewing authority finds one or more of the findings in this section cannot be
made.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.84.060 Notice of decision.
   A notice of decision of a variance or minor deviation shall be processed
consistent with
Chapter 10.70.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.84.070 Appeals.
   (A)   Appeals to a decision of the reviewing authority of a variance or
minor deviation shall be submitted and processed consistent with the procedures
in
Chapter 10.70.
   (B)   When a minor deviation is appealed, the variance findings in §
10.84.050 shall apply to the appeal of the minor deviation.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.84.080 Life of permits and extensions of time.
   The initial life and subsequent extensions of time for a variance or minor
deviation shall be per
Chapter 10.70, except that when any variance that is approved in conjunction
with a tentative subdivision map or parcel map pursuant to
Chapter 8.24, the variance or minor deviation shall not expire unless the
tentative subdivision map or parcel map also expires, and an extension of the
tentative subdivision map or parcel shall be deemed to be an extension of the
variance or minor deviation.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.84.090 Revocation.
   Revocation of an approved variance or minor deviation shall be conducted
consistent with procedures and notice requirements in
Chapter 10.70.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.86: ZONING ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS
Section
   
10.86.010   Purpose.
   
10.86.020   Application procedure.
   
10.86.030   Findings.
   
10.86.040   Notice of decision.
   
10.86.050   Appeals.
   
10.86.060   Life of permits and extensions of time.
   
10.86.070   Revocation.
   
10.86.080   Urgency zoning ordinance amendments.
   
10.86.090   Pre-zoning.
§ 10.86.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this section is to provide a uniform procedure for amending
the text of this title or the boundaries of the Zoning Map prescribed in this
title. This title may be amended by changing the boundaries of districts or by
changing any other provision thereof whenever the public necessity and
convenience and the general welfare require such amendment by following the
procedure set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.86.020 Application procedure.
   (A)   Applications for amendment to this title shall be filed and processed
pursuant to the applicable sections of
Chapter 10.70.
   (B)   An amendment or change to the boundaries of a zone district on the
Zoning Map (zone change) may only be filed by a property owner or authorized
agent of land that is affected by the proposed amendment, or by the Director,
City Council, or Planning Commission. If the subject property for which the
amendment is proposed involves more than one property owner, all property
owners or their authorized agents shall file the application.
   (C)   An amendment or change to the text of this title (text amendment) may
only be initiated by the Director, City Council, or the Planning Commission.
The Planning Commission may initiate such an amendment or change upon a written
request to the Director with application fee by an interested person.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.86.030 Findings.
   (A)   Before a zone change or text amendment may be approved, all the
following findings shall be made by the reviewing authority identified in
Chapter 10.70:
      (1)   The amendment is internally consistent with the goals, objectives,
and policies of the General Plan and this title.
      (2)   The amendment would not be detrimental to the public interest,
health, safety, convenience, or welfare of the community.
      (3)   The amendment would maintain the appropriate balance of land uses
within the city.
      (4)   The anticipated land uses on the subject site would be compatible
with existing and future surrounding uses.
      (5)   The proposed amendment will not have a significant impact on the
environment.
   (B)   A zone change or text amendment may be denied if the reviewing
authority finds one or more of the findings in this section cannot be made.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.86.040 Notice of decision.
   A notice of decision of a zone change or text amendment shall be processed
consistent with
Chapter 10.70.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.86.050 Appeals.
   The decision of the City Council regarding a zone change or text amendment
is final.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.86.060 Life of permits and extensions of time.
   A zone change or text amendment is final upon its effective date and does
not expire.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.86.070 Revocation.
   A zone change or text amendment may not be revoked, except by filing a new
application in accordance with
Chapter 10.70.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.86.080 Urgency zoning ordinance amendments.
   To protect the public interest, health, safety, convenience or welfare, the
City Council may adopt an urgency zoning ordinance amendment limiting the use
of property that may be in conflict with a general plan, specific plan or
zoning amendment that is being contemplated by the Planning Commission or City
Council. The following regulations shall govern the procedures for an urgent
zoning ordinance amendment.
   (A)   Adoption of an urgency zoning ordinance amendment shall require a
four-fifths vote of the City Council.
   (B)   The urgency ordinance shall not be binding 45 days from its adoption
except under the following conditions.
      (1)   Subject to a public hearing, the City Council may extend the
urgency ordinance amendment for ten months and 15 days.
      (2)   An urgency ordinance amendment may be extended for an additional
year, subject to a four-fifths vote by the City Council.
      (3)   Ten days prior to the expiration or extension of an urgency
ordinance, the City Council shall issue a written report describing the
measures being taken to alleviate the condition that led to the adoption of the
urgency ordinance.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.86.090 Pre-zoning.
   The city may pre-zone unincorporated territory to delineate the zoning of
the subject territory in the event of annexation to the city. The procedure for
pre-zoning shall be consistent with the requirements outlined in this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.88: GENERAL PLAN AND SPECIFIC PLAN AMENDMENTS
Section
   
10.88.010   Purpose.
   
10.88.020   Application process.
   
10.88.030   Findings.
   
10.88.040   Notice of decision.
   
10.88.050   Appeals.
   
10.88.060   Life of permits and extensions of time.
   
10.88.070   Revocation.
§ 10.88.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of a general plan amendment is to allow for modifications to the
Tulare General Plan text (e.g., goals, policies, or implementation programs),
the General Plan Land Use Map, the General Plan Circulation Map, or other
elements of the Tulare General Plan. The purpose of a specific plan amendment
is to adopt a new or modify an existing, approved specific plan.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.88.020 Application process.
   (A)   Applications for a general plan or specific plan amendment shall be
filed and processed pursuant to the applicable sections of
Chapter 10.70.
   (B)   A general plan amendment affecting the General Plan Land Use Map or
other map in the General Plan may be filed by a property owner or authorized
agent of land that is affected by the proposed amendment.
   (C)   A specific plan amendment may be filed by a property owner or
authorized agent of land that is affected by the proposed amendment.
   (D)   A general plan or specific plan amendment may be initiated by the City
Council or the Planning Commission. Either authority may initiate such an
amendment upon a written request by the Director or upon a written request with
application fee by an interested person.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.88.030 Findings.
   (A)   Before a general plan or specific plan amendment may be approved, all
the following findings shall be made by the reviewing authority identified in
Chapter 10.70:
      (1)   The amendment is internally consistent with the goals, objectives,
and policies of the General Plan and this title.
      (2)   The amendment would not be detrimental to the public health,
safety, or welfare of the community.
      (3)   The amendment would maintain the appropriate balance of land uses
within the city.
      (4)   The anticipated land uses on the subject site would be compatible
with existing and future surrounding uses.
   (B)   A general plan or specific plan amendment may be denied if the
reviewing authority finds one or more of the findings in this section cannot be
made.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.88.040 Notice of decision.
   A notice of decision of a general plan or specific plan amendment shall be
processed consistent with
Chapter 10.70.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.88.050 Appeals.
   The decision of the City Council regarding a general plan or specific plan
amendment is final.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.88.060 Life of permits and extensions of time.
   A general plan or specific plan amendment is final upon its effective date
and does not expire.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.88.070 Revocation.
   A general plan or specific plan amendment may not be revoked, except by
filing a new application in accordance with
Chapter 10.70.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.89: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
Section
   
10.89.010   Purpose.
   
10.89.020   Objective.
   
10.89.030   Definitions.
   
10.89.040   Development agreement requirements.
   
10.89.050   Development agreement contents.
   
10.89.060   Application.
   
10.89.070   Hearings and notice.
   
10.89.080   Report and findings.
   
10.89.090   Action of City Council.
   
10.89.100   Initiation of amendment or cancellation.
   
10.89.110   Recordation of development agreement.
   
10.89.120   Review of development agreement.
§ 10.89.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide a mechanism that assures the
applicant of a development project that upon approval, the applicant may
proceed with the project in accordance with existing policies, rules,
regulations, and conditions that were applicable at the time of project
approval, and in a manner consistent with Cal. Gov't Code §§ 65864 et seq.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.89.020 Objective.
   The objective of a development agreement is to strengthen the public
planning process, encourage private participation in comprehensive planning,
reduce the economic costs of development, and promote the construction of
public improvements by the private sector by providing for provisions in the
agreement whereby the applicant is reimbursed over time for the financing of
the public improvements.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.89.030 Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT. A contract duly executed and legally binding between
the City of Tulare and a developer(s) that delineates the terms and conditions
agreed upon by two or more parties.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.89.040 Development agreement requirements.
   To enter into a development agreement, the city shall find that:
   (A)   A person has a legal or equitable interest in real property for the
development of such property.
   (B)   The development project is consistent with the Tulare General Plan and
any applicable specific plan.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.89.050 Development agreement contents.
   A development agreement shall specify the duration of the agreement, the
permitted uses of the property, the density or intensity of use, the maximum
height and size of proposed buildings, and provisions for reservation or
dedication of land or facilities for public purposes. The development agreement
may include conditions, terms, restrictions, and requirements for subsequent
discretionary actions, provided that such conditions, terms, restrictions, and
requirements shall not prevent development of the land for uses and to the
density or intensity of development set forth in the agreement. The agreement
may require that construction shall be commenced within a specified time and
that the project or any phase thereof be completed within a specified time.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.89.060 Application.
   An application for a development agreement shall be made to the Community
Development Department on a form prescribed by the Department. The application
shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.89.070 Hearings and notice.
   Upon receipt of a development agreement application, the Community
Development Department shall prepare a notice for a public hearing consistent
with the requirements contained in
Chapter 10.16, Public Hearings.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.89.080 Report and findings.
   The Community Development Department shall prepare a report on the
development agreement application. The Department shall provide a
recommendation to the City Council based on the following findings:
   (A)   Is the project consistent with the Tulare General Plan and any
applicable specific plan?
   (B)   Is the project authorized by the title as it relates to use and
development standard regulations?
   (C)   Will the project be detrimental to the public health, safety, and
general welfare?
   (D)   Will the project provide sufficient benefit to the city to justify
entering into the development agreement?
   (E)   Will the project have a significant impact on the environment?
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.89.090 Action of City Council.
   (A)   The City Council shall take action on the development agreement. The
Council can approve, approve with modifications, or deny the development
agreement. Subsequent to a decision by the City Council, one of the following
actions shall be initiated.
   (B)   If the Council approves or approves with modification the development
agreement, it shall initiate proceedings to adopt an ordinance. After the
ordinance takes effect, the city may enter into the agreement with the
applicant.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.89.100 Initiation of amendment or cancellation.
   Either party may propose an amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part
of the development agreement previously entered into. If proposed by the
applicant the procedure shall be the same as the procedure for entering into an
agreement. However, where the City Council initiates the proposed amendment to
or cancellation of the development agreement, it shall first give at least 30
days' notice to the applicant of its intention to initiate such proceedings in
advance of giving notice of the public hearing.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.89.110 Recordation of development agreement.
   (A)   Within ten days after the city enters into the development agreement,
the city shall have the agreement recorded with the County Recorder.
   (B)   If the parties to the agreement or their successors in interest amend
or cancel the agreement, or if the city terminates or modifies the agreement
for failure of the applicant to comply in good faith with the terms or
conditions of the agreement, the city shall have notice of such action recorded
with the County Recorder.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.89.120 Review of development agreement.
   (A)   The Community Development Department shall review the development
agreement at least once every 12 months from the date the agreement is entered
into. The Community Development Department shall report the findings to the
City Council. The time for review may be modified by agreement between the
parties.
   (B)   Should the Community Development Director find that the developer is
in non-compliance or not performing consistently with the development
agreement, the Director shall report this finding to the City Council. The City
Council may terminate the development agreement consistent with §
10.89.100 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.90: NON-CONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES, AND LOTS
Section
   
10.90.010   Purpose.
   
10.90.020   Applicability.
   
10.90.030   Non-conforming uses.
   
10.90.040   Non-conforming structures.
   
10.90.050   Non-conforming lots.
   
10.90.060   Removal of certain non-conforming uses and structures.
   
10.90.070   Effect of eminent domain.
   
10.90.080   Exceptions.
§ 10.90.010 Purpose.
   Within the zones established by this title, there exist uses, structures,
and lots that were lawful before this title was adopted or amended, but which
would now be prohibited under the terms of this title or its future amendments.
It is the intent of this title to permit these non-conforming uses to continue
until they are terminated, but not to encourage their expansion, and to provide
for the modification or removal of these non-conforming uses and structures in
an equitable, legally defensible, and timely manner. To avoid undue hardship,
nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the plans,
construction, or designated use of any building where a building permit has
been issued prior to the effective date of this title, provided such permit is
diligently carried to completion.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.90.020 Applicability.
   This chapter applies to uses, structures, and lots that were lawful when
they were commenced, constructed, or created, but that do not comply with one
or more applicable provisions of this title. This Chapter does not apply to
non-conforming signs, which are instead subject to the requirements of
Chapter 10.56.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.90.030 Non-conforming uses.
   The regulations that apply to non-conforming uses in Tulare, including
provisions that pertain to maintenance, repair, alterations, change in
ownership, and termination, are as follows:
   (A)   Change of ownership, tenancy, or management of a non-conforming use
shall not affect its legal, non-conforming status. A non-conforming use may be
maintained or repaired except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no structure that
contains a non-conforming use, shall be moved, altered, or enlarged unless
required by law or the non-conforming use is eliminated.
   (C)   If a non-conforming use is abandoned, discontinued, or changed to a
conforming use for a continuous period of six months, the use shall lose its
legal, non-conforming status and shall be required to conform to the use and
development standard regulations of this title.
   (D)   Whenever a structure, which contains a non-conforming use, is damaged
by fire, flood or other calamity, and the extent of the damage is 50% or less
of the floor area of the structure or 50% or less of the replacement value of
the structure, as determined by the Building Official, the structure may be
restored and the non-conforming use may be resumed, provided that the
restoration is started within six months and is completed within 18 months.
   (E)   Whenever a structure, which contains a non-conforming use, is damaged
by fire, flood, or other calamity, and the extent of the damage is more than
50% of the floor area of the structure or 50% or more of the replacement value
of the structure, as determined by the Building Official, the structure shall
not be restored unless in conformity with the use and development standard
regulations of this title.
   (F)   An agricultural crop production use that is non-conforming due to
annexation, adoption, or amendment to this title shall be allowed to continue,
provided that the intensity of the agricultural crop production use shall not
increase.
   (G)   A non-conforming residential use that is located in a commercial or
industrial zone district may be altered or enlarged; provided that a
conditional use permit is secured.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.90.040 Non-conforming structures.
   The regulations that apply to non-conforming structures in Tulare, including
provisions that pertain to maintenance, repair, alterations, change in
ownership, and damage, are as follows:
   (A)   Change of ownership, tenancy, or management of a non-conforming
structure shall not affect its legal, non-conforming status. A non-conforming
use may be maintained or repaired except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
   (B)   A non-conforming structure shall not be moved, altered, or enlarged
unless required by law or unless the moving, alteration, or enlargement will
result in the elimination of the non-conforming status of the structure.
   (C)   Whenever a structure is damaged by fire, flood, or another calamity,
and the extent of the damage is 50% or less of the floor area of the structure
or 50% or less of the replacement value of the structure, as determined by the
Building Official, the structure may be restored and the non-conforming use may
be resumed, provided that the restoration is started within six months and is
completed within 18 months.
   (D)   Whenever a structure is damaged by fire, flood, or other calamity, and
the extent of the damage is more than 50% of the floor area of the structure or
50% or more of the replacement value of the structure, as determined by the
Building Official, the structure shall not be restored unless in conformity
with the use and development standard regulations of this title.
   (E)   A non-conforming residential structure may be moved, altered, or
enlarged; provided, that the alteration or enlargement is consistent with the
development standards of the zone district in which the structure is located.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.90.050 Non-conforming lots.
   (A)   A lot shall be deemed non-conforming if it was legally created in
accordance with the State Subdivision Map Act prior to the adoption or
amendment of this title, but which, does not meet all the provisions,
standards, and requirements of this title applicable to lots.
   (B)   A non-conforming lot shall not be subdivided, nor its lot lines
adjusted, unless the subdivision or lot line adjustment brings the lot into
conformance with the provisions, standards, and requirements of this title
applicable to lots or reduces the difference between actual conditions and
required standards while not creating a new non-conforming use or structure.
   (C)   A non-conforming lot may be used for any use allowed in the zone
district in which it is located.
   (D)   A structure conforming to the provisions of this title may be
constructed on a non-conforming lot.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.90.060 Removal of certain non-conforming uses and structures.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a violation, the following shall be removed within 30
days, unless an alternative deadline is specified in the violation notice.
   (B)   A non-conforming use that does not occupy a structure or is using a
structure having an assessed valuation of less than $1,000 shall be
discontinued and completely removed or converted to a conforming status.
   (C)   Whenever a structure has an assessed value of less than $500 and does
not comply with the development standards of coverage, front yard, side yard,
rear yard, height of structures, or distances between structures, for the
district in which the structure is located, the structure shall be removed from
its site within five years from the effective date of this title.
   (D)   Existing fences, walls, and hedges that do not conform to the
provisions of this title governing the placement of fences, walls, and hedges
in relation to street intersections or encroachment into the public right-of-
way, shall be removed or modified to conform to the provisions of this title.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.90.070 Effect of eminent domain.
   (A)   If the area of the lot is reduced by eminent domain, the provisions
for non-conforming lots and structures shall apply, but the provisions for non-
conforming uses shall not apply.
   (B)   If a required yard or setback area is reduced or eliminated by eminent
domain, any affected building or structure shall be deemed non-conforming;
provided, however, such building or structure may be structurally altered so
long as such alterations comply with all the other requirements of the zoning
district.
   (C)   If any required parking space on a lot is reduced or eliminated by
eminent domain, the use shall not be deemed non-conforming solely because of
the lack of required parking spaces.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.90.080 Exceptions.
   Nothing in this title pertaining to non-conforming structures and uses shall
be construed or applied so as to require the termination or discontinuance or
removal, or to prevent the expansion, modernization, replacement, repair,
maintenance, alteration, reconstruction, or rebuilding, and continued use of
any electric distribution substation, electric transmission line,
communications equipment building, gas regulator station or public utility
pumping station; provided that there be no change of use or enlargement of
those areas so used.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.92: REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION
Section
   
10.92.010   Purpose.
   
10.92.020   Definitions.
   
10.92.030   Reasonable accommodation request.
   
10.92.040   Notice to the public of availability of accommodation process.
   
10.92.050   Requesting reasonable accommodation.
   
10.92.060   Medical information.
   
10.92.070   Application requirements.
   
10.92.080   Jurisdiction.
   
10.92.090   Findings for reasonable accommodation.
   
10.92.100   Appeals.
   
10.92.110   Fee.
   
10.92.120   Stay of enforcement.
§ 10.92.010 Purpose.
   In order to make specific housing available to one or more individuals with
disabilities, this chapter implements the policy of the city on requests for
reasonable accommodation in its rules, policies, and procedures for persons
with disabilities as required by the Fair Housing Act, as amended, 42 U.S.C. §
3604(f)(3)(B). The policy of the city is to comply fully with the provisions of
the Fair Housing Act.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.92.020 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise defined, the following
words and phrases when used in this chapter are defined as follows.
   APPLICANT. Any person with disabilities or their representative who is
requesting a reasonable accommodation pursuant to this chapter.
   DEPARTMENT. The Community Development Department of the City of Tulare.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as,
or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families,
and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or
location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof.
   FAIR HOUSING ACT. The Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, as
amended.
   PERSON WITH DISABILITIES. Any person who, as defined by applicable federal
law, has a physical or mental impairment that limits one or more major life
activities or anyone who is regarded as having such impairment; or anyone who
has a record of such impairment.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.92.030 Reasonable accommodation request.
   (A)   Any person with disabilities and eligible under the Fair Housing Act
or their representative may request a reasonable accommodation with respect to
the various land use or zoning laws, rules, policies, practices, and/or
procedures of the city as provided by the Fair Housing Act pursuant to the
procedures set out in this chapter.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter requires persons with disabilities or
operators of group homes for persons with disabilities acting or operating in
accordance with applicable zoning, licensing, or land use laws or practices to
seek reasonable accommodation under this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.92.040 Notice to the public of availability of accommodation process.
   The Department shall prominently display a notice at the counter in the
Community Development Department and Finance Department advising that persons
with disabilities or their representatives may request a reasonable
accommodation in accordance with the procedures established in this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.92.050 Requesting reasonable accommodation.
   (A)   A request by an applicant for reasonable accommodation relating to
land use or zoning rules, policies, practices, and/or procedures may be made
orally or in writing. The Department will assist the applicant with furnishing
the Department all information necessary for processing the reasonable
accommodation request, including that information which the Department deems
necessary to complete a reasonable accommodation request.
   (B)   The Department will provide the assistance necessary to an applicant
in making a request for reasonable accommodation. The Department will provide
the assistance necessary to any applicant wishing to appeal a denial of a
request for reasonable accommodation to ensure the process is accessible to the
applicant. The applicant is entitled to be represented at all stages of the
proceedings identified in this chapter by a person designated by the applicant.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.92.060 Medical information.
   (A)   Should the information provided by the applicant to the Department
include medical information or records of the applicant, including records
indicating the medical condition, diagnosis, or medical history of the
applicant, the applicant may, at the time of submitting such medical
information, request that the Department, to the extent allowed by law, treat
such medical information as confidential information of the applicant.
   (B)   Medical information. The Department shall provide written notice to
the applicant of any request received by the Department for disclosure of the
medical information or documentation that the applicant has previously
requested to be treated as confidential by the Department. The Department will
cooperate with the applicant, to the extent allowed by law, in actions
initiated by the applicant to oppose the disclosure of such medical information
or documentation.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.92.070 Application requirements.
   (A)   The applicant shall submit a request for reasonable accommodation in a
form acceptable to the Department. The application shall include the following
information:
      (1)   The applicant's name, address, and telephone number.
      (2)   The address of the property for which the request is being made.
      (3)   The name and address of the property owner, and the owner's written
consent to the application.
      (4)   The current actual use of the property.
      (5)   The basis for the claim that the individual is considered disabled
under the fair housing laws: identification and description of the disability
which is the basis for the request for accommodation, including current,
written medical certification and description of disability and its effects on
the person's medical, physical or mental limitations.
      (6)   The rule, policy, practice, and/or procedure of the city for which
the request for accommodation is being made, including the zoning code
regulation from which reasonable accommodation is being requested.
      (7)   The type of accommodation sought.
      (8)   The reason(s) why the accommodation is reasonable and necessary for
the needs of the disabled person(s). Where appropriate, include a summary of
any potential means and alternatives considered in evaluating the need for the
accommodation.
      (9)   Copies of memoranda, correspondence, pictures, plans, or other
background information reasonably necessary to reach a decision regarding the
need for the accommodation.
   (B)   If the project for which the reasonable accommodation is being
requested also requires some other discretionary permit per this title or
Chapter 8.24 (Subdivisions), then the reasonable accommodation request shall be
acted on before proceeding with the public hearing for the discretionary permit
applications.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.92.080 Jurisdiction.
   (A)   The Director shall have the authority to consider and act on requests
for reasonable accommodation. When a request for reasonable accommodation is
filed with the Department, it will be referred to the director/designee for
review and consideration. The Director shall issue a written determination
within 30 days of the date of receipt of a completed application and may (1)
grant the accommodation request; or (2) deny the request, in accordance with
federal law. Any such denial shall be in writing and shall state the grounds
for denial. All written determinations shall give notice of the right to appeal
and the right to request reasonable accommodation in the appeals process. The
notice of determination shall be sent to the applicant by certified mail,
return receipt requested, and by regular mail.
   (B)   Requests for additional information. If reasonably necessary to reach
a determination on the request for reasonable accommodation, the director/
designee may, prior to the end of said 30-day period, request additional
information from the applicant, specifying in detail what information is
required. The applicant shall have 15 days after the date of the request for
additional information to provide the requested information. In the event a
request for additional information is made, the 30-day period to issue a
written determination shall be stayed. The Director shall issue a written
determination within 30 days after receipt of the additional information. If
the applicant fails to provide the requested additional information within said
15-day period, the Director shall issue a written determination within 30 days
after the expiration of said 15-day period.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.92.090 Findings for reasonable accommodation.
   (A)   A determination on the following findings shall be made before any
action is taken to approve or deny a request for reasonable accommodation and
must be incorporated into the record relating to such approval or denial:
      (1)   Whether the housing that is the subject of the request for
reasonable accommodation will be used by one or more persons with disabilities
protected under federal fair housing laws.
      (2)   Whether the accommodation requested may be necessary to afford one
or more persons with disabilities equal opportunity to use and enjoy a specific
dwelling.
      (3)   Whether the requested accommodation would require a fundamental
alteration to the city's zoning scheme.
      (4)   Whether the requested accommodation would impose undue financial or
administrative burdens on the city.
   (B)   A request for a reasonable accommodation shall not be denied for
reasons that violate the provisions of the Fair Housing Act. This ordinance
does not obligate the city to grant any accommodation request unless required
by the provisions of the Fair Housing Act or applicable California State law.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.92.100 Appeals.
   (A)   The applicant may appeal the decision within 30 days of the date of
the mailing of the decision to the applicant.
   (B)   Appeals shall contain a statement of the grounds for the appeal.
   (C)   If an applicant needs assistance in appealing a decision, the
department will provide the assistance necessary to ensure that the appeal
process is accessible to the applicant. All applicants are entitled to be
represented at all stages of the appeal proceeding by a person designated by
the applicant.
   (D)   Appeals shall be to the City Council who shall hear the matter and
render a determination as soon as reasonably practicable, but in no event later
than 30 days after an appeal has been filed. All determinations on appeal shall
address and be based upon the findings identified in §
10.92.090 and shall be consistent with the Fair Housing Act.
   (E)   An applicant may request reasonable accommodation in the procedure by
which an appeal will be conducted.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.92.110 Fee.
   There shall be no fee imposed in connection with a request for reasonable
accommodation under the provisions of this chapter or an appeal of the
decision. Nothing in this chapter obligates the city to pay an applicant's
attorney fee.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.92.120 Stay of enforcement.
   While an application for reasonable accommodation or appeal of said
application is pending before the city, the city will not enforce the subject
zoning ordinance against the applicant.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.94: ANNEXATIONS
Section
   
10.94.010   Purpose.
   
10.94.020   General provisions.
   
10.94.030   Applications.
   
10.94.040   Annexation agreements.
   
10.94.050   Proposed zoning.
   
10.94.060   Petitions.
   
10.94.070   Planning Commission duties.
   
10.94.080   City Council duties.
   
10.94.090   Tulare County Local Formation Commission (LAFCO).
   
10.94.100   Taxation authorization.
§ 10.94.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide a process for the annexation of
land into the city limits. The review process is meant to assure orderly growth
and development while weighing the need for services and facilities against the
total financial resources available for securing such services and facilities.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.94.020 General provisions.
   Whether initiated by petition or by resolution for application, the
following general provisions will apply with regard to all proposed or
requested annexation actions:
   (A)   Staff is authorized to take all actions and file any protests or
notices necessary to protect and preserve city rights and opportunities for
further comment or action; whether in connection with LAFCO or any other entity
to the extent the city is an "affected city," as defined in Cal. Gov't Code §
56011 or as amended.
   (B)   The city's adopted General Plan and zoning ordinance reflect the City
Council's statement of the city's intentions with regard to future development
and expansion. City staff is to work with the County of Tulare and LAFCO to
implement the City Council's intent in documents and processes within their
jurisdiction and with regard to all actions to achieve consistency with the
city's adopted General Plan and zoning ordinance, and existing state and
federal law.
   (C)   Complete applications are required and fees must be paid before
processing any annexation request.
   (D)   The city will seek to recover the costs of facilities and system
capacities needed by any annexed properties proposed for annexation in a manner
consistent with the city's connection fee and development impact fee programs.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.94.030 Applications.
   (A)   An application for an annexation shall be initiated with the city by
submission of an application to the Community and Economic Development
Department. The Community and Economic Development Director is directed to
establish appropriate application forms, fee studies, and processes and to
issue administrative guidelines defining a "complete" application and to set
the required number of copies. The application materials shall include, but not
be limited to, the following:
      (1)   A copy of any annexation or pre-annexation agreement between the
party and the city or between the party and the county.
      (2)   Copies of any known studies or reports by any local governmental
agency concerning the condition of the infrastructure and any service
deficiencies within the area proposed for annexation.
      (3)   A statement regarding the nature and extent of existing public
safety and emergency services and an evaluation of additional such services
required with regard to the area proposed to be annexed.
      (4)   A statement of the applicant's plans (if any) for extending,
financing, and providing municipal services within the area to be annexed.
      (5)   A summary identifying all existing special districts within the
area to be annexed.
      (6)   A map of the city and adjacent area showing:
         (a)   Present and proposed boundaries of the city in the vicinity of
the proposed annexation.
         (b)   The present streets, major trunk water lines, sewer interceptors
and outfalls, other utility lines and ditches and the proposed extension of
such streets and utility lines in the vicinity of the proposed annexation.
         (c)   The existing and proposed land use patterns in the areas to be
annexed.
      (7)   A map and legal description of the area proposed to be annexed.
   (B)   The applicant/petitioner shall be responsible for the cost of
preparing all environmental documentation required by the California
Environmental Quality Act associated with the proposed annexation.
   (C)   Only owners of the properties proposed for annexation using the city
resolution process permitted under Cal. Gov't Code § 56654, and registered
electors within the proposed area proposed for annexation (or an organization
lawfully formed by them to represent their interests), may submit an
application.
   (D)   Community and Economic Development Director. The Community and
Economic Development Director shall administer all city processes required by
either the Act or this chapter in cooperation with department heads from other
affected departments. Upon receipt of an application, the Director shall
determine if the application is complete and will notify the applicant within
30 days if the application is deficient in any manner. Deficient applications
will not be processed further until the defects are remedied.
   (E)   In connection with any LAFCO sphere of influence reviews, LAFCO
annexation proceedings, or annexation pre-application (collectively, the
action) processes the Director will perform an evaluation identifying potential
city issues and will make recommendations with regard to such issues. At a
minimum, the following issues will be analyzed:
      (1)   Whether the property meets the statutory requirements for
annexation.
      (2)   Whether the property is within the City of Tulare's sphere of
influence as shown on the last adopted City General Plan.
      (3)   Whether the proposed action is consistent with intergovernmental
agreements where the city is a party.
      (4)   Whether the proposed action creates concerns regarding the city's
finances or ability to provide municipal services (including without limitation
municipal utility services) to the entire city if the proposed action is
approved.
      (5)   Projects that will be required or impacted if the city supports the
proposed action or if it is completed.
      (6)   City policies that will be affected (such as voting districts, by
way of example) if the proposed action is completed.
         (a)   Any other foreseeable consequences about which the Planning
Commission and City Council should be informed.
   (F)   In connection with proposed annexations which include inhabited
territory, at a minimum, the following additional standards will be applied:
      (1)   The Pavement Condition Index (PCI), as applied to city streets
through the city's adopted Transportation System Management Policy will be used
to assess the transportation infrastructure and service needs.
      (2)   The factors specified in Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 33030 and
33031 for determining whether "blight" exists and its degree.
      (3)   Expected specific increases to city general fund and other fund
revenues and other articulable expected city benefits are to equal or exceed
the expected increased city disbursements and expected adverse city impacts.
   (G)   Staff decisions are reviewable by the City Manager. All final
decisions of the City Manager are appealable to the City Council.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.94.040 Annexation agreements.
   The city may require that applicants requesting a resolution for application
from the Council enter into an annexation agreement with the city as a
condition to issuing a resolution of application for a proposed annexation. The
annexation agreement may contain provisions for zoning of the property, the
physical development of the property, the timing of development, the allocation
of the cost of required public improvements and services, and/or other matters
relating to the public interest.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.94.050 Proposed zoning.
   (A)   The proposed zoning for the area to be annexed may be addressed in an
annexation agreement pursuant to §
10.26.040. The annexation agreement may provide for further reorganization to
detach the property if, after annexation, the proposed zoning is materially
different than that specified in the annexation agreement.
   (B)   The city may zone the property either concurrent with the proposed
annexation or within 90 days of recording of the annexation.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.94.060 Petitions.
   (A)   When LAFCO annexation proceedings are initiated by landowner or voter
petitions, the city will fully participate in proceedings in a manner
consistent with the provisions, purposes, and objectives in this chapter. city
staff is directed and authorized to take all actions consistent with these
directions. Such participation will include, without limitation, the following:
      (1)   Seeking LAFCO imposition of terms and conditions on any annexations
to mitigate adverse impacts and to implement the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   If preliminary staff analysis demonstrates the potential for
significant adverse fiscal or other impacts to the city, staff is directed to
take all actions to mitigate such adverse impacts and to fully inform the City
Council regarding such events.
      (3)   Pursue formation of improvement districts and Mello-Roos districts
and other financing tools to address significant blight, infrastructure
deficiencies, and anticipated disproportionately burdensome service costs as
terms and conditions for annexation.
      (4)   Negotiate in good faith with the County of Tulare for a property
tax transfer agreement based on the anticipated financial impacts to the city.
      (5)   Prepare and publish factual information describing likely impacts
to the residents in the proposed annexation area and to the city in connection
with the proposed action. Such information should include, but not be limited
to, any information that might be helpful with the process and in describing
differences between being in the county and being in the city such as the
following: tax differences, land use regulation, code enforcement, and animal
control ordinance standards, potential effects of the city's water and sewer
ordinances, specific city fees, assessments related to indebtedness, procedures
and policies defined by this chapter.
   (B)   Staff will, in all discussions, negotiations, and processes
established by the Act or otherwise, seek to cause an application with all
related fees and costs and deposits to be filed with the city in order to be
able to complete the annexation impact report described in §
10.26.060 above and all city reviews allowed by the Act and provided for in
this code.
   (C)   Regardless of whether that occurs, the city's efforts to obtain fair
share contributions from the other agencies for impact-related costs and LAFCO-
imposed terms and conditions will be the same whether the annexation process is
commenced by a resolution for application of annexation or by landowner/voter
petition directly to LAFCO.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.94.070 Planning Commission duties.
   (A)   Public hearing required. Following acceptance of an application, the
Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing for consideration of the
application with the following minimum requirements:
      (1)   Notice of a hearing shall be given in accordance with
Chapter 10.16 Public Hearings of this code.
      (2)   The Planning Commission shall conduct the public hearing and hear
testimony for and against the application. A public hearing may be continued
without additional public notice.
      (3)   Following the conclusion of the public hearing, the Planning
Commission shall make written recommendations to the City Council to approve,
approve with conditions or modifications, or deny the application as submitted
or in modified form and shall make written findings supporting the reasons for
the recommendation.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.94.080 City Council duties.
   (A)   Public hearing required. After the Planning Commission makes a
recommendation on the application, the City Council shall hold a public hearing
on the application with the following minimum requirements:
      (1)   Notice of a hearing shall be given in accordance with
Chapter 10.16 Public Hearings of this code.
      (2)   The City Council shall conduct the public hearing and hear
testimony for and against the application. A public hearing may be continued
without additional public notice.
      (3)   Following the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Council
shall approve, modify, or reject the Planning Commission's recommendation,
provided that a substantial modification not previously considered by the
Planning Commission shall be referred to the Planning Commission for a written
recommendation prior to consideration of an amendment. Prior to the adoption of
an annexation, the City Council shall make written findings supporting the
reason for the decision. Approval of the annexations shall be by adoption of a
resolution of application.
   (B)   Property tax exchange resolution. If the City Council adopts a
resolution of application in accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code § 56700, the
Council shall also adopt a property tax exchange resolution in accordance with
Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code § 99 establishing the amount of property tax
revenues to be exchanged between and among local agencies whose service area or
service responsibility will be altered by the amount of, and allocation factors
with respect to, property tax revenue estimated from the proposed application.
   (C)   Filing. The City Council shall direct the City Clerk to file a
certified copy of the resolution of application and a copy of the property tax
exchange resolution with the executive officer of the Tulare County Local
Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO).
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.94.090 Tulare County Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO).
   Following approval of the resolution of application by the City Council, the
applicant shall submit an application to the Tulare County LAFCO in order to
initiate annexation proceedings with that agency.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.94.100 Taxation authorization.
   In addition to any and all fees, all property annexed to the city shall be
subjected to taxation equally with property within the city, and to pay and
bonded indebtedness outstanding or authorized on the effective date of the
annexation.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.96: DEFINITION OF LAND USES
Section
   
10.96.010   Purpose.
   
10.96.020   Land use definitions.
§ 10.96.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish definitions for the identified
land uses in this title.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.96.020 Land use definitions.
   The following land use definitions apply to this title. The item number in
parenthesis at the end of the definition is not a part of the definition but
refers to the line item of that land use in Table 10.08.020-1 and Table
10.08.030-1.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE. A structure which is subordinate to and the
use of which is customarily incidental to, that of the main building,
structure, or use on the same site, including patio covers. If any accessory
building is attached to the main building by a common wall or a connecting
roof, such accessory building shall be deemed to be a part of the main
building. This does not include accessory dwelling or junior accessory dwelling
units. (42)
   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU). As set forth in Cal. Gov’t Code § 65852.2 is
a smaller (detached or attached) secondary dwelling unit with complete,
independent living facilities (kitchen and bathroom) that is located on the
same parcel as a primary dwelling unit (existing or proposed). The ADU can be
located within or attached to a single dwelling unit, within a multiple
dwelling unit building, or in a separate detached structure. (30)
   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT, JUNIOR. As set forth in Cal. Gov’t Code § 65852.22,
means a small dwelling unit (500 square feet maximum in size) that is developed
within the walls of a single dwelling unit. The Junior ADU must have a separate
entrance, an efficiency kitchen, and access to a bathroom either within the
Junior ADU or via shared access with the primary dwelling unit. A Junior ADU is
allowed only within the single dwelling unit and is not permitted within an
accessory structure or multiple dwelling unit development. (31)
   ACCESSORY USE. A use incidental, related, appropriate, and clearly
subordinate to the main use of the site or building, and accessory use does not
alter the principal use of the site. (42)
   ADULT DAY HEALTH CARE CENTER. See RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY. (17) (18) (H15)
(H16)
   ADULT DAYCARE. See DAYCARE, ADULT (56) (L10)
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT. Any adult bookstore, adult hotel or
motel, adult motion picture arcade, adult motion picture theater, cabaret,
sexual encounter establishment, adult model studio, or any other business or
establishment that offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized
by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas," but not including those uses or
activities, the regulation of which is preempted by state law. (I1)
   AGRICULTURAL CROP PRODUCTION. The use of land for farming, horticulture,
floriculture, viticulture, apiaries, tree and sod farms, animal and poultry
husbandry, and accessory activities, including, but not limited to, storage,
associated maintenance of equipment, harvesting of crops or feeding of animals
and excluding dairying, stockyards, slaughtering or commercial food processing.
Pursuant to Cal. Health and Safety Code § 10021.6, any employee housing
consisting of no more than 36 beds in group quarters or 12 units or spaces
designed for use by a single family or household shall be deemed an
agricultural land use for zoning purposes. (D1)
   AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS PACKING, PACKAGING, PREPARING OR PROCESSING. A
facility performing any processing or packaging of crops after harvest, whether
or not value is added, to prepare them for market on-site or for further
processing and packaging elsewhere, including but not limited to alfalfa and
hay cubing; corn shelling; drying of corn, rice, hay, fruits or vegetables;
pre-cooling and packaging of fresh or farm-dried fruits and vegetables; grain
cleaning and custom grinding; custom grist mills; custom milling of flour, feed
and grain; sorting, grading and packing of fruits and vegetables; canning,
freezing, or preserving fruits and vegetables; tree nut hulling and shelling;
and alcohol fuel production. Any of the above activities performed in the field
with mobile equipment not involving permanent buildings are included under
AGRICULTURAL CROP PRODUCTION. It includes related accessory uses such as
offices, laboratories, retail sales of agricultural products produced on the
premises or off-site by the operator, retail sales of agriculture-related
promotional and/or educational items, and facility tours. Does not include
WINERIES, COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY, CANNABIS CULTIVATION, or sorting and
packing activities conducted within a permitted roadside stand. (D2)
   AIRPORT OR HELIPORT. An area of land, water, or a structural surface that is
used for the landing and takeoff of airplanes and/or helicopters and any
appurtenant areas or buildings that are used for maintenance, servicing, or
storing of aircraft, and for services provided to pilots or passengers. (K1)
   AMBULANCE SERVICE. The provision by a licensed ambulance provider of ground
transportation of a sick or injured person in a specially designed and equipped
vehicle which includes a trained ambulance attendant who is licensed or
certified as required by state law. (J1)
   ANIMAL RAISING. The care and breeding of domestic agricultural animals such
as chickens and other fowl, horses, goats, or cows. (D3)
   ART SCHOOL. See SCHOOL, CHARTER, TRADE, VOCATIONAL, ART, BUSINESS, or
PROFESSIONAL. (70) (C14)
   ARTISAN FOOD AND BEVERAGE PRODUCTION AND SALES. Small-scale production and/
or preparation of food and/or beverages made on-site with minimal automated
processes involved and may include direct sales to consumers and product
tasting. This definition includes uses such as small- batch food producers and
bakeries, small-batch candy shops, cheese makers, and herbal remedies. The
definition does not include the production of beer, wine, or other alcoholic
beverages. (B1)
   ASSEMBLY FACILITY.
      (1)   Meeting facilities for organizations including facilities for
business associations, civic, social, and fraternal organizations, labor unions
and similar organizations, political organizations, professional membership
organizations, and other membership organizations.
      (2)   Churches and other religious institutions, including living
quarters for ministers and staff, but excluding other establishments maintained
by religious organizations such as educational institutions and daycare, which
are separately regulated.
      (3)   Community centers and other multipurpose meeting and recreational
facilities that include one or more meeting or multipurpose facilities,
kitchens, and outdoor barbecue facilities available for use by various groups
for meetings, parties, receptions, dances, etc. (50) (C1)
   ASSISTED LIVING, SKILLED NURSING, OR HOSPICE FACILITY. A residential complex
providing skilled nursing care on an intermittent, extended, or continuous
basis to residents, with staff  personnel and programs to assist residents with
many activities of daily living. Units may or may not have kitchens, and meals
can also be provided in a central location. (1) (2) (H1)
   ATHLETIC COMPLEX OR BALL FIELD. A field, outdoor court, outdoor swimming
pool, stadium, or group of these used for sporting activities such as baseball,
softball, football, basketball, swimming, or other sports, and is not operated
as a commercial enterprise. (G1)
   AUCTION OR SALES HOUSE. A fully enclosed establishment where items are
offered for sale through competitive bidding. It does not include foreclosure,
real estate, or personal property sales conducted upon the site of the estate,
foreclosed or for sale property, or property belonging to the personal property
owner. It does not include "Swap meet or flea market" or "Auction or sales
yard." (I2)
   AUCTION OR SALES YARD. An outdoor or open-air facility where items are
offered for sale through competitive bidding. Items typically include motor
vehicles, heavy equipment, items of an industrial nature, livestock, or items
not normally found within retail stores. It does not include SWAP MEET OR FLEA
MARKET. It may also have an indoor component similar to an AUCTION OR SALES
HOUSE. (I3)
   AUDITORIUM. A large room or building used for public gatherings typically
open to the general public to watch and/or listen to movies, plays, acts,
speeches, or concert performances." (C2) (C3)
   AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE (ATM). A computer terminal that takes the place of
a human bank teller and allows the user to access basic bank services, such as
making deposits and cash withdrawals, from remote locations. (A1)
   AUTOMOBILE AND PICK-UP SALES, NEW AND USED. An open area that can include
buildings, other than a street, used for the display, sale, or rental of new
and used automobiles and pick-ups along with repairs and servicing of
automobiles or pick-ups. (I4)
   AUTOMOBILE AND PICK-UP SALES, USED ONLY. An open area or building, other
than a street, used for the display, sale, or rental of used  automobiles and
pick-ups and where no repair work is done except minor incidental repairs and
servicing of automobiles or pick-ups to be displayed, sold or rented on the
premises. (I5)
   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. See FUEL SALES, RETAIL, MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR or
SERVICE, MINOR, and MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR SERVICE, MAJOR. (I15) (J18) (J19)
   AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD. See JUNK YARD, WRECKING YARD, or SALVAGE FACILITY.
(K5)
   BALL FIELD. See ATHLETIC COMPLEX or BALL FIELD. (G1)
   BANK OR CREDIT UNION, MAIN BRANCH. An institution providing retail banking
services. This classification includes only those institutions engaged in the
on-site circulation of money, loan services, or merchant banking services. This
use excludes a payday lender or check-cashing establishment. For
administration, headquarters, or other offices of banks and credit unions
without retail banking services with on-site circulation of money see Office,
professional or commercial. (J2)
   BAR, NIGHTCLUB, or LOUNGE. An establishment that provides alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the site and may or may not provide food service,
and that may provide live entertainment and/or dancing. This use typically
requires an ABC Type 40, 42, 48, 60, or 61 license. (B2)
   BARBERSHOP, HAIR SALON, NAIL CARE, MASSAGE THERAPY, OR DAY SPA. An
establishment that provides personal care treatments or massage therapy of
hair, skin, nails, and/or face where overnight accommodations are not provided.
This use includes the application of permanent facial makeup but does not
include other forms of tattooing or body art application. (J3)
   BED AND BREAKFAST INN. A transient lodging establishment that is
predominantly residential in character, is primarily engaged in providing
overnight or otherwise temporary lodging for the general public, and where a
breakfast meal is customarily included in the lodging rate. Alcoholic beverages
served to overnight guests typically require an ABC Type 67 license. (3) (H2)
   BOARDING HOUSE OR ROOMING HOUSE. A building containing a single dwelling
unit and provisions for five or more persons, where lodging is provided with or
without meals for compensation. This definition does not include assisted
living, skilled nursing, or hospice facility, bed and breakfast inn, or
residential care facility. (4) (H3)
   BOAT, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV), AND TRUCK SALES. An open area or building,
other than a street, used for the display, sale, or rental of new or used
boats, campers, camper trailers, recreational vehicles, trucks over one-ton
class, and other vehicles or sporting equipment of similar size, and where no
repair work is done except minor incidental repairs and servicing of vehicles
and equipment to be displayed, sold or rented on the premises. (I6)
   BREWERY, WINERY, OR DISTILLERY. An establishment that manufactures beer,
wine, distilled spirits, or similar alcoholic beverages, including processing,
storage, aging, packaging, bottling, and shipping. Consumption can occur on or
off the site in accordance with the establishment's ABC license restrictions
and can include tasting facilities and/or a restaurant. This use typically
requires an ABC Type 01, 02, 03, or 04 license. (D4)
   BREWPUB. A restaurant that also brews limited amounts of beer (less than
5,000 barrels) for consumption on the site. This use typically requires an ABC
Type 75 license. (B3)
   BUILDING MATERIALS AND SUPPLY OR HOME IMPROVEMENT STORE. An establishment
selling a mix of lumber, building materials, tools, residential appliances,
nursery items, and home furnishings. (I7)
   BUS, TRANSIT, OR TRAIN STATION. A terminal facility where transit vehicles
load or unload passengers, along with supporting services such as ticket sales
and waiting areas. BUS, TRANSIT, OR TRAIN STATION does not include a transit
stop along a route in the public right-of-way where no additional services are
provided. (K2)
   BUSINESS SCHOOL. See SCHOOL, CHARTER, TRADE, VOCATIONAL, ART, BUSINESS, or
PROFESSIONAL. (70) (C14)
   CALL CENTER. An office used primarily for receiving or transmitting a large
volume of requests by telephone to administer product support or information
inquiries from consumers or to conduct telemarketing, solicitation of
charitable or political donations, debt collection, or market research. (E1)
   CANNABIS. All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica,
or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin,
whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant,
its seeds, or resin. CANNABIS also means the separated resin, whether crude or
purified, obtained from cannabis. CANNABIS does not include the mature stalks
of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds
of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber,
oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of
germination. For the purpose of this division, CANNABIS does not mean
"industrial hemp" as defined by Cal. Health and Safety Code § 11018.5. (51-53
(L1-L9))
   CANNABIS CULTIVATION. Any activity, whether occurring indoors or outdoors,
involving the propagation, planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing,
grading, and/or trimming of cannabis plants or any part thereof for any
purpose. (51) (52) (L-1) (L-2)
   CANNABIS DELIVERY. As defined in the Medical Marijuana Regulation and Safety
Act, Cal. Business and Professions Code § 19300.5(m), as that section may be
amended from time to time, and includes the commercial transfer of cannabis or
cannabis products from a dispensary as well as the use of any technology
platform owned, controlled, and/or licensed by the dispensary, or independently
licensed by the state of California under the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis
Regulation and Safety Act (MAUCRSA) that enables anyone to arrange for a
commercial transfer, up to an amount determined to be authorized by the state
of California, or any of its departments or divisions, to anyone for any
purpose. (53) (L3)
   CANNABIS DISPENSARY. A commercial cannabis business facility where cannabis,
cannabis products, or devices for the use of cannabis or cannabis products are
offered, either individually or in any combination, for retail sale, including
an establishment (whether fixed or mobile) that delivers, pursuant to express
authorization, cannabis and cannabis products as part of a retail sale. (L9)
   CANNABIS DISTRIBUTION. The wholesale procurement, and sale, of cannabis or
cannabis products between entities licensed pursuant to MAUCRSA, AUMA, and any
subsequent state of California legislation regarding the same. (L4)
   CANNABIS LABORATORY TESTING. Offering or performing testing and/or
activities relating to the evaluation of, or assessing the quality and/or
characteristics of, cannabis or cannabis products; carried out by any entity,
accredited and licensed by the state of California, bureau of marijuana
control, or otherwise accredited by any other independent accrediting body,
within a facility or at any other location. (L5)
   CANNABIS MANUFACTURING. To compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise
make or prepare a cannabis product. The manufacturer conducts the production,
preparation, propagation, or compounding of cannabis or cannabis products
either directly or indirectly or by extraction methods, or independently by
means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical
synthesis at a fixed location that packages or repackages cannabis or cannabis
products or labels or relabels its container. (L6)
   CANNABIS PRODUCT. Cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the plant
material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not limited
to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing cannabis
or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients; intended to be sold for use by
medical cannabis patients in California pursuant to the Compassionate Use Act
of 1996 (Proposition 215), found at Cal. Health and Safety Code § 11362.5 (as
the same may be amended from time-to-time) or pursuant to the Adult Use of
Marijuana Act. For purposes of this title, "medical  cannabis" does not include
industrial hemp as defined by Cal. Food and Agricultural Code § 81000 or Cal.
Health and Safety Code § 11018.5. (51-53) (L-1-L-9)
   CANNABIS TRANSPORTING. The conveyance by a person, issued a state license
authorizing the point-to-point movement of cannabis or cannabis products, in
amounts authorized by the state of California, or by one of its departments or
divisions under the MAUCRSA and/or AUMA. (53) (L3)
   CAR WASH, AUTOMATIC OR FULL SERVICE. A facility for washing vehicles using
conveyorized and/or mechanized equipment where the washing of the vehicle is
performed by equipment, the facility's employees, or both. (J4)
   CAR WASH, SELF-SERVICE. A facility for washing vehicles where the user of
the vehicle uses handheld equipment, typically coin-operated, to wash the
vehicle. (J5)
   CARD ROOM. An establishment providing legal gambling combined with card
games, and can include a restaurant, bar, or other ancillary entertainment.
(C4)
   CARETAKER RESIDENCE OR QUARTERS. A residence that is an accessory to a
primary use of the site, for housing a person or persons who are tasked with
caring for or securing the site on a part-time or full-time basis. Second
dwelling unit includes a caretaker residence or quarters in residential zones.
(38)(A2)
   CARNIVAL OR CIRCUS. A temporary outdoor amusement center, bazaar or fair,
either involving use of special purpose equipment or conducted by professional
operators, or both, and where activities include such things as rides,
exhibitions, food service, sales, or small-scale games. CARNIVAL OR CIRCUS does
not include a non-profit event sponsored by a local school or religious
institution. (C6)
   CARPET CLEANING AND DYEING. An establishment that provides for the cleaning
and dyeing of rugs, carpet, and upholstery. (J6)
   CEMETERY. Land and facilities used or intended to be used for the burial or
interment of the dead, and includes a columbarium, crematorium, mausoleum and/
or mortuary when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of the
facility. (F1)
   CHARTER SCHOOL. See SCHOOL, CHARTER, TRADE, VOCATIONAL, ART, BUSINESS, or
PROFESSIONAL. (70) (C14)
   CHECK CASHING ESTABLISHMENT. See Payday lender or check cashing
establishment. (J20)
   CHILD CARE CENTER. See DAYCARE CENTER. (59) (L13)
   CLINIC, MEDICAL. See URGENT CARE CENTER OR OTHER WALK-IN CLINIC. (E8)
   CLUB, LODGE, OR PRIVATE MEETING HALL. A large room or building used for
public gatherings where membership or invitation is typically required to
attend. It can include a dance floor, lodge rooms, conference rooms, dining
rooms, drinking establishments for members and their guests only, and exhibit
rooms. Alcoholic beverage service to members and their guests typically
requires an ABC Type 51, 52, or 57 license. (C5)
   COLD STORAGE OR ICE HOUSE. A facility for the storage of food or other items
in an artificially cooled place for the purpose of preservation, and/or for
producing large amounts of ice. (K3)
   COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY, PRIVATE OR PUBLIC. A school or group of schools that
provides post-secondary education usually resulting in a degree. (C7)
   COMMERCIAL RECREATION FACILITY, INDOOR. Indoor recreational facilities that
are operated as a business and open to the general public for an entry fee or
pay per use. Examples include indoor uses such as, but are not limited to, a
bowling alley, bounce house, skating rink, batting cage, miniature golf,
swimming pool, climbing wall, arcade, and similar uses. Food and beverage
service can be provided as an ancillary use. (G2)
   COMMERCIAL RECREATION FACILITY, OUTDOOR. Outdoor recreational facilities
that are operated as a business and open to the general public for an entry fee
or pay per use. Examples include outdoor uses such as, but are not limited to,
a batting cage, miniature golf, water slide, go-cart racing, and similar uses.
Food and beverage service can be provided as an ancillary use. (G3)
   COMMUNICATIONS BROADCASTING OR MEDIA STUDIO. A facility that is equipped for
sound recording, the transmission of radio and television programs, or the
production of motion pictures, television programs, videos, music, cellular
phone applications or video games. (E2)
   COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING. See ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION AND
TRANSMISSION SUBSTATION, GAS REGULATOR STATION, COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT
BUILDING, PUBLIC SERVICE PUMPING STATION, or ELEVATED PRESSURE TANK. (60) (F4)
   COMMUNITY CENTER OR FACILITY. An assembly building used typically for non-
profit social, recreational, and cultural activities. (62) (F2)
   COMMUNITY GARDEN. An area of land managed and maintained by an individual or
group to grow and harvest food and horticultural products for personal or group
consumption. The garden may be divided into separate garden plots for
cultivation by one or more individuals or may be farmed collectively by members
of the group. (F3)
   CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS RECYCLING. A yard or facility that collects leftover
construction materials that may be recycled or reused as an alternative to
disposal in a landfill site. Examples of construction materials include lumber,
drywall, masonry, cabinets, metals and appliances, cardboard and paper, asphalt
roofing, plastic and vinyl, doors and windows, tubs, sinks, and toilets. (J7)
   CONVENIENCE STORE, WITH OR WITHOUT FUEL SALES. An establishment with
extended operating hours and in a convenient location, stocking a limited range
of household goods and groceries. Retail fuel sales may or may not also be
provided. (I8)
   CONVENTION OR CONFERENCE CENTER. Facilities designed and used for
conventions, conferences, seminars, trade shows, product displays, and other
events in which groups gather to promote and share common interests. CONVENTION
CENTERS typically have at least one auditorium and may also contain concert
halls, lecture halls, meeting rooms, and conference rooms, as well as accessory
uses such as facilities for food preparation and serving and administrative
offices. CONVENTION OR CONFERENCE CENTER does not include conference rooms that
may be an ancillary use in a hotel and motel. (C8)
   COPY, PRINTING, OR MAILING SERVICE. An establishment providing printing,
photocopying, engraving, binding, packaging, mailing, and related services to
both businesses and individuals. (J8)
   COTTAGE FOOD OPERATION. A home-based business involving the preparation and/
or packaging of certain foods in private-home kitchens for sale primarily by
the resident family. (33) (A3)
   CREMATORIUM. A structure or building substantially exposed above ground
intended to be used for the cremation and/or interment of the cremated remains
of a deceased person or animal. (J9)
   DAYCARE CENTER. Any adult or child care facility of any capacity, other than
a family care home, in which less than 24-hour per day non-medical care and
supervision are provided in a group setting. This classification includes
nursery schools, preschools, and daycare facilities for children or adults, and
any other daycare facility licensed by the State of California. (59) (A4) (L13)
   DAYCARE FACILITY. A facility providing supervision, feeding, and non-medical
care of persons, usually but not necessarily children, for a time period of
less than 24 hours. Daycare facilities are further divided into the following
categories:
      DAYCARE, ADULT. A facility or program licensed by the State of California
provides non-medical care and supervision to persons 18 years of age or older
in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for
sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of these
individuals, in a daycare setting on less than a 24-hour basis. (56) (L10)
      DAYCARE, LARGE FAMILY. Regularly provided care, protection, and
supervision of children, in the caregiver's own home, for periods of less than
24 hours per day, while the parents or authorized representatives are away for
seven to 14 children. (58) (L12)
      DAYCARE, SMALL FAMILY. Regularly provided care, protection, and
supervision of children, in the caregiver's own home, for periods of less than
24 hours per day, while the parents or authorized representatives are away for
up to eight children. (57) (L11)
   DAY SPA. See BARBERSHOP, HAIR SALON, NAIL CARE, MASSAGE THERAPY, or DAY SPA.
(J3)
   DRIVE-THRU PICK-UP WINDOW. The ancillary use of a window or other opening in
the wall of a building through which goods or services are provided directly to
customers in motor vehicles. (A5, A6)(B6)(B7)
   DRY CLEANING OR LAUNDROMAT. An establishment providing laundry, dry
cleaning, and other related services for individual customers on a pick-up and
drop-off basis or where with coin-operated washing and drying machines are
available for customer use. (J10)
   DUPLEX. See MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING. (13, 14, 15, H13) (14) (15) (H13)
   DWELLING, ACCESSORY. See ACCESSORY DWELLING. (30)
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. See MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING. (13) (14) (15) (H13)
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. See SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING. (19) (20) (21) (H18)
(H19)
   ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION AND TRANSMISSION SUBSTATION, GAS REGULATOR STATION,
COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING, PUBLIC SERVICE PUMPING STATION, OR ELEVATED
PRESSURE TANK. The assembly of above-ground buildings or equipment on a
separate lot that is part of a system for the distribution or transmission of
electric power, natural gas, domestic water, or communications. Wireless
communication facilities are not included in this definition. (60) (F4)
   ELECTRIC VEHICLE RECHARGING FACILITY. One or more publicly available parking
spaces served by electric vehicle service equipment and is typically an
ancillary use in a parking garage or parking lot. (A7)
   ELEVATED PRESSURE TANK. See ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION AND TRANSMISSION
SUBSTATION, GAS REGULATOR STATION, COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING, PUBLIC
SERVICE PUMPING STATION, OR ELEVATED PRESSURE TANK. (60) (F4)
   EMERGENCY SHELTER. A facility providing housing with minimal supportive
services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or
less where housing is not denied because of an inability to pay. (5) (H4)
   EMPLOYEE HOUSING. Property used temporarily or seasonally (not more than 180
days in any calendar year) for the residential use of unrelated persons/
families employed to perform agricultural or industrial labor either on or off-
site of agricultural activities. The accommodations may consist of any living
quarters, dwelling, boarding house, tent (only temporary occupancy), bunkhouse
(only temporary occupancy), mobile home, manufactured home, recreational
vehicle, travel trailer, or other housing accommodations maintained in one or
more buildings, or one or more sites, and the premises upon which they are
situated, including an area set aside for parking of mobile homes and
manufactured homes or camping of employees by the employer. Employee housing
may also involve permanent residency if the housing accommodation is a mobile
home, manufactured home, travel trailer, or recreational vehicle pursuant to
Cal. Health and Safety Code § 10021.5. Specifically, there are two types of
employee housing as follows:
      (1)   EMPLOYEE HOUSING, LARGE. Employee housing that serves more than six
employees and consists of no more than 36 beds in group quarters or 12 units or
spaces designed for use by a single family or household. (7) (H6)
      (2)   EMPLOYEE HOUSING, SMALL. Employee housing that serves six or fewer
employees. The housing may be in a single or multi-family residence. (6) (H5)
   EQUIPMENT RENTAL YARD. An establishment offering a wide variety of large
equipment or tools for rent, much of which is stored outdoors when not being
used. (J11)
   EXTERMINATOR OR PEST CONTROL SERVICE. An establishment specializing in the
elimination of vermin, insects, or other similar pests from a building or
grounds, especially by the controlled application of toxic chemicals. (J12)
   FAMILY. All persons, related and unrelated, who occupy a single housing
unit.
   FAIRGROUNDS. An area with indoor and outdoor facilities where fairs,
circuses, or exhibitions are held. (F5)
   FARMERS MARKET. A facility or area where several farmers or growers gather
on a periodic basis to provide fresh fruits, vegetables, or other locally-grown
agricultural products directly to consumers. (I10)
   FEED AND SEED STORE. An establishment that provides feed, seed, and animal
and agricultural supplies primarily in bulk quantities. (I11)
   FOOD CATERING. An establishment that prepares and delivers food and
beverages for off-site consumption, typically at a special event, without
provision for on-site pickup or consumption. This use includes a commissary
kitchen. (J13)
   FOOD LOCKER. An establishment that rents lockers, compartments, or space for
the storage of frozen food. A food locker may also include the preparation or
dressing of animal carcasses for consumption but does not include the
slaughtering of animals. (K4)
   FOOD MARKET. An establishment that provides a wide variety of fresh produce
and meat, canned and packaged food items, small household goods, and similar
items that are typically consumed and used off-premises. It can also contain a
section where prepared foods are sold and consumed on-site. (I12)
   FOOD PRODUCE STAND. An area or building set aside for the sale of
agricultural produce that is grown primarily on the site. (I13)
   FORTUNE TELLING. An establishment where people's fortunes are predicted
through the use of astrology, card reading, numerology, etc. (J14)
   FUEL DISTRIBUTING. A facility that is a base of operations for the bulk
distribution of gasoline, propane, butane, or other another site. (J15)
   FUEL SALES, FLEET, OR CARDLOCK. An establishment that is typically
unattended and provides gasoline, propane, diesel fuel, and/or other liquid or
gaseous fuels mainly for commercial fleet vehicles. (I14)
   FUEL SALES, RETAIL. An establishment that provides gasoline, propane, diesel
fuel, and/or other liquid or gaseous fuels directly to consumers. (I15)
   FUNERAL HOME OR MORTUARY. An establishment where the deceased are prepared
for burial or cremation, and funeral services may be conducted. It can include
an area where funeral vehicles are stored, and caskets and other funeral
supplies are sold. (C9)
   GAMES OF SKILL OR AMUSEMENT. Machines, devices or apparatus, the operation
or use of which is made possible by the deposit or placement of any currency,
plate, disc, slug or key into any slot or crevice, for the purpose or use as a
game or amusement. This use does not include games, machines, or devices used
for a purpose that is prohibited by law. (A9) (A10)
   GARDEN SHOP. An establishment that provides live plants and related products
mainly to residential consumers, with a portion of the establishment typically
located outdoors. (I16)
   GAS REGULATOR STATION. See ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION AND TRANSMISSION
SUBSTATION, GAS REGULATOR STATION, COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING, PUBLIC
SERVICE PUMPING STATION, OR ELEVATED PRESSURE TANK. (60) (F4)
   GAS STATION. See FUEL SALES, RETAIL. (I15)
   GOLF COURSE OR COUNTRY CLUB. One or more golf courses, with accessory
facilities and uses that can include clubhouses with bar and restaurant, locker
and shower facilities; driving ranges; "pro shops" for onsite sales of golfing
equipment; and golf cart storage and sales facilities. (61) (G4)
   GOVERNMENT OFFICE; LOCAL, STATE, OR FEDERAL. A facility owned or operated by
a local, state, or federal government that provides services to the public such
as employment assistance, public assistance, motor vehicle registration and
licensing services and similar activities commonly accustomed to having
sizeable assemblages of people waiting for service, whether pedestrian or
vehicular. This use does not include a government-owned facility that is more
specifically defined in this chapter, such as fairgrounds, cemetery, post
office, or public safety facility. (F6)
   GUEST HOUSE. Living quarters without a kitchen, located on the same premises
with a main residence. (35)
   HAIR SALON. See BARBERSHOP, HAIR SALON, NAIL CARE, MASSAGE THERAPY, or DAY
SPA. (J3)
   HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITY. All contiguous land and structures, other
appurtenances and improvements on the land used for the treatment, transfer,
storage, resource recovery, disposal or recycling of hazardous waste, and may
consist of one or more treatment, transfer, storage, resource recovery,
disposal or recycling hazardous waste management units, or combinations of
these units. (See Cal. Health and Safety Code § 25110.1.) (D5)
   HEALTH OR FITNESS FACILITY, LARGE. A fitness center, gymnasium, health club
or athletic club that typically charges a membership fee and includes any of
the following: indoor sauna, spa or hot tub facilities; a swimming pool, or a
tennis, basketball or handball court. (G5)
   HEALTH OR FITNESS FACILITY, SMALL. A fitness center, health club or athletic
club that typically charges a membership fee and does not include any of the
following: indoor sauna, spa or hot tub facilities; a swimming pool, or a
tennis, basketball or handball court. (G6)
   HELIPORT. See AIRPORT OR HELIPORT. (K1)
   HOME OCCUPATION. Any use conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on
by the inhabitants thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to
the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not change the character
thereof or adversely affect the uses permitted in the residential district of
which it is a part; which creates no additional vehicular or pedestrian
traffic, requires no additional parking space, generates no noises audible
beyond the site, causes no radio or television interference; where no persons
are employed other than domestic help, and no mechanical equipment is used
other than that necessary for domestic purposes and where no materials,
equipment and/or supplies are stored outdoors other than such storage normally
associated with the residential use of the property. For  purposes of this
definition, the storage of not more than one ton capacity shall be deemed as
normally associated with residential use of the property. (35) (A9)
   HOSPITAL, GENERAL OR PSYCHIATRIC. A facility that provides medical,
psychiatric, or surgical service for sick or injured persons, primarily on an
in-patient basis, and including ancillary facilities for out-patient and
emergency treatment, diagnostic services, training, research, administration
and services to patients, employees, or visitors. (E4)
   HOTEL OR MOTEL. A building or group of buildings in one complex consisting
of multiple guest rooms intended or designed to be occupied on a temporary
basis, and typically providing ancillary services such as a restaurant, lounge,
pool or exercise room, meeting rooms, and/or other personal services. Alcoholic
beverages served to overnight guests outside of a restaurant or bar/lounge
typically require an ABC Type 70 license. (8) (H7)
   INDUSTRIAL OR MANUFACTURING FACILITY, HEAVY. A facility that manufactures
products from extracted or raw materials or recycled or secondary materials, or
the bulk storage and handling of such products and materials. This use includes
operations such as biomass energy conversion; production apparel manufacturing;
photographic processing plants; leather and allied product manufacturing; wood
product manufacturing; paper manufacturing; chemical manufacturing; plastics
and rubber products manufacturing; non-metallic mineral product manufacturing;
primary metal manufacturing; fabricated metal product manufacturing; and
automotive and heavy equipment manufacturing. This use does not include
Agricultural products processing. (D6)
   INDUSTRIAL OR MANUFACTURING FACILITY, LIGHT. A facility that manufactures
products from previously prepared materials completely within an enclosed
building, and that produces minimal impacts on nearby properties. This use
includes the manufacturing of finished parts or products primarily from
previously prepared materials; commercial laundries and dry cleaning plants;
monument works; printing, engraving, and publishing; sign production or
manufacturing;  machine and electrical shops; computer and electronic product
manufacturing; furniture and related product manufacturing; and industrial
services. The use also includes the preparation and/or packaging of food for
off-site consumption. (D7)
   JUNIOR ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT. See ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT, JUNIOR. (31)
   JUNK YARD, WRECKING YARD, OR SALVAGE FACILITY. A facility that accepts,
collects, and stores junk, scrap, or salvable material, including junk metals
or other scrap materials, and/or that stores, dismantles, wrecks, or allows
parts removal of more than three non-operating automobiles, other vehicles, or
machinery for a period of more than 30 days. (K5)
   KEEPING OF HOUSEHOLD PETS. The keeping, raising, and caring for domesticated
animals that are not considered domestic agricultural animals by the definition
of ANIMAL RAISING, and typically including dogs, cats, birds, fish or other
similar-sized animals. Also, see ANIMAL RAISING. (36) (A10)
   KENNEL OR ANIMAL BOARDING. Any facility where four or more dogs, cats, or
other small animals are kept overnight for profit, breeding, care, or
exhibiting. This use does not include a pet store. (62) (J16)
   LABORATORY, GENERAL, MEDICAL, OR DENTAL. A facility that conducts scientific
or medical experiments, research, or teaching, typically within a completely
enclosed building. (E3)
   LANDSCAPE NURSERY. A facility that grows, maintains, and provides trees,
plants, and other nursery products for transplant in another location typically
to both retailer and wholesale customers. (I17)
   LARGE FAMILY DAYCARE. See DAYCARE, LARGE FAMILY. (58) (L12)
   LIBRARY, MUSEUM, OR CULTURAL FACILITY. A facility operated entirely on a
public or non-profit basis for the purpose of providing education, information,
training, and/or entertainment of a civic or cultural nature. (C10)
   LINEN, DIAPER OR UNIFORM SUPPLY SERVICE. An establishment providing high
volume laundry and garment services, including power laundries (family),
garment pressing  and dry cleaning, linen supply, diaper service, and
industrial laundries. This use does not include dry cleaning or laundromat.
(J17)
   LIQUOR STORE. An establishment that provides for the sale of alcoholic
beverages such as beer, wine, and/or distilled spirits for consumption off the
site, along with other retail items. This use typically requires an ABC Type 20
or 21 license. Limited consumption on the site can occur only when the
appropriate ABC license is obtained, typically an ABC Type 86 license. (I18)
   LIVE/WORK FACILITY. A building that combines a complete dwelling unit with a
commercial or office workspace, with both occupancies used by the same person
or family. (H8)
   LODGE. See CLUB, LODGE, OR PRIVATE MEETING HALL. (C5)
   LOUNGE. See BAR, NIGHTCLUB, OR LOUNGE. (B2)
   LUMBERYARD. See BUILDING MATERIALS AND SUPPLY OR HOME IMPROVEMENT STORE.
(I7)
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure that was constructed on or after June 15,
1976, is transportable in one or more sections, is eight body feet or more in
width, or 40 body feet or more in length, in the traveling mode, or, when
erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and is designed to be used as a
single-family dwelling when connected to the required utilities. (10) (11)
(H10) (H11)
   MANUFACTURED HOME SALES YARD. An establishment that stores and provides
manufactured homes, typically in an open setting with a sales office. (I19)
   MASSAGE THERAPY. See BARBERSHOP, HAIR SALON, NAIL CARE, MASSAGE THERAPY, OR
DAY SPA. (J3)
   MEAT PACKING OR SLAUGHTERHOUSE. A facility used for the killing or dressing
of animals, including cattle, sheep, swine, goats, horses, or poultry, and the
storage, freezing, curing, or packaging of meat or meat products. (D8)
   MICROBREWERY. An establishment that produces small batches of beer for sale
on or off of the site and may or may not include food service. Typically, a
microbrewery produces fewer than 15,000 barrels of beer or ale per year. This
use typically requires an ABC Type 23 license. (B4)
   MINING, QUARRY, OR SAND AND GRAVEL EXCAVATION. An area of land where rock,
ore, stone, and similar materials are excavated and processed for sale for use
off-site. (D9)
   MINI-WAREHOUSE OR SELF-STORAGE FACILITY. An establishment providing rental
space, such as rooms, lockers, or containers for the storage of goods and
materials, typically on a monthly basis. This use does not include FOOD LOCKER
or WAREHOUSE OR DISTRIBUTION CENTER. (71) (K6)
   MIXED-USE. An area of land where compatible integration of residential,
commercial, office, and/or industrial uses on a single project site. Uses that
would not be permitted on their own, can be integrated into a development
project. In this case specifically, a hotel or motel can only be allowed in a
residential district as part of a mixed-use development. Similarly, residential
uses can only be permitted in a commercial district as part of a mixed-use
development. (63)
   MOBILE HOME. A structure that was constructed prior to June 15, 1976, is
transportable in one or more sections, is eight body feet or more in width, or
40 body feet or more in length, in the traveling mode, or, when erected on
site, is 320 or more square feet, and is designed to be used as a single-family
dwelling when connected to the required utilities. (10) (H10)
   MOBILE HOME PARK. An area of land where two or more mobile home sites are
rented or leased, or offered for rent or lease, to accommodate mobile homes or
manufactured homes used as a residence. (12) (H12)
   MOBILE VENDOR OR FOOD TRUCK. An establishment that sells food, drinks, or
merchandise by means of a motorized or non-motorized vehicle, such as a wagon,
pushcart, handcart, bicycle, motorized cart, or food truck that periodically
parks to provide food or other wares to customers. (64) (A11)
   MOTEL. See HOTEL OR MOTEL. (8) (H7)
   MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR OR SERVICE, MAJOR. An establishment that provides major
repair or servicing of motor vehicles, such as body, chassis, engine,
transmission, or exhaust repair or modification. (J18)
   MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR OR SERVICE, MINOR. An establishment that provides minor
repair or servicing of motor vehicles, such as the replacement of tires or
batteries, smog inspection, window tinting, car stereo installation, oil and
filter change, wheel alignment, and fluid flushing, refill, or replacement.
(J19)
   MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING. A building or group of buildings in one complex with
multiple separate housing units. A multi-family dwelling can have two units (a
duplex,) three units (a triplex,) four units (a fourplex,) or five or more
units. Multi-family dwelling includes a mixed-use building that also provides
separate space for commercial or office use but does not include an attached
single-family dwelling. (13) (14) (15) (H13)
   NAIL CARE. See BARBERSHOP, HAIR SALON, NAIL CARE, MASSAGE THERAPY, OR DAY
SPA. (J3)
   NEWS, MAGAZINE, OR FLOWER STAND, OUTDOOR. An establishment that provides
newspapers, magazines, flowers, or other similar goods, typically to
pedestrians passing by, in a permanent structure open to the outdoors. This use
does not include sales from temporary booths or structures. (I20)
   NIGHTCLUB. See BAR, NIGHTCLUB, OR LOUNGE. (B2)
   OFFICE; MEDICAL, DENTAL, OR OPTOMETRY. An establishment that provides
services, typically by appointment, dealing with human health including dental,
chiropractic, medical, optometry, physical therapy, psychology, psychiatry,
family counseling, or therapy. This use does not include Barbershop, hair
salon, nail care, massage therapy, or day spa. (E5)
   OFFICES, PROFESSIONAL OR COMMERCIAL. An establishment that provides
administrative, clerical, technical, professional or similar business services
and typically where products  or goods are not provided. Examples include
escrow and title, insurance, mortgage, real estate, accounting, architecture,
graphic design, finance, consulting, engineering, legal, and similar services.
(E6)
   OPTICAL RETAILER. An establishment that provides prescription eyeglasses and
contact lenses, and where optometry services are not provided on the site.
Prescription eyeglasses and contact lenses may be made on the premises. (I24)
   OUTDOOR ADVERTISING STRUCTURE. A structure of any kind or character, erected
or maintained for outdoor advertising purposes, upon which a sign may be placed
that advertises a use, product, or service that is not provided off-site. (A12)
   OUTDOOR STORAGE. The storage of goods or materials outside of any building
or structure, but not including storage of a temporary or emergency nature.
(66) (A13)
   PARK OR PLAYGROUND. An open area typically landscaped and containing play
equipment that provides rest and recreation, usually owned by a public agency
or homeowner's association. (67) (G7)
   PARKING FACILITY, OFF-SITE. An area, lot, or structure with one or more
levels, other than a street or other public right-of-way, that provides for the
parking of motor vehicles as a primary use on the site. This use does not
include parking areas or lots that are ancillary and specifically intended to
provide parking for the primary use on the site. (K7)
   PAWN SHOP. An establishment that provides secured loans to customers, with
items of personal property used as collateral. (I21)
   PAYDAY LENDER OR CHECK CASHING ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment that cashes
checks, warrants, or money orders for a fee, and/or provides short-term loans,
usually at a high interest rate, that must be paid in full when the borrower
receives their next paycheck. This use does not include Bank or credit union.
(J20)
   PET GROOMING. A personal service establishment that, for a fee, trims,
cleans or curries domestic pets such as dogs and cats and which may sell pet
supplies. This use does not include KENNEL or ANIMAL BOARDING. (J21)
   PET STORE. An establishment where dogs, cats, or other small animals are
kept and offered for sale. (I22)
   PHARMACY. An establishment that provides prescription drugs under the
supervision of a pharmacist and can also provide other retail products. (E7)
   PHOTOGRAPHY STUDIO. An establishment where customers can have their
portraits taken professionally. (J22)
   POOL HALL OR BILLIARD PARLOR. An establishment where pool and/or billiard
games are played for a fee. (C11)
   POST OFFICE. A facility that accepts, processes, and sorts mail, operated by
the United States Postal Service. (F7)
   PRIVATE MEETING HALL. See CLUB, LODGE, OR PRIVATE MEETING HALL. (C5)
   PRODUCE STAND. See FOOD PRODUCE STAND. (I13)
   PROFESSIONAL SCHOOL. See SCHOOL, CHARTER, TRADE, VOCATIONAL, ART, BUSINESS,
OR PROFESSIONAL. (70) (C14)
   PUBLIC CORPORATION YARD, UTILITY YARD, OR VEHICLE AND HEAVY EQUIPMENT
MAINTENANCE AND STORAGE YARD. A facility that provides for maintenance,
servicing, or storage of fleet vehicles, equipment, or supplies, or for the
dispatching of service vehicles; or distribution of supplies or construction
materials required in connection with a business activity, public utility
service, transportation service, government service, or similar activity. (F8)
   PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITY OR STATION. A facility that is a base for providing
public safety and emergency services, including police, fire protection and
emergency services. This use does not include AMBULANCE SERVICE. (F9)
   PUBLIC SERVICE PUMPING STATION. See ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION AND TRANSMISSION
SUBSTATION, GAS REGULATOR STATION, COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING, PUBLIC
SERVICE PUMPING STATION, OR ELEVATED PRESSURE TANK. (60) (F4)
   RAISING OF FRUIT, VEGETABLES, AND HORTICULTURAL SPECIALTIES FOR PERSONAL
USE. Garden crops, including fruits, vegetables, and ornamental plants that are
not sold or processed for sale. (37)
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK. A lot or area of land where two or more spaces
are rented to users of recreational vehicles for overnight parking and use, and
that typically provide support services, such as utility hookups and sewer dump
facilities. (16) (H14)
   RECYCLING, LARGE COLLECTION FACILITY. A facility located in an area of over
200 square feet and may include a mobile unit, bulk reverse vending machine or
a grouping of reverse vending machines, a kiosk type unit which may include a
permanent structure or an unattended container placed for the donation of
recyclable materials. (J24)
   RECYCLING, PROCESSING OR SORTING FACILITY. A facility used for the
collection, processing and preparation of recyclable material for efficient
shipment, or to an end-user's specifications, by such means as bailing,
briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting,
shredding, cleaning, and remanufacturing. (J25)
   RECYCLING, SMALL COLLECTION FACILITY. A collection facility that occupies an
area of not more than 200 square feet, and may include a mobile unit, bulk
reverse vending machine or a grouping of reverse vending machines, a kiosk type
unit which may include a permanent structure or an unattended container placed
for the donation of recyclable materials. (J23)
   REPAIR SHOP, LARGE APPLIANCE OR EQUIPMENT. An establishment that restores or
repairs major appliances or equipment that generally cannot be easily moved by
a single person and is typically placed on the floor. This use typically
provides all of its service on-site and includes repair of large motorized
equipment that are not vehicles. (J26)
   REPAIR SHOP, SMALL APPLIANCE OR EQUIPMENT. An establishment that restores or
repairs small appliances or equipment that generally can be moved by one person
and is typically repaired on a table or workbench. This use typically provides
all of its service on-site and includes services such as gunsmithing, lawnmower
repair, and home computer repair. (J27)
   RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT FACILITY. A facility that is primarily used for the
research, design, development, and testing of biological, chemical, electrical,
magnetic, mechanical, and/or optical components in advance of product
manufacturing. This use does not involve the fabrication, mass manufacture, or
processing of products. (D10)
   RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY. A single-family dwelling, group care facility, or
similar facility licensed by the State of California for 24-hour non-medical
care of persons in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance
essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection
of the individual. (17) (18) (H15) (H16)
   RESIDENTIAL DWELLING LOCATED IN THE SAME BUILDING WITH OFFICE OR COMMERCIAL
USE. A building that contains a mix of both residential dwelling units and
space used for commercial or office uses. (H17)
   RESTAURANT, FULL SERVICE. An establishment providing preparation and sale of
a variety of food and beverages with full table service by wait staff. Takeout
or delivery service and/or live entertainment may also be provided. If
alcoholic beverages are served, this use typically requires an ABC Type 41 or
47 license. (B5)
   RESTAURANT, LIMITED SERVICE WITH DRIVE-THRU PICKUP WINDOW. An establishment
providing preparation and sale of a variety of food and beverages for
consumption on or off the site by ordering and paying at a counter or drive-
thru window. Delivery service and/or live entertainment may also be provided.
(B6) (B7)
   RESTAURANT, LIMITED SERVICE WITHOUT DRIVE-THRU PICKUP WINDOW. An
establishment providing preparation and sale of a variety of food and beverages
by ordering and paying at a counter. Takeout or delivery service and/or live
entertainment may also be provided. Drive-thru pickup windows are not provided.
If alcoholic beverages are served, this use typically requires an ABC Type 41
or 47 license. (B8)
   RETAIL SALES SOLELY VIA INTERNET, DIRECT MAIL, OR TELEPHONE. An
establishment providing retail products for sale and delivery only via
internet, direct mail, or telephone communication, with a floor space for
storage of products of less than 5,000 square feet. This use does not include a
Call center or a Warehouse or distribution center. If alcoholic beverages are
sold, this use typically requires an ABC Type 85 license. (I25)
   RETAIL SALES STORE. An establishment providing retail products. This use
includes all retail sales establishments that are not more specifically defined
in this chapter. (I23) (I24)
   ROOMING HOUSE. See BOARDING HOUSE OR ROOMING HOUSE. (4) (H3)
   SCHOOL; CHARTER, TRADE, VOCATIONAL, ART, BUSINESS, OR PROFESSIONAL. A
facility that is operated either with public funds under a charter contract or
with private funds, and that offers specific educational instruction to
children and/or adults. This use includes charter schools, secretarial schools,
beauty and cosmetology schools, modeling schools, language schools, computer or
electronics training schools, arts schools, and automotive repair schools, and
similar specialized schools. (70) (C14)
   SCHOOL, PRIVATE (KINDERGARTEN TO 12TH GRADE). A facility owned and/or
operated by a private entity that educates minors in courses of study required
by the California Education Code. This use includes a kindergarten, elementary
school, middle school, high school, special institution of education, or
combination of these, and includes a technical, vocational, or art school only
when the students are primarily minors. This use does not include homeschooling
at a residence. (68) (C12)
   SCHOOL, PUBLIC (KINDERGARTEN TO 12TH GRADE). A facility owned and/or
operated by a publicly funded school district that educates minors in courses
of study required by the California Education Code. This use includes a
kindergarten, elementary school, middle school, high school, special
institution of education, or combination of these, and includes a technical,
vocational, or art school only when the students are primarily minors. This use
does not include a charter school. (69) (C13)
   SCRAP METAL PROCESSING. See JUNK YARD, WRECKING YARD, OR SALVAGE YARD. (K5)
   SECONDHAND OR THRIFT STORE. An establishment that accepts donations of
secondhand items and clothing and is typically operated for charitable
purposes. (I26)
   SELF-STORAGE FACILITY. See MINI-WAREHOUSE OR SELF-STORAGE FACILITY. (71)
(K6)
   SERVICE STATION. See FUEL SALES, RETAIL, AND MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR OR
SERVICE, MINOR. (I15) (J19)
   SHOOTING RANGE, INDOOR. An establishment that is used for archery or
firearms practice in a fully enclosed facility. (J28)
   SHOOTING RANGE, OUTDOOR. An establishment that is used for archery or
firearms practice, either wholly or partially outdoors. (J29)
   SIGN MANUFACTURING AND PRODUCTION. See INDUSTRIAL OR MANUFACTURING FACILITY,
LIGHT. (D7)
   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING, ATTACHED. A building with two residential dwelling
units located on portions of two lots with a building firewall along the lot
line, such that the dwelling units may be sold separately. (19) (H18)
   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING, DETACHED. A building with one residential dwelling
unit located on one lot. (20) (H19)
   SINGLE-ROOM OCCUPANCY (SRO). A residential facility of two or more separate
individual rooms with typically less than 500 square feet of floor space, with
or without separate kitchen or bathroom facilities for each room, rented on a
weekly or monthly basis. SINGLE-ROOM OCCUPANCY does not include HOTEL OR MOTEL.
(22) (H20)
   SMALL FAMILY DAYCARE. See DAYCARE, SMALL FAMILY. (57) (L11)
   SOCIAL SERVICE OFFICE, ASSISTANCE CENTER, OR GUIDANCE CENTER. A facility
that provides counseling, guidance, recuperative, or similar services for
persons requiring rehabilitation assistance as a result of economic hardship,
mental disability, alcoholism, detention, drug addiction, or similar
conditions. This use does not include facilities that provide overnight stay.
(F10)
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. Any collection of solar panels, connectors, battery
banks, controllers, wiring, meters, and switching devices intended to work in
combination to convert solar energy to electrical power. (A15) (A16)
   SPECIALTY CONSTRUCTION OR TRADE SERVICE. An establishment that provides
construction, installation or maintenance services activities that are
typically specialized trade activities, and where some of the service may be
provided off-site. This use includes establishments that provide services such
as plumbing, electrical work, painting, irrigation, heating/air conditioning,
and masonry. This use does not include REPAIR SHOP OR MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR OR
SERVICE. (J30)
   STORM DRAINAGE BASIN, WITH OR WITHOUT A PARK. A facility that collects
stormwater from off-site locations into a sunken basin. The facility may be
inaccessible to the public or may be designed to provide partial public access
for recreational use. (72) (F11)
   STUDIO FOR MARTIAL ARTS, MUSIC, DANCE, YOGA, EXERCISE, GYMNASTICS OR
SIMILAR. A facility that provides group or individualized instruction in a
specific activity typically related to the arts. This use does not include
HEALTH OR FITNESS FACILITY. (C15)
   SUPPORTIVE HOUSING. Is defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 50675.14 and
has no limit on the length of stay, is occupied by a target population as
defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 53260 (i.e., low-income persons with
mental disabilities, AIDS, substance abuse or chronic health conditions or
persons whose disabilities originated before the person turned 18), that is
linked to onsite or offsite service that assists the supportive housing
resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and
maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the
community. Services may include case management, mental health treatment, and
life skills. (23) (H21)
   SWAP MEET OR FLEA MARKET. A facility that provides typically
compartmentalized space, either indoors or outdoors, to vendors who sells or
barter merchandise. This use does not include FARMERS MARKET, AUCTION OR SALES
HOUSE, or AUCTION OR SALES YARD. (I27)
   TAILORING OR CLOTHING ALTERATIONS. An establishment that provides custom
making or altering of clothing when not an ancillary use in a clothing store.
(J31)
   TATTOOING OR BODY ART. An establishment that provides tattooing, body
piercing, and other forms of body art allowed by the California Health and
Safety Code, except that body art involving ear piercing and permanent cosmetic
application are not included and are considered ancillary uses in other
establishments. This use does not include any use that is more specifically
defined in §
10.62.020. (J32)
   TEMPORARY MATERIALS OR EQUIPMENT STORAGE YARD. A facility that is used to
store, park, house, or prepare equipment, dirt, materials, or temporary offices
or shops to support a construction or demolition activity occurring on another
site. (39) (A17)
   TEMPORARY SALES OFFICE. A facility that provides temporary office space to
support the sale of residences or other structures and can include related
parking. (40) (A18)
   TOBACCO, SMOKE, OR VAPE SHOP. An establishment that provides tobacco or vape
products or tobacco or vape-related paraphernalia in an area greater than 40%
of its total available retail floor space. (I28)
   TRADE SCHOOL. See SCHOOL, CHARTER, TRADE, VOCATIONAL, ART, BUSINESS, OR
PROFESSIONAL. (70) (C14)
   TRANSIT STATION. See BUS, TRANSIT, OR TRAIN STATION. (K2)
   TRANSITIONAL HOUSING. Any program that is designed to assist homeless
persons in obtaining skills necessary for independent living in permanent
housing and which includes; comprehensive social service programs consisting of
regular individualized case management services such as alcohol and drug abuse
counseling, self-improvement education, employment and training assistance
services, and independent living skills development, the use of a program unit
as a temporary housing unit in a structured living environment which use is
conditioned upon compliance with the transitional housing program rules and
regulations, and a rule or regulation which specifies an occupancy period of
not less than 30 days, but not more than 24 months. This definition includes
low-barrier navigation centers. (24) (H22)
   TRAVEL CENTER. See TRUCK STOP OR TRAVEL CENTER. (K8)
   TRUCK STOP OR TRAVEL CENTER. An establishment or group of establishments
designed to operate together that provide fuel, overnight parking, lodging,
food, convenience goods, or other services primarily to truckers and travelers.
(K8)
   TRUCKING OR TRANSPORTATION TERMINAL. A facility designed specifically for
large trucks or other vehicles to load, unload, or transfer freight, cargo
containers, or other items being shipped, along with associated fueling areas,
maintenance facilities, and offices. (K9)
   URGENT CARE CENTER OR OTHER WALK-IN CLINIC. A facility that provides medical
treatment of injuries or illnesses that do not require treatment typically
provided in an emergency room,  typically without an appointment. This use
includes urgent care centers, free clinics, hospital-based health clinics, and
community health clinics, but does not include ancillary retail clinics located
within a retail store, food market, or pharmacy. (E8)
   VEHICLE IMPOUND YARD. A facility that provides temporary storage of vehicles
that have been removed or impounded from public or private property at the
direction of a peace officer or because of local ordinance or judicial order.
(K10)
   VENDING MACHINES. A device that dispenses a product or service upon
activation by the receiver of that product or service. Products can include
items such as ice; food and beverages, movies and video games, lottery tickets,
newspapers, or similar items, but do not include fueling pumps. (A19)
   VETERINARY CLINIC OR OFFICE. A facility where animals are examined,
diagnosed, or treated, but typically not kept overnight. (J33)
   VETERINARY HOSPITAL. A facility where animals are kept for observation,
diagnosis, treatment, or medical care, and can include overnight surveillance.
(J34)
   VOCATIONAL SCHOOL. See SCHOOL, CHARTER, TRADE, VOCATIONAL, ART, BUSINESS, OR
PROFESSIONAL. (70) (C14)
   WAREHOUSE OR DISTRIBUTION CENTER. A facility for storage of goods or
materials that will eventually be redistributed to retailers, wholesalers, or
directly to consumers. This use does not include Mini-warehouse or self-storage
facility. (K11)
   WINERY. See BREWERY OR WINERY. (D4)
   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY. An unstaffed facility that transmits and
receives wireless telecommunications, and typically consists of an antenna
array, connection cables, and equipment room, and an antenna support structure
tower, or pole. (F12)
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 10.98: DEFINITION OF TERMS
Section
   
10.98.010   Applicability.
   
10.98.020   Definition of terms.
§ 10.98.010 Applicability.
   The terms, words, and phrases defined in this chapter shall apply to this
title.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
§ 10.98.020 Definition of terms.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED. Failure to develop, maintain, or use a building, structure, or
improvement or failure to conduct a use upon real property for a stated period
of time.
   ABUTTING. Two or more parcels sharing a common boundary at least at one
point.
   ACCESS. Safe, adequate, and usable ingress or egress to real property,
structures, or improvements.
   ACTION. The decision made by the review authority on a land use application,
including appropriate findings, environmental determination, and conditions of
approval, where applicable.
   ADDITION. Any construction that increases the size of a building or facility
in terms of site coverage, height, length, width, or gross floor area.
   ALLEY. A public thoroughfare for the use of pedestrians and/or vehicles,
producing only a secondary means of access to the abutting property.
   ALTERATION. Any construction or physical change in the internal arrangement
of rooms or the supporting members of a building or structure or change in the
appearance of any building or structure.
   ANTENNA. A device for transmitting or receiving radio, television, or any
other transmitted signal.
   APPLICANT. Owner(s) of property, or their agent(s) who are seeking
privileges provided by this title.
   ATTACHED. Any structure that has a wall or roof in common with another
structure.
   BASEMENT. A portion of the building partly or wholly underground and having
more than one-half of its height below the average level of the adjoining
ground.
   BERM. A mound or embankment of earth.
   BLOCK. A parcel of land surrounded by public streets, highways, freeways,
railroad rights-of-way, flood control channels, creeks, washes, rivers, or
unsubdivided acreage or any combination thereof.
   BUILDING. A permanently located structure, having a roof, for the housing or
enclosure of persons, possessions, or property of any kind. Mobile homes,
travel trailers, and other vehicles, even though permanently immobilized, shall
not be deemed to be buildings.
   BUILDING AREA. The net portion of the lot remaining after deducting all
required setbacks from the gross area of the lot.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance between the average finished ground
surface adjacent to the structure and to the highest point of the structure,
excluding architectural features and appurtenances such as, but not limited to,
chimneys, vents, antennas, elevators, and similar mechanical equipment.
   BUILDING, MAIN. A building in which the principal use of the real property
is conducted.
   BUILDING SETBACK AREA, FRONT. An area extending across the full width of the
lot between the front lot line or the existing or future street right-of-way
and a structural setback line parallel thereto. On corner lots, the shortest
street frontage shall be the front building setback area.
   BUILDING SETBACK AREA, INTERIOR SIDE. An area extending from the required
front building setback area or, where there is no required front building
setback area, from the front lot line to the required rear building setback
area or, where there is no required rear building setback area, to the rear lot
line and from the interior side lot line to a setback line parallel thereto.
   BUILDING SETBACK AREA, REAR. An area extending across the full width of the
lot between the rear lot line and a setback line parallel thereto.
   BUILDING SETBACK AREA, SIDE. A building setback area between the side lot
line and a line parallel thereto and extending from the front building setback
area to the rear building setback area.
   BUILDING SETBACK AREA, STREET SIDE. An area extending from the required
front building setback area or, where there is no required front building
setback area, from the front lot line to the rear lot line, and from the side
street lot line, or the existing or future side street right-of-way (whichever
is greater) to a structural setback line parallel thereto.
   BUILDING SITE. The ground area of a building together with all open spaces
required by this title.
   CARPORT. A permanent roofed structure not completely enclosed to be used for
vehicle parking.
   CITY. The City of Tulare.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. A vehicle customarily used as part of a business for the
transportation of goods or people.
   COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the City of Tulare.
   CONDITIONAL USE. A use that may be located within a zone only upon taking
measures to address issues that may make the use detrimental to the public
health, safety, and welfare and will not impair the integrity and character of
the zoned district.
   CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT (CUP). A discretionary entitlement which may be
granted under the provisions of this title and which when granted authorizes a
specific use to be made of a specific property, subject to compliance with all
terms and conditions imposed on the entitlement.
   CONSTRUCTION COMMENCEMENT. The start of construction of a substantial
portion on-site and off-site structural improvements after a building permit
has been issued.
   CORNER CUTOFF AREA. An area at the corner of a street, alley, or private
driveway that must remain free of visual obstruction for traffic and pedestrian
safety.
   COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Tulare.
   COUNTY. The County of Tulare.
   COURT. An open, unoccupied space, other than a yard, unobstructed from
ground to sky on the same lot with a building or buildings and which is bounded
on two or more sides by the walls of a building.
   DAYS. Consecutive calendar days unless otherwise stated.
   DECIBEL (dB/dBA). A unit for describing the amplitude of sound, as it is
heard by the human ear.
   DENSITY. The number of dwelling units per gross acre, unless otherwise
stated, for residential uses.
   DENSITY BONUS. An increase in the allowable number of residences granted by
the city or county in return for the project's providing low- or moderate-
income housing. A housing development that provides 20% of its units for lower-
income households, 10% of its units for very-low-income households, or 50% of
its units for seniors is entitled to a density bonus and other concessions (see
Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915).
   DESIGN. The planning and engineering of the following: street alignments,
grades, and widths; drainage and sanitary facilities and utilities, including
alignment and grades thereof; location and size of all required easements and
rights-of-way; fire roads and fire breaks; lot size and configuration; traffic
access; grading; land to be dedicated for park or recreational purposes;
building, structures and improvements and other such specific physical
requirements.
   DETACHED. Any building or structure that does not have a wall or roof in
common with any other building or structure.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any change or alteration of real property or its boundary
lines, and including, without limitation, the placement or erection of any
solid material, structure or improvement thereon; discharge or disposal of any
dredged material or any gaseous liquid, solid or thermal waste; grading,
removing, dredging, mining or extraction of any soil or materials; change in
the density or intensity of use of land, including, but not limited to,
subdivision pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act (commencing with Cal. Gov’t
Code § 66410), and any other division of land, including lot splits, except
where the land division is brought about in connection with the purchase of
such land by a public agency for public recreational use; change in the
intensity of use of water, or of access thereto; construction, reconstruction,
demolition or alteration of the size of any structure including any facility of
any private, public or municipal utility; and the removal of any major
vegetation. As used in this title, "structure" includes but is not limited to
any building, road, pipe, flume, conduit, siphon, aqueduct, telephone line, and
electrical power transmission and distribution line. A "project," as defined in
Cal. Gov’t Code § 65931, is included with this definition.
   DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT. A binding contract between a developer and a city or
county establishing the conditions under which a particular development may
occur. The local government "freezes" the regulations applicable to the site
for an agreed-upon period of time (see Cal. Gov’t Code § 65864).
   DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. A discretionary entitlement which may be granted under
the provisions of this title and which when granted authorizes a specific use
to be made of specific property, subject to compliance with all terms and
conditions imposed on the entitlement.
   DISPLAY AREA. The area of a building in a retail sales store used to display
goods that are for sale.
   DRIVEWAY. A permanently surfaced area providing direct access for vehicles
between a street and a permitted off-street parking or loading area.
   DWELLING or DWELLING UNIT. A room or group of rooms (including sleeping,
eating, cooking, and sanitation facilities, but not more than one kitchen),
which constitutes an independent housekeeping unit, occupied or intended for
occupancy by one household on a long-term basis. A dwelling unit shall have
interior access between all habitable spaces, except that a junior accessory
dwelling unit containing all facilities necessary for living, sleeping, eating,
food preparation, and sanitation need not maintain interior access to the
remainder of the dwelling unit.
   EASEMENT. A grant of property rights by the property owner to the public, or
any specific person.
   ELECTRIC VEHICLE. A vehicle that uses a plug-in battery to provide all or
part of the motive power of the vehicle, including battery electric, plug-in
hybrid electric, or plug-in fuel cell vehicle.
   ELECTRIC VEHICLE SERVICE EQUIPMENT. An electric component assembly or
cluster of component assemblies designed specifically to charge batteries
within electric vehicles by permitting the transfer of electric energy to a
battery or other storage device in an electric vehicle.
   EMERGENCY SHELTER. A structure or building, including a tent, that is
utilized for sleeping purposes during a shelter crisis as part of an emergency
homeless shelter facility. An emergency homeless shelter is not a dwelling and
need not contain all provisions for living and habitation as required for
dwellings by state housing law and shall include other interim interventions,
including, but not limited to, a navigation center, bridge housing, and respite
or recuperative care.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Land, buildings, rooms, space, and/or equipment necessary for
conducting business.
   FAÇADE. The exterior wall of a building exposed to public view or that wall
viewed by persons not within the building.
   FACILITY. Land, buildings, rooms, space, and/or equipment necessary for
doing something.
   FAMILY. One or more individuals living as a single housekeeping unit in a
dwelling unit, not including a fraternity, sorority, club, or other group of
persons occupying a hotel, lodging house, or institution of any kind.
   FAR (FLOOR AREA RATIO). A measure of development intensity. FAR is the ratio
of the floor area of a building to the area of its site. For instance, both a
two-story building that covers an entire lot and a four-story building that
covers half of a lot have a FAR of two.
   FENCE. A barrier surrounding or located upon a parcel of real property or a
portion thereof and intended to prevent escape or intrusion therefrom or to
identify a boundary identity, including without limitation, screened, solid
(90%) or more closed to air, light and vision), open (50% or more), or
temporary and which may be constructed from wood, metal or masonry material or
any combination thereof.
   FLOOR AREA. The gross area included within the surrounding exterior finish
wall surface of a building or portion thereof, exclusive of courtyards.
   FURNITURE. The things placed in a room that equip it for living. This
normally includes beds, tables, chairs, sofas, desks, and shelves. Home
appliances, outdoor/patio furniture, wall cabinets, garage storage units, and
home furnishing accessories are excluded from the definition of furniture.
   GARAGE. An enclosed building or a portion of an enclosed building used for
the parking of vehicles.
   GARAGE SUBORDINATE DESIGN. The garage is set back from the front façade of a
home or the entrance to the garage is not a part of the front elevation of a
home (such as alley-loaded or side-loaded garages). For the purpose of meeting
design standards, the living space shall be at least five feet forward of a
front-facing garage.
   GENERAL PLAN. A document adopted by the City Council containing a statement
of policies, including text and diagrams, setting forth objectives, principles,
standards, and plan proposals, for the future physical development of the City
of Tulare.
   GLARE. The effect produced by brightness sufficient to cause annoyance,
discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility.
   GRADE. The degree of rise or descent of a sloping surface.
   GRADE, FINISHED. The final elevation of the ground surface after
development.
   GRADE, NATURAL. The elevation of the ground surface in its natural state
before man-made alterations.
   GRADING. The stripping, cutting, filling, and stockpiling of earth or land,
including the land in its cut or filled condition.
   GROSS ACREAGE. The total area within the lot lines of a lot or parcel of
land before public streets, easements, or other areas to be dedicated or
reserved for public use are deducted from such lot or parcel and does not
include adjacent lands already dedicated for such purposes.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Either of the following:
      (1)   A waste, or combination of wastes, which because of its quantity,
concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may either:
         (a)   Cause, or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality
or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible, illness.
         (b)   Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health
or environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of, or
otherwise managed.
      (2)   A waste that meets any of the criteria for the identification of a
hazardous waste adopted by the State Department of Health Services pursuant to
Cal. Health and Safety Code § 25117 or any other federal, State, or local law
or regulation.
      (3)   Resource Conservation and Recovery Act hazardous wastes.
      (4)   Unless expressly provided otherwise, the term "hazardous waste"
shall be understood to also include extremely hazardous waste and acutely
hazardous waste (see Cal. Health and Safety Code § 25117).
   IMPROVEMENT. Any item which becomes part of, placed upon, or is affixed to
real estate.
   INFILL DEVELOPMENT SITE. A parcel or group of parcels that make up a site
that is vacant or underutilized and is surrounded by developed land or parcels
on at least 75% of its perimeter. INFILL DEVELOPMENT SITES include previously
developed sites that may/will be redeveloped.
   INTEGRATED SHOPPING CENTER. A combination of three or more business
establishments permitted or conditional permitted in the zone district in which
they are located where off-street parking, landscaping, lighting, or other
features are developed, managed, and maintained jointly.
   KITCHEN. Any room, all, or any part of which is designed and/or used for
cooking and the preparation of food.
   LAND USE. A description of how land (real estate) is occupied or utilized.
   LANDSCAPING. An area devoted to, or developed and maintained predominantly
with, native or exotic plant materials including lawn, groundcover, trees,
shrubs, and other plant materials; artificial turf and other permeable
surfaces; and also including accessory decorative outdoor landscape elements
such as pools, fountains, paved or decorated surfaces (excluding driveways,
parking, loading or storage areas), and sculptural elements.
   LOADING SPACE. An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building
or contiguous to a group of buildings for the temporary parking of a commercial
vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
   LOT. A parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or
as otherwise permitted by law, to be used, developed or built upon. The
classifications of lots are:
      CORNER. A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets at an
angle of not more than 135 degrees. If the angle is greater than 135 degrees,
the lot shall be considered an interior lot.
      FLAG. A lot having access or an easement to a public or private street by
a narrow, private right-of-way.
      INTERIOR. A lot abutting only one street.
      KEY. A lot with a side lot line that abuts the rear lot line of any one
or more adjoining lots.
      REVERSE CORNER. A corner lot, the rear of which abuts the side of another
lot.
      THROUGH. A lot having frontage on two generally parallel streets, with
only one primary access.
   LOT AREA. The net horizontal area within bounding lot lines after
dedication.
   LOT COVERAGE. The area of a lot covered by buildings excluding eaves,
projecting balconies, ground-level paving, landscaping, and open recreational
facilities.
   LOT DEPTH. The horizontal distance between the midpoint of the front lot
line and the midpoint of the rear lot line.
   LOT FRONTAGE. The portion of the lot contiguous to the street.
   LOT LINE. Any boundary of a lot. The classifications of lot lines are:
      FRONT. On an interior lot, the line separating the parcel from the
street. On a corner lot, the shorter lot line abutting a street. (If the lot
lines on a corner lot are equal in length, the front lot line shall be
determined by the Director). On a through lot, the lot line abutting the street
providing the primary access to the lot.
      INTERIOR. Any lot line not abutting a street.
      REAR. A lot line, not intersecting a front lot line, which is most
distant from and most closely parallel to the front lot line.
   LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between side lot lines, measured at the
front setback line.
   LOW BARRIER. Best practices to reduce barriers to entry, including, but not
limited to allowing partners, pets, possessions, and privacy for participants.
   LOW BARRIER NAVIGATION CENTER. A Housing First, low-barrier, service-
enriched shelter focused on moving people into permanent housing that provides
temporary living facilities while case managers connect individuals
experiencing homelessness to income, public benefits, health services, shelter,
and housing.
   MALL. A large building or series of connected buildings containing a variety
of retail stores, restaurants, and entertainment activities including, but not
limited to, such activities as theaters, arcades, amusement rides, rock-
climbing, and other indoor recreation opportunities that serve a regional
population.
   MEDIAN. A paved or planted area separating a street or highway into two or
more lanes of opposite directions of travel.
   NON-CONFORMING LOT. A lot, the area, frontage, or dimensions of which do not
conform to the provisions of this zoning code.
   NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE. A structure that was lawfully erected prior to the
adoption of this title but does not conform with the development standards of
the district in which the structure is located, including coverage, setbacks,
height of structures, or distances between structures.
   NON-CONFORMING USE. A use that was lawfully established and maintained prior
to the adoption of this title, but does not conform with the use regulations
for the zoning district in which it is located or to the provisions of this
zoning code.
   OPEN SPACE. Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved and
set aside, dedicated, designated, or reserved for public or private use or
enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land
adjoining or neighboring such open space. Does not include areas covered by
buildings or accessory structures (except recreational structures), paved areas
(except recreational facilities), proposed and existing public and private
streets or driveways, and school sites.
   OPEN SPACE, USABLE. Recreational or leisure space for the shared use of
residents of a multi-unit development and may include gardens, playgrounds,
courtyards, swimming pools, sitting areas, court games, recreation rooms,
exercise rooms or gyms, spas, community rooms, lawn/turf used for open play,
ponds, fountains, atriums, picnic areas, rooftop gardens or green roofs, or
similar uses or facilities.
   OVERHANG. The part of a roof or wall that extends beyond the façade of a
lower wall.
   OVERLAY DISTRICT. A district established by this zoning code which may be
applied to a lot or portion thereof only in combination with a base district.
   PARAPET. The extension of the main walls of a building above the roof level.
   PARCEL. A parcel of land under one ownership that has been legally
subdivided or combined and is shown as a single parcel on the latest recorded
map in the County Recorder's office.
   PARKING AREA. Any public or private land area designed and used for parking
motor vehicles including parking lots, garages, private driveways, and legally
designated areas of public streets.
   PARKING LOT. An off-street, ground-level area, usually surfaced and
improved, for the temporary storage of motor vehicles.
   PARKING RATIO. The number of parking spaces provided per 1,000 square feet
of floor area.
   PARKING, SHARED. A public or private parking area used jointly by two or
more uses.
   PARKING SPACE. The space marked for the parking of a motor vehicle within a
public or private parking area.
   PARKING STRUCTURE OR STRUCTURED PARKING. A multi-story car park (also called
a parking garage or indoor parking) designed for car parking and where there
are a number of floors or levels on which parking takes place.
   PARKWAY. That portion of the public street right-of-way between the curb or
curb line and the adjacent sidewalk or property line, as applicable, used for
or which may be used for the purpose of planting and maintaining street trees,
shrubs, hedges, or other plants. In some areas within the city, park strips may
extend into a private property's yard beyond the sidewalk. Park strips may be
located on private property or may abut private property.
   PERFORMANCE STANDARDS. Zoning regulations that permit uses based on a
particular set of standards of operation rather than on a particular type of
use. Performance standards may provide specific criteria to limit noise, air
pollution, emissions, odors, vibration, dust, dirt, glare, heat, fire hazards,
wastes, traffic impacts, or visual impact of a use.
   PERMIT. A written governmental permission issued by an authorized official,
empowering the holder thereof to do some act not forbidden by law, but not
allowed without such authorization.
   PERMITTED USE. Any use allowed in a land use zoning district and subject to
the provisions applicable to that district.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association,
social club, fraternal organization, company, joint stock association,
corporation, estate, trust, organization, business, business trust, public
agency, school district, State of California, and its political subdivisions or
instrumentalities, receiver, syndicate or any group or combination thereof,
acting as a unit, including any trustee, receiver or assignee.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). The development of a parcel(s) or structure
(s) with two or more different land uses such as, but not limited to a
combination of residential, office, manufacturing, retail, public or
entertainment in a single or physically integrated group of structures.
   PRINCIPAL USE. The primary or predominate use of any lot, building or
structure.
   PROJECT. The total development within the boundaries as defined on the
development plan.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication,
prescription, voluntary purchase and sale, or condemnation and intended to be
occupied by a road, trail, water line, sanitary sewer and/or any other public
uses.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle or trailer capable of human habitation or
designed or used for recreational camping or travel use, whether self-propelled
or mounted on or drawn by another vehicle, or any structure inspected, approved
and designated a recreational vehicle and bearing the insignia of the State of
California or any other state or federal agency having the authority to approve
recreational vehicles. RVs include without limitation, any of the following:
camp trailer, as defined by the Cal. Vehicle Code § 324; house car, as defined
by Cal. Vehicle Code § 362; trailer coach, as defined by Cal. Vehicle Code §
635; mobile home, as defined by Cal. Vehicle Code § 396; bus, as defined by
Cal.  Vehicle Code § 233, whether altered or unaltered or for commercial or
private use; boat, watercraft, and/or trailer for a boat or watercraft;
trailers designed to carry persons, property or animals on its own structure
and to be drawn by a motor vehicle; and recreational vehicle, as defined by the
Cal. Health and Safety Code § 18010.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIAL. Reusable material including but not limited to metals,
glass, plastic, and paper, which are intended for reuse, remanufacture or
reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered form. Recyclable material
does not include refuse or hazardous materials but may include used motor oil
collected and transported in accordance with Cal. Health and Safety Code §§
25250.11 and 25143.2(b)(4).
   RECYCLING. The process by which waste products are reduced to raw materials
and transformed into new reused or reconstructed products that meet the quality
standards necessary to be used in the marketplace.
   REVIEW AUTHORITY. The person, committee, commission, or council responsible
for the review and/or final action on a land use entitlement.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land acquired by purchase, reservation, dedication,
forced dedication, prescription, or condemnation and intended to be occupied or
occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or
gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer, and other similar uses.
   ROUNDING OF QUANTITIES. The consideration of distances, unit density,
density bonus calculations, or other aspects of development or the physical
environment expressed in numerical quantities which are fractions of whole
numbers; the numbers are to be rounded to the nearest highest whole number when
the fraction is one-half or more, and to the next lowest whole number when the
fraction is one-half, except as otherwise provided in this zoning code.
   SCREENED OR SCREENING. Shielded, concealed, and effectively hidden from view
by a person standing at ground level on an abutting site, or outside the area,
screened by a fence, wall, hedge, berm, or similar architectural or landscape
feature that is at least 90% view obscuring.
   SETBACK. The area between the setback line and property line.
   SETBACK LINE. A line within a lot parallel to and measured from a
corresponding lot line, forming the boundary of a required yard and governing
the placement of structures and uses on the lot.
   SHIPPING CONTAINER. A standardized reusable vessel, prefabricated container,
or structure originally designed for or capable of being mounted or moved by
rail, truck, or ship. This definition includes the terms seatrain, C-Train, C-
van, ISO container, and cargo container.
   SIGN. Any letter or symbol made of cloth, metal, paint, paper, wood, or
other material of any kind whatsoever placed for advertising, identification,
or other similar purposes on the ground or on any wall, post, fence, building,
structure, vehicle or on any place whatsoever.
   SINGLE-ROOM OCCUPANCY (SRO). A residential facility of two or more separate
individual rooms with typically less than 500 square feet of floor space, with
or without separate kitchen or bathroom facilities for each room, rented on a
weekly or monthly basis. An SRO may not be occupied by more than one person.
SINGLE-ROOM OCCUPANCY does not include hotel or motel.
   SITE. The land or area that is the subject of a development project or use
and may include more than one lot or parcel.
   SITE AREA. The net horizontal area included within the boundary lines of a
site, not including the area within the established right-of-way of a public
street, future public street, or railroad, or any other area dedicated or to be
dedicated for a public use.
   SITE PLAN. A plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete
dimensioning all of the buildings, structures, and uses and the exact manner of
development proposed for a specific parcel of land.
   SLOPE. The degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually
expressed in percentage or degrees.
   SOLAR FACILITIES. The airspace over a parcel that provides access for solar
energy system to absorb energy from the sun.
   SPECIFIC PLAN. A plan consisting of text, maps and other documents and
exhibits regulating development within a defined area of the city, consistent
with the General Plan and the provisions of Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65450 et seq.
   STORY. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of any floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it,
then the space between such floor and ceiling next above it.
   STREET. Any public or private thoroughfare with a width of 20 feet or more
which affords a primary means of access to abutting property.
   STREET, PRIVATE. A street in private ownership, not dedicated as a public
street, which provides the principal means of vehicular access to a property
and is not to be construed to mean driveways, alleys, or parking areas.
   STREET, PUBLIC. A street owned and maintained by the city, the county, or
the state. The term includes streets offered for dedication that have been
improved or for which a bonded improvement agreement is in effect.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change in the supporting members of a structure
such as the bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, or girders.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or built. An edifice or building of any
kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined
together in some definite manner.
   STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY. A subordinate building that is incidental and not
attached to the main building or use on the same lot. If an accessory building
is attached to the main building or if the roof is a continuation of the main
building roof, the accessory building shall be considered an addition to the
main building. Includes structures regardless of whether a Building Permit is
required, including, but not limited to, enclosed and unenclosed patios, barns,
guesthouses, accessory dwelling units, garages, carports, storage buildings/
sheds, trellis, gazebos, decks, and real or artificial rockscapes.
   STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY. A structure without any foundation or footings and
which is removed when the designated time period, activity, or use for which
the temporary structure was erected has ceased.
   TARGET POPULATION. Persons with low incomes who have one or more
disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other
chronic health condition, or individuals eligible for services provided
pursuant to the Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act (Division 4.5
(commencing with § 4500) of the Cal. Welfare and Institutions Code) and may
include, among other populations, adults, emancipated minors, families with
children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system,
individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans, and homeless people.
   TEMPORARY STRUCTURE. A structure without any foundation or footings, and
which is removed when the designated time period, activity, or use for which
the temporary structure was erected has ceased.
   TEMPORARY USE. A use established for a designated period of time, with the
intent to discontinue the use at the end of the designated time period.
   TRAFFIC SAFETY SIGHT AREA. A space that is set aside on a corner lot in
which all visual obstructions, such as structures and plantings, which inhibit
visibility and thus cause a hazard to traffic and pedestrian safety are
prohibited.
   TRANSIENT BASIS. A continuous period of two weeks or less.
   UNDERUTILIZED LAND. Land with a structure or structures that occupy only a
small portion of the land and is being used significantly below its potential
use.
   USE. The purpose (type or extent) for which land or a building is arranged,
designed or intended or for which either land or a structure is occupied or
maintained.
   USE INITIATION. The implementation of a use on a parcel or occupancy of a
structure, or construction of substantial site improvements after a building
permit has been issued, subject to determination by the Director.
   USE, ACCESSORY. A use which is incidental to, and customarily associated
with, a specified principal use and which meets the applicable conditions set
forth in this ordinance.
   USE, ALLOWED. A use listed by the regulation of any particular district as a
permitted use within that district and permitted therein as a matter of right
when conducted in accord with the regulations established by this Ordinance.
   USE, CONDITIONAL. A use listed by the regulations of any particular district
as a conditional use within that district and allowable therein, solely on a
discretionary and conditional basis, subject to development/design review or to
a conditional use permit, and to all other regulations established by this
code.
   USE, PRINCIPAL. A use that fulfills a primary function of a household,
establishment, institution, or other entity.
   USE, TEMPORARY. A use established for a fixed period of time with the intent
to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time period.
   VARIANCE. A discretionary entitlement that permits the departure from the
strict application of the development standards contained in this zoning code.
   VEHICLE. A self-propelled device by which persons or property may be moved
upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks.
   WILDLANDS. Any area of land that is essentially unimproved, in a natural
state of hydrology, vegetation and animal life, and not under cultivation.
   YARD. An open space that lies between the principal or accessory building or
buildings and the nearest lot line.
   ZERO LOT LINE. The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one
or more of the building's sides rest directly on a lot line.
   ZONING CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A permit issued by the community
development department that allows the occupancy of a structure that conforms
to all applicable provisions of this chapter and any and all conditions or
requirements issued by the city or any of its departments, or by any other
federal, state or local agency or body.
   ZONING DISTRICT. A portion of the city within which certain uses of land and
structures are defined, and regulations are specified.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-7-2025)
TITLE 11: REHABILITATION ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
Chapter
   
11.04.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
11.08.   RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE CITY COUNCIL
   
11.12.   ADMINISTRATION OF PROGRAM
   
11.16.   COMMITTEES
   
11.20.   LIMITATIONS ON AMOUNT OF LOAN
   
11.24.   TERMS OF STANDARD RAP LOANS
   
11.28.   DEFERRED/SHARED APPRECIATION LOANS
   
11.32.   MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 11.04: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
11.04.010   General.
   
11.04.020   Definitions.
   
11.04.030   References to public officials and public agencies.
§ 11.04.010   General.
   There is herewith created a Rehabilitation Assistance Program (RAP) in the
city. The purpose of this RAP is to improve the condition of housing and the
quality of life in Tulare by providing a means through which property owners in
designated neighborhood conservation areas in Tulare, which are deteriorating,
may obtain financial assistance to rehabilitate their property. It shall be the
policy of the RAP to encourage the existence of low and moderate income housing
and to preserve the residential character of designated areas. The methods to
be used consist of concentrated code enforcement, low cost long term loans for
property rehabilitation and public improvements necessary to insure the success
of rehabilitation areas.
(1995 Code, § 11.04.010) (Ord. 97-1800, passed - -1997)
§ 11.04.020   Definitions.
   Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions govern this
title.
   CITY. The City of Tulare.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT AREA. The same meaning as “neighborhood conservation area.”
   DEFERRED/SHARED APPRECIATION LOAN. A loan made to a low-income owner-
occupant of a property requiring residential rehabilitation made pursuant to
Chapter 11.28 of this title.
   DESIGNATED AREA. The same meaning as NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION AREA.
   FINANCING. The lending of money for the purpose of residential
rehabilitation to a property which is subject to residential rehabilitation.
   GENERAL PROPERTY IMPROVEMENTS. Those items of residential rehabilitation
which are not necessary to remedy existing violation of city codes relating to
the physical condition of structures or incipient violations thereof.
   HOUSING ADVISORY APPEALS BOARD. A board established by the Housing Code of
the city as adopted by §
4.20.010 of the City Code of Tulare, California.
   INCIPIENT CODE VIOLATION. A physical condition which can be expected to
deteriorate into a violation of a rehabilitation standard within two years.
   LOAN COMMITTEE. The Committee established in accordance with this title.
   NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION AREA. The geographical area designated by the City
Council, including approved redevelopment project areas, for inclusion in a
comprehensive residential rehabilitation financing program pursuant to the
provisions of this title. It may also be referred to as the “designated area,”
“redevelopment project area,” “code enforcement area” or “residential
rehabilitation area.”
   PARTICIPATING PARTY. Any persons, company, corporation, partnership, firm or
other entity or group of entities requiring financing for residential
rehabilitation pursuant to the provisions of this title.
   PROGRAM. The Rehabilitation Assistance Program described in this title and
includes, but is not limited to, the provisions for code enforcement,
rehabilitation financing and installation of public improvements in
neighborhood conservation areas.
   REHABILITATION ASSISTANCE PROGRAM or RAP. The same meaning as program.
   REHABILITATION STANDARDS. The standards of the city’s Housing Code, approved
redevelopment plans or standards adopted thereto and other applicable city
codes relating to the physical condition of structures.
   RESIDENCE. Any residential dwelling unit which is located in a neighborhood
conservation area.
   RESIDENTIAL REHABILITATION. The construction, reconstruction, renovation,
replacement, extension, repair, betterment, equipping, development,
embellishing or otherwise improving residences consistent with the standards of
strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety so that such
structures are satisfactory and safe to occupy for residential purposes and are
not conducive to ill health, transmission of disease or infant mortality.
   RESIDENTIAL REHABILITATION LOAN FUND. The fund established with federal,
state or local funds allocated by the City Council; loan repayments; and funds
from gifts and other sources.
   REVENUES. All amounts received as payment of principal, shared appreciation
and all other charges received for and all other income and receipts derived by
the City of Tulare from the financing of residential rehabilitation, including
such other monies as the City Council may, in its discretion, make available
therefor.
   STANDARD RAP LOAN. Any residential rehabilitation loan made pursuant to the
provisions of this title which is not a deferred/shared appreciation loan.
(1995 Code, § 11.04.020) (Ord. 97-1810, passed - -1997; Ord. 97-1800, passed -
-1997)
§ 11.04.030   References to public officials and public agencies.
   (A)   Unless otherwise indicated, all public officials and public agencies
named in this title are officials and agencies of the city.
   (B)   Whenever a city official is referred to in this title, the reference
includes that official and his or her designee or designees.
   (C)   All references to the Charter, code or to title are references to the
Charter or code of the city.
(1995 Code, § 11.04.010) (Ord. 97-1800, passed - -1997)
CHAPTER 11.08: RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE CITY COUNCIL
Section
   
11.08.010   Appropriations.
   
11.08.020   Designation of neighborhood conservation areas.
§ 11.08.010   Appropriations.
   The City Council may, subject to budgetary and fiscal limitations,
appropriate monies to implement the program including, but not limited to,
principal, interest and shared appreciation payments made to the city by
property owners in repayment of loans made by the city pursuant to the
provisions of this program.
(1995 Code, § 11.08.010) (Ord. 97-1800, passed - -1997)
§ 11.08.020   Designation of neighborhood conservation areas.
   The area within the Alpine Redevelopment Project, including Amendment No. 2
to the Alpine Redevelopment Plan and the West Tulare Redevelopment Project,
shall be deemed designated as neighborhood conservation areas.
(1995 Code, § 11.08.020) (Ord. 99-1847, passed - -1999)
CHAPTER 11.12: ADMINISTRATION OF PROGRAM
Section
   
11.12.010   Responsibility for administration of program.
   
11.12.020   Fees and charges on financing.
   
11.12.030   Revisions of loan charges.
§ 11.12.010   Responsibility for administration of program.
   The City Manager shall be responsible for the administration of all aspects
of the RAP except those for which responsibility is specifically retained by
the City Council. The City Manager shall have such authority as may be
reasonably necessary to carry out these responsibilities.
(1995 Code, § 11.12.010) (Ord. 97-1800, passed - -1997)
§ 11.12.020   Fees and charges on financing.
   The City Manager may establish fees and special charges which he or she
deems appropriate which shall be levied against participating parties in order
to carry out the intended purposes of this title.
(1995 Code, § 11.12.020) (Ord. 97-1800, passed - -1997)
§ 11.12.030   Revisions of loan charges.
   Fees and charges for financing residential rehabilitation may be revised
from time to time by the City Manager. The revisions may reflect changes in
loan fund availability, losses due to defaults and bona fide changes in loan
servicing charges related to the administration of the program under the
provisions of this title.
(1995 Code, § 11.12.030) (Ord. 97-1800, passed - -1997)
CHAPTER 11.16: COMMITTEES
Section
   
11.16.010   Loan Committee—Membership.
   
11.16.020   Loan Committee—Functions.
   
11.16.030   Appeals.
§ 11.16.010   Loan Committee—Membership.
   There shall be a Loan Committee appointed by the Council consisting of five
members as follows:
   (A)   At least one member shall be the Redevelopment Director of the City of
Tulare. The Redevelopment Project Manager shall be the alternate to the
Redevelopment Director.
   (B)   At least one member shall be from a neighborhood conservation area who
shall be nominated by the Project Area Committee or other citizen group for the
area.
   (C)   One or more member shall be qualified in the field of real estate
lending and financing.
(1995 Code, § 11.16.010) (Ord. 06-2019, passed 6-6-2006; Ord. 03-1915, passed -
-2003; Ord. 99-1847, passed - -1999)
§ 11.16.020   Loan Committee—Functions.
   The functions of the Loan Committee are as follows:
   (A)   The Loan Committee shall review periodically the rules, regulations,
procedures and standards for the granting of residential rehabilitation loans
and shall recommend changes when desirable to the City Manager.
   (B)   The Loan Committee shall review and approve or disapprove all loan
applications.
(1995 Code, § 11.16.020) (Ord. 97-1800, passed - -1997)
§ 11.16.030   Appeals.
   Decisions of the Loan Committee may be appealed to the City Manager who may
modify such decisions as he or she deems appropriate.
(1995 Code, § 11.16.030) (Ord. 97-1800, passed - -1997)
CHAPTER 11.20: LIMITATIONS ON AMOUNT OF LOAN
Section
   
11.20.010   Maximum indebtedness on property.
   
11.20.020   Maximum amount of loan.
   
11.20.030   Limitations on use of loan for general property improvements.
   
11.20.040   Costs incidental to obtaining fee title.
   
11.20.050   Limitation based on fair market value of work.
§ 11.20.010   Maximum indebtedness on property.
   Outstanding loans on the property to be rehabilitated, including the amount
of the loan for rehabilitation, shall not exceed 95% of the anticipated after-
rehabilitation fair market value of the property to be rehabilitated, as
determined by the City Manager, except that the Loan Committee may authorize
loans of up to 110% of the anticipated after-rehabilitation fair market value
of the property if:
   (A)   There is demonstrated need for such higher limit; and
   (B)   There is a high probability that the value of the property will not be
impaired during the term of the loan.
(1995 Code, § 11.20.010) (Ord. 99-1847, passed - -1999)
§ 11.20.020   Maximum amount of loan.
   The maximum amount loaned for rehabilitation for each residential dwelling
unit within the meaning of the term as defined in this title shall be $75,000.
(1995 Code, § 11.20.020) (Ord. 06-2005, passed 2-21-2006; Ord. 99-1847, passed
- -1999)
§ 11.20.030   Limitations on use of loan for general property improvements.
   No more than 20% of any loan for residential rehabilitation shall be used
for general property improvements, except that in the case of owner-occupied,
one-to-four residential dwelling unit properties, up to 40% of the loan may be
used for general property improvements.
(1995 Code, § 11.20.030) (Ord. 97-1800, passed - -1997)
§ 11.20.040   Costs incidental to obtaining fee title.
   A RAP loan may include necessary and reasonable costs incidental to
obtaining fee title to the property to be rehabilitated. Such costs may include
costs of assuming an existing obligation on the property or the necessary and
reasonable costs of obtaining a new loan.
(1995 Code, § 11.20.040) (Ord. 97-1800, passed - -1997)
§ 11.20.050   Limitation based on fair market value of work.
   Prior to the granting of any loan under this title, a qualified
rehabilitation inspector will certify in writing that the estimated cost of the
recommended work as detailed in the job specifications is reasonable. Prior to
the payment of the last installment due under the contract, the rehabilitation
inspector will make an on-premises inspection and sign a certificate of
completion and conformance certifying that the work as outlined in the job
specifications has been completed satisfactorily.
(1995 Code, § 11.20.050) (Ord. 97-1800, passed - -1997)
CHAPTER 11.24: TERMS OF STANDARD RAP LOANS
Section
   
11.24.010   Eligibility for loans.
   
11.24.020   Maximum repayment period for loan.
   
11.24.030   Interest rate.
   
11.24.040   Prepayment penalties.
   
11.24.050   Security for loan.
   
11.24.060   Insurance.
   
11.24.070   Impound account.
   
11.24.080   Transfer of loans.
   
11.24.090   Loan charges.
   
11.24.100   Non-discrimination.
   
11.24.110   Enforcement of loan provisions.
§ 11.24.010   Eligibility for loans.
   Each owner of property located within a neighborhood conservation area is
eligible for a standard RAP loan, subject to loan fund availability, provided
the owner demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Loan Committee the ability to
repay such a loan, applies for the loan within a time period to be designated
by the City Manager and meets the other requirements of this title. A standard
RAP loan may be made to investor/owners and owner-occupants having an income
above 80% of median income for Tulare County. The property owner shall agree to
all conditions of the loan agreement as a prerequisite to obtaining a loan. No
elective officer of the state or any of its subdivisions shall be eligible to
receive a loan under the provisions of this title.
(1995 Code, § 11.24.010) (Ord. 97-1800, passed - -1997)
§ 11.24.020   Maximum repayment period for loan.
   The maximum repayment period shall be 20 years.
(1995 Code, § 11.24.020) (Ord. 97-1800, passed - -1997)
§ 11.24.030   Interest rate.
   The interest rate for the standard RAP loan is established at 3% simple per
annum.
(1995 Code, § 11.24.030) (Ord. 97-1800, passed - -1997)
§ 11.24.040   Prepayment penalties.
   There shall be no penalty assessed for prepayment of any standard loan.
(1995 Code, § 11.24.040) (Ord. 97-1800, passed - -1997)
§ 11.24.050   Security for loan.
   Each RAP loan shall be secured by a deed of trust, which may be other than a
first deed of trust, naming the city as beneficiary of the trust.
(1995 Code, § 11.24.050) (Ord. 97-1800, passed - -1997)
§ 11.24.060   Insurance.
   All RAP loan agreements shall provide that so long as the loan or any
portion of it is outstanding, the owner of the property subject to the loan
shall carry adequate property insurance and provide duplicate copies of
insurance policies to the city. The City Manager shall establish standards for
determining what amount of property insurance is adequate.
(1995 Code, § 11.24.060) (Ord. 97-1800, passed - -1997)
§ 11.24.070   Impound account.
   If the City Manager deems it desirable and necessary to effectuate the
purposes of the program that an impound account be required to assure timely
payment of taxes, insurance or a maintenance reserve, he or she may, unless
precluded from doing so by state or federal law, include such a requirement in
any RAP loan agreement.
(1995 Code, § 11.24.070) (Ord. 97-1800, passed - -1997)
§ 11.24.080   Transfer of loans.
   The unpaid balance of a standard RAP loan shall be declared due and payable
upon sale or transfer of the ownership of the property, except in the case
where a single-family dwelling unit is sold to a low-income purchaser who will
be the owner-occupant, then the loan may convert to a deferred/shared
appreciation loan in accordance with the terms and eligibility requirements of
Chapter 11.28 of this title. In the event of the death of one or more of the
mortgagors, transfer of the loan may be made to a spouse or heir who occupied
the property at the time of mortgagor’s death and is otherwise eligible for a
standard RAP loan.
(1995 Code, § 11.24.080) (Ord. 97-1810, passed - -1997; Ord. 97-1800, passed -
-1997)
§ 11.24.090   Loan charges.
   Loan charges for RAP loans shall be established pursuant to the provisions
of this title and may include amounts to cover the cost of servicing loan
accounts and penalties for late payments.
(1995 Code, § 11.24.090) (Ord. 97-1800, passed - -1997)
§ 11.24.100   Non-discrimination.
   The RAP program shall be carried out in a nondiscriminatory manner, in
compliance with Civil Rights Act provisions in effect and Executive Order No.
11063 pertaining to equal opportunity in housing.
(1995 Code, § 11.24.100) (Ord. 97-1800, passed - -1997)
§ 11.24.110   Enforcement of loan provisions.
   The provisions of this title as they relate to enforcement of
nondiscrimination on the basis of race, age, sex, marital status, color,
religion, national origin or ancestry are enforceable by the city. Violation of
the loan agreement provisions required by this title may result in any
outstanding financing obtained pursuant to the loan agreement becoming
immediately due and payable.
(1995 Code, § 11.24.110) (Ord. 97-1800, passed - -1997)
CHAPTER 11.28: DEFERRED/SHARED APPRECIATION LOANS
Section
   
11.28.010   Availability and purpose.
   
11.28.020   Maximum amount of loan and eligibility.
   
11.28.030   Term.
   
11.28.040   Transferability.
   
11.28.050   Forgiveness.
   
11.28.060   Repayment.
   
11.28.070   Security.
   
11.28.080   Additional loan terms.
   
11.28.090   Source of funds.
§ 11.28.010   Availability and purpose.
   Deferred/shared appreciation loans are hereby established as a part of the
rehabilitation assistance program. The purpose of a deferred/shared
appreciation loan shall be to provide financial assistance in the form of a
deferred principal loan to low-income owner-occupants of property subject to
residential rehabilitation having an income of 80% of median income, or below,
for Tulare County.
(1995 Code, § 11.28.010) (Ord. 97-1810, passed - -1997; Ord. 97-1800, passed -
-1997)
§ 11.28.020   Maximum amount of loan and eligibility.
   A deferred/shared appreciation loan of up to $75,000 may be made to a low-
income applicant who is the owner-occupant of a one-to-four unit residential
dwelling unit building.
(1995 Code, § 11.28.020) (Ord. 06-2005, passed 2-21-2006; Ord. 99-1847, passed
- -1999)
§ 11.28.030   Term.
   A deferred/shared appreciation loan shall be for a maximum term of 75 years
and shall be due and payable upon transfer of the property unless the property
is transferred to another party who is eligible for such a loan pursuant to
this title and accepts the assignment of the rights and obligations of the
deferred/shared appreciation loan.
(1995 Code, § 11.28.030) (Ord. 97-1810, passed - -1997; Ord. 97-1800, passed -
-1997)
§ 11.28.040   Transferability.
   Upon transfer of property subject to a deferred/shared appreciation loan, or
an interest therein, to a spouse or heir who occupied the property at the time
of mortgagor’s death and who is otherwise eligible for a deferred/shared
appreciation loan, if the surviving spouse or heir so chooses and occupies the
property, the deferred/shared appreciation loan may be transferred to the
spouse or heir. A deferred/shared appreciation loan may not be transferred more
than once.
(1995 Code, § 11.28.040) (Ord. 97-1810, passed - -1997; Ord. 97-1800, passed -
-1997)
§ 11.28.050   Forgiveness.
   The deferred/shared appreciation loan shall, however, be forgiven at the end
of 15 years if the property is still occupied the property owner or his or her
rightful spouse or heir in accordance with this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 11.28.050) (Ord. 97-1810, passed - -1997)
§ 11.28.060   Repayment.
   If the owner sells the property at a bonafide sale for fair market value
(FMV), the total amount due the city shall be determined based upon the
following formula:
   (A)    The original value of the deferred/shared appreciation loan be
divided by the FMV after rehabilitation of the property as determined by a
qualified appraiser at the time of rehabilitation. This ratio shall be known as
the Shared Appreciation Value Ratio (SAVR).
   (B)    The amount due the city shall be lesser of:
      (1)   The SAVR multiplied by the sales price of the property; and
      (2)   The amount calculated by taking the sales price of the property and
subtracting from it the amounts paid out upon sale of the property to satisfy
debts owed on the property which were in a secured position superior to that of
the deferred/shared appreciation loan and the costs of any capital improvements
paid for by the property owner and the amount of all closing costs paid by the
owner. By way of example only, the following two alternatives demonstrate the
methodology for calculating the amount to be paid back to the city upon sale of
the property.
Example #1
$10,000 Loan
$50,000 Appraised Value
$60,000 Sales Price
$25,000 Outstanding 1st Mortgage
$ 5,000 Closing Costs
$ 2,000 Capital Improvements made by Owner
$10,000
$50,000 = 20% SAVR
$60,000 x 20% = $12,000
$60,000 - 25,000 - 5,000 - 2,000 = $28,000
City is paid $12,000
 
Example #2
$10,000       Loan
$50,000       Appraised Value
$60,000       Sales Price
$35,000       Outstanding 1st mortgage
$ 5,000       Closing Costs
$10,000       Capital Improvements made by Owner
$10,000
$50,000       = 20% SAVE
$60,000 x 20% = $12,000
$60,000 - 35,000 - 5,000 - 10,000= $10,000
City is paid $10,000
 
(1995 Code, § 11.28.060) (Ord. 97-1810, passed - -1997; Ord. 97-1800, passed -
-1997)
§ 11.28.070   Security.
   Deferred/shared appreciation loans shall be secured by a deed of trust,
which may be other than a first deed of trust, naming the city as beneficiary
of the trust.
(1995 Code, § 11.28.070) (Ord. 97-1800, passed - -1997)
§ 11.28.080   Additional loan terms.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, each provision required to
be contained in a standard RAP loan agreement pursuant to this title shall also
be contained in each deferred/shared appreciation loan agreement.
(1995 Code, § 11.28.080) (Ord. 97-1800, passed - -1997)
§ 11.28.090   Source of funds.
   Any funds given to or received by the city specifically for the purpose of
providing deferred/shared appreciation loans may be accepted by the City
Manager for that purpose.
(1995 Code, § 11.28.090) (Ord. 97-1800, passed - -1997)
CHAPTER 11.32: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section
   
11.32.010   Tenant displacement assistance.
   
11.32.020   Conversion to state or federal program.
   
11.32.030   Construction and effect of title.
   
11.32.040   Severability.
§ 11.32.010   Tenant displacement assistance.
   In addition to moving costs, a tenant displaced because of rehabilitation of
the dwelling unit or building in which the tenant lives may be eligible for
other relocation assistance. The city shall be responsible for the relocation
of tenants in residential units displaced due to the program, subject to the
availability of funds for this purpose. All reasonable efforts shall be made to
minimize or avoid displacement of tenants.
(1995 Code, § 11.32.010) (Ord. 97-1800, passed - -1997)
§ 11.32.020   Conversion to state or federal program.
   In the event that funds for rehabilitation loans become available through a
state or federal program on equal or more favorable terms than standard RAP
loans or deferred/shared appreciation loans, every effort shall be made to
convert to the use of such loans in existing neighborhood conservation areas.
(1995 Code, § 11.32.020) (Ord. 97-1800, passed - -1997)
§ 11.32.030   Construction and effect of title.
   The provisions of this title, being necessary for the welfare of the city
and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect its purposes.
(1995 Code, § 11.32.030) (Ord. 97-1800, passed - -1997)
§ 11.32.040   Severability.
   If any provision of this title, or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance, is held invalid, the validity of the remainder of the title and
the applicability of such provisions to other persons and circumstances shall
not be affected thereby.
(1995 Code, § 11.32.040) (Ord. 97-1800, passed - -1997)
TITLE 12: BOND FINANCING
Chapter
   
12.04.   REVENUE BONDS FOR FINANCING INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL FACILITIES
   
12.08.   HOME MORTGAGE FINANCING PROGRAM
CHAPTER 12.04: REVENUE BONDS FOR FINANCING INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL FACILITIES
Section
   
12.04.010   Definitions.
   
12.04.020   Public purpose.
   
12.04.030   Contract restrictions.
   
12.04.040   Powers.
   
12.04.050   Nonoperation.
   
12.04.060   Request for applications— Publication—Advertisements.
   
12.04.070   Rules, regulations and forms.
   
12.04.080   Applications.
   
12.04.090   Processing of applications.
   
12.04.100   Preliminary undertaking.
   
12.04.110   Undertakings.
   
12.04.120   Nonagency.
   
12.04.130   Resolution of issuance.
   
12.04.140   Indenture provisions in resolution of issuance.
   
12.04.150   Further provisions re bonds.
   
12.04.160   Compliance with state and federal laws.
   
12.04.170   Sale of bonds.
   
12.04.180   No city debt.
   
12.04.190   Net earnings.
   
12.04.200   Miscellaneous.
   
12.04.210   Other ordinances.
   
12.04.220   Statement of policy, severability.
§ 12.04.010   Definitions.
   Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, the
definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the
construction, meaning and application of words and phrases used in this
chapter.
   ACQUIRE. Acquire, construct, improve, furnish, equip, remodel, repair,
reconstruct or rehabilitate.
   ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES. The reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by
the city in the administration of the provisions of this chapter, including,
without limitation, fees and costs of paying agents, indenture trustees,
attorneys, consultants and others.
   APPLICATION. An application submitted by a company pursuant to this chapter
to obtain financing for a project under a project agreement.
   BONDHOLDER or HOLDER OF BONDS.
   (A)   Any person who shall be the holder of any outstanding bond payable to
bearer; or
   (B)   The registered owner or his or her duly authorized attorney, trustee,
representative or assigns of any outstanding bond which shall, at the time, be
registered so as to be payable other than to bearer. For the purpose of
bondholders’ voting rights or consents, bonds owned by the city shall not be
counted.
   BOND PROCEEDS. All amounts received by the city upon sale or other
disposition of any bonds.
   BONDS. The bonds, including principal (premium, if any) and interest,
authorized to be issued by the city under this chapter, including a single
bond, a promissory note or notes, or other instruments evidencing an
indebtedness or obligation. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing,
BONDS include any security issued hereunder, including any guarantee of such
security by any person given in relation to an issue of bonds, which satisfy
the following criteria:
   (A)   Are issued as part of an issue all or a major portion of the proceeds
of which are to be used directly or indirectly in any trade or business carried
on by any person who is not an exempt person within the meaning of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1954, as amended; and
   (B)   The payment of the principal or interest on which (under the terms of
the obligation or any underlying arrangement) is in whole or in major part:
      (1)   Secured by any interest in property used, or to be used, in a trade
or business or in payments in respect of the property; or
      (2)   To be derived from payments in respect of property or borrowed
money used, or to be used, in a trade or business.
   (C)   Are issued as part of an issue substantially all of the proceeds of
which are to be used, with respect to any one or more of the facilities (none
of which shall be deemed to be restricted in scope because of the provisions of
any other state law), to provide:
      (1)   For the acquisition or development of land as the site for an
industrial park;
      (2)   For any facilities meeting the criteria set forth in divisions (A)
and (B) above which the city can finance hereunder under the exemptions in the
Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended, commonly known as the “small issue
exemptions”;
      (3)   Residential real property for family units;
      (4)   Sports facilities;
      (5)   Convention or trade show facilities;
      (6)   Airports, docks, wharves, mass commuting facilities, parking
facilities or storage or training facilities;
      (7)   Sewage or solid waste disposal facilities or facilities for the
local furnishing of electric energy or gas;
      (8)   Air or water pollution control facilities;
      (9)   Facilities for the furnishing of water for any purpose if:
         (a)   The water is or will be made available to members of the general
public (including electric utility, industrial, agricultural or commercial
users); and
         (b)   Either the facilities are operated by a governmental unit or the
rates for the furnishing or sale of the water have been established or approved
by the state or political subdivision thereof, by an agency or instrumentality
of the United States, or by a public service or public utility commission or
other similar body of the state or political subdivision thereof; or
      (10)   For any other facilities which the city can finance hereunder
without violating the applicable federal laws and regulations promulgated
thereunder pertaining to industrial development bonds. The above definitions of
the words BONDS and BOND shall be construed to include all of the types of
industrial development bond facilities that can be financed on a tax-exempt
basis under the applicable federal laws and the regulations promulgated
thereunder, the details thereof, although also incorporated in such laws and
regulations, being omitted herein for the sake of brevity; and, it is intended
that the definition in this chapter will be amended to correspond with any
changes in the federal laws (but not in the regulations or in the details of
the laws). It is not intended, by including any of the above definitions, to
contravene any provisions of the City Charter and such definitions shall be so
construed. Furthermore, some of the above items are furnished by privately
owned public utilities or private concerns, and it is not intended to, nor
shall any proceedings be conducted under those provisions, without the consent
of the privately owned public utility or other private concern involved, as the
case may be.
   (D)   Are issued as part of an issue substantially all the proceeds of which
are to be used with respect to any one or more of the facilities (none of which
shall be deemed to be restricted in scope because of the provisions of any
other state law) to provide facilities (for example, hospitals) which are to be
used directly or indirectly in any trade or business carried on by any person
who is an exempt person within the meaning of the Internal Revenue Code of
1954, as amended; and any company, who so qualifies as an exempt person, may
submit an application for financing hereunder; and any company, who does not so
qualify as an exempt person, may submit an application for financing or
facilities of operation by such an exempt person, it being the intent of this
chapter to encourage all enterprises, either within or without the city, which
broaden the employment opportunities for residents of the city and which serve
the residents of the city and so make it a more attractive place for industrial
and commercial ventures. While bonds issued to provide facilities described in
this division (D) do not fall within the definition of “industrial development
bonds” as set forth in the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended, and the
regulations promulgated thereunder, the bonds shall be treated as industrial
development bonds for purposes of this chapter and may be issued substantially
in the manner set forth herein pursuant to appropriate proceedings being taken
therefor.
   CITY. The City of Tulare, California, a charter city in the state existing
under and exercising powers pursuant to the City Charter.
   CITY CHARTER. The “Charter of the City of Tulare, State of California”, as
amended from time to time.
   COMPANY. A person, partnership, corporation, whether for profit or not,
trust, or other private enterprise of whatever legal form, for which a project
is undertaken or proposed to be undertaken pursuant to this chapter, and may
include more than a single enterprise.
   COST. As applied to any project, may include without limitation, any or all
of the following:
   (A)   The cost of construction, improvement, remodeling rehabilitation,
repair and reconstruction;
   (B)   The cost of acquisition, including rights in land and other property,
both real and personal and improved and unimproved, and franchises, and
disposal rights;
   (C)   The cost of demolishing, removing or relocating any building or
structures on lands so acquired, including the cost of acquiring any lands to
which the buildings or structures may be moved or relocated;
   (D)   The cost of machinery, equipment and furnishings, and of engineering
and architectural surveys, plans and specifications;
   (E)   The cost of consultant services, including, without limitation, legal,
financial, engineering, accounting auditing, necessary or incident to a project
and of the determination as to the feasibility or practicability of undertaking
such project;
   (F)   The cost of financing, including without limitation, interest to be
paid on the bonds prior to, during and for a reasonable period after completion
of a project, underwriter’s discount, loan fees and reserves for securing
principal and interest payments and for extensions, enlargements, additions,
repairs, replacements, renovations and improvements;
   (G)   The cost of acquiring or refinancing existing obligations incurred in
connection with a project, and the reimbursement to any governmental entity or
agency or any company, of expenditures made by or on behalf of the entity,
agency or company that are costs of the project hereunder, without regard to
whether or not such expenditures may have been made before or after the
undertaking of a project by the city or delivery of bonds, all to the extent
that the costs may be legally paid from bond proceeds;
   (H)   The cost of making relocation assistance payments by the company and/
or the city, as the case may be, all as provided by state law; and
   (I)   Any other items necessary or convenient for the project, whether or
not included within the above categories. Except in the case of a company
qualifying as an exempt person under § 501 of the Internal Revenue Code of
1954, as amended, COST shall not otherwise include working capital for a
company.
   FACILITIES or FACILITY. Property suitable for any one or more of the
activities or uses described in this chapter for which bonds can be issued, and
includes incidental facilities and appurtenances and appurtenant work.
    GOVERNMENTAL DEPARTMENT. Any commission, department or agency of the state
or the United States of America with which, under any other act, the offer,
issuance or sale of the bonds is subject to authorization, qualification or
registration.
   HEALTH FACILITIES. A structure or building suitable for use as a hospital,
clinic, nursing home, home for the aged or infirm, place providing health care,
laboratory, laundry, nurses, doctors or interns’ residence, ambulatory care
center, place for administrative offices, place in which to conduct research,
place in which to house maintenance equipment and supplies, storage place,
place in which to locate utilities, auditorium, dining hall, place for food
service and preparation, place in which to house fire fighting equipment, place
in which to provide mental and physical health care and dental care, nursing
school, medical teaching school, and place in which to house offices, parking
lots, garages and buildings or structures in which to house supporting
services; and all necessary, useful and related furnishings, equipment,
machinery and appurtenances,  including, without limitation, the acquisition,
preparation and development of all lands necessary or convenient as a site or
sites for any of the foregoing.
   PROCEEDINGS. The actions taken by the city in undertaking, carrying out and
completing a project, including, without limitation, the project agreements,
indenture, bonds and resolutions.
   PROJECT. The acquisition, financing or refinancing of facilities as
authorized by this chapter.
   PROJECT AGREEMENTS. The agreements between the city and a company respecting
a project, and may include, without limitation, leases, subleases, options to
and installment or other contracts of purchase, loan and guarantee agreements,
notes, mortgages, deeds of trust and security agreements.
   PROPERTY. Any land, easements, rights-of-way, air rights, water rights,
disposal rights and any other rights, hereditaments or profits of whatever kind
and nature, improvements, buildings or other structures and any personal
property and includes, but is not limited to, machinery and equipment, whether
or not in existence or under construction, and interests in any of the
foregoing necessary, incidental or convenient in connection with a project.
   RESOLUTION OF ISSUANCE. A resolution authorizing the issuance of bonds by
the city as further provided in §
12.04.130 hereof.
   REVENUES. All rents, purchase payments and other income derived by the city
from, or with respect to, the sale, lease or other voluntary or involuntary
disposition of, or repayment of, loans with respect to property, bond proceeds
and any receipts derived from the investment of any such income or proceeds in
any fund or account of the city, but does not include receipts designated to
cover administrative expenses.
   STATE. The State of California.
(1995 Code, § 12.04.010)
§ 12.04.020   Public purpose.
   The city is hereby authorized and directed to engage in the issuance of
bonds for the accomplishment of one or more of the public purposes which it is
the declared policy of this city to achieve, all as provided in this chapter.
The purpose or purposes shall be deemed to constitute a public purpose or
purposes of the city in which the city has a peculiar and unique interest and
the exercise of the powers recognized in this chapter shall be deemed to be in
the performance of an essential governmental function and also a municipal
affair as those terms are defined by California law. Findings as to the reasons
for the adoption of this chapter, the public purposes to be achieved thereby
and other matters pertinent to this chapter are set forth in a Res. 2866, of
the Council, which is incorporated herein by reference.
(1995 Code, § 12.04.020)
§ 12.04.030   Contract restrictions.
   No attorney or firm of attorneys employed as counsel by a company may serve
as legal counsel, including bond counsel, to the city in connection with any
project or proposed project for the company. No attorney or firm of attorneys
employed as counsel by an underwriter may serve as legal counsel, including
bond counsel, to the city in connection with any project or proposed project
for the company involved. No person or firm employed as financial consultant,
advisor or underwriter by a company may serve as financial advisor to the city,
and no financial advisor to the city for a particular issue of bonds may
purchase or agree to purchase bonds from the city unless the bonds are offered
by the city at a public sale upon publication of a notice inviting bids.
(1995 Code, § 12.04.030)
§ 12.04.040   Powers.
   The city is recognized to have all powers pursuant to and as may be limited
by the City Charter which are necessary or appropriate for carrying out the
purposes of this chapter, including, without limitation, the following powers,
together with all powers incidental thereto:
   (A)   To acquire property by purchase, exchange, gift, lease, contract or
otherwise, including eminent domain;
   (B)   To maintain property;
   (C)   To dispose of property by lease, sale, exchange, donation, release,
relinquishment or otherwise;
   (D)   With respect to property, to:
      (1)   Charge and collect rent under any lease;
      (2)   Sell at public or private sale, with or without public notice;
      (3)   Sell at a premium or discount above or below appraised value or for
a nominal consideration;
      (4)   Sell on an installment payment or a conditional sales basis;
      (5)   Convey or provide for the transfer of, property without further act
of the city, upon exercise of an option; and
      (6)   Sell at a fixed or formula price, and receive for any such sale the
note or notes of a company and mortgages, deeds of trust or other security
agreements respecting the property; however, this section shall be operable
only to the extent permitted by the City Charter.
   (E)   To encumber property, including funds, whether then owned or
thereafter acquired;
   (F)   To advance funds secured by loan agreements and charge and collect
interest on the funds;
   (G)   To exercise all rights and to perform all obligations of the city
under the project agreements and resolution of issuance, including the right,
upon any event of default by or the failure to comply with any of the
obligations thereof by the lessee, purchaser or other company thereunder to
dispose of all or part of the property to the extent authorized by the project
agreements or resolution of issuance;
   (H)   To borrow money and issue its bonds for the purpose of paving all or
any part of the costs of a project, as provided in this chapter;
   (I)   To pledge the revenues or any portion thereof, and all other rights,
as security for the payment of any bonds so issued and for performance of
obligations under a resolution of issuance;
   (J)   To contract and pay compensation for professional, legal, financial
and other services;
   (K)   To refund outstanding bonds when there is a finding that the refunding
will be of benefit to a company or holders of the bonds, subject to the
provisions of the proceedings for the issuance thereof to the extent permitted
by law;
   (L)   To invest and reinvest funds, including bond proceeds, pending
application thereof to the purposes for which the bonds shall have been issued,
subject to the provisions of the proceedings for the issuance thereof;
   (M)   To acquire and hold obligations of any kind and pledge or assign the
same as further security;
   (N)   To fund administration expenses:
      (1)   By the establishment and collection of application processing and
other fees in such amounts as may be established by the Council from time to
time;
      (2)   By the acceptance of funds and other aid from governmental sources
authorized to provide such funds or aid;
      (3)   By the acceptance of contributions from business, trade, labor,
community and other associations; and
      (4)   By other legal means.
   (O)   Loans; leases; installments:
      (1)   To make a loan and/or loans to a company pursuant to a resolution
of issuance and a project agreement, and such loan or loans may be secured by a
mortgage or such other security interests as deemed advisable by the city, may
contain the unconditional promise of the company to so make payments or may be
guaranteed by such other means as approved by the city;
      (2)   To lease facilities and/or property to a company with an option for
the company to purchase such facilities and/or property at the end of the lease
term at such price as may be determined by the city;
      (3)   To enter into lease-leaseback financings with companies on such
terms as may be provided in the resolution of issuance and the project
agreements; and
      (4)   To enter into installment sale agreements with a company for
facilities constructed by the city, with title to pass from the city to such
company upon entering into such agreement or upon payment in full of the
principal and interest on bonds.
   (P)   To exercise the city’s right of eminent domain in implementing the
intent of the city by adopting this chapter, to the extent possible and in the
manner required in the City Charter and applicable state laws.
(1995 Code, § 12.04.040)
§ 12.04.050   Nonoperation.
   The city shall not have the power to operate any facilities as a business.
(1995 Code, § 12.04.050)
§ 12.04.060   Request for applications— Publication—Advertisements.
   Upon this chapter becoming effective, the City Clerk shall publish in a
newspaper of general circulation within the city, a notice setting forth
substantially the following:
   (A)   That the city has duly adopted and approved this chapter seeking to
promote industrial growth within the city so as to encourage increasing long-
term employment for residents thereof;
   (B)   That on and after the effective date of this chapter, the city will
accept applications on forms approved by the city from companies interested in
entering into project agreements for the financing of facilities hereunder; and
   (C)   That the city will review such applications and determine the
feasibility of each project so submitted, and will undertake to commence the
financing thereof as soon as practicable.
(1995 Code, § 12.04.060)
§ 12.04.070   Rules, regulations and forms.
   The Council shall provide by resolution, rules and regulations setting forth
the details of the procedures for the implementation of this chapter, including
therein, without limitation, a form of application, the criteria for evaluation
and approval of the applications, the procedures for processing applications
and the deposits, fees and charges to be made hereunder and the uses of same,
or any fund or funds derived therefrom.
(1995 Code, § 12.04.070)
§ 12.04.080   Applications.
   Private industrial, manufacturing or commercial concerns may apply for
financing pursuant to this chapter by filing an application with the city on
such forms and with the city as specified pursuant to §
12.04.070 hereof and shall include, without limitation, all information
necessary to evaluate the financial reliability and stability of the
enterprise, to verify that long-term employment of local residents, will, in
fact, be increased, and to determine that the city will receive a substantial
benefit that exceeds any detriment incurred. The application shall also include
the following:
   (A)   An estimate of the maximum amount of bonds proposed to be issued, of
the sources of amounts otherwise required for the project, and an itemization
of the estimated costs and any other expenses;
   (B)   The application shall be supplemented with a commitment by the company
to comply, and/or to assist the city in complying, with all state and federal
laws in the issuance of the bonds, including, without limitation, the making of
any required application to a governmental department, for authorization,
qualification or registration of the offer, issuance, or sale of the bonds, and
any amendments thereto, and any permit or other authorization of such
governmental department, prior to the delivery by the city of the bonds;
   (C)   The application shall be supplemented with a commitment by the company
to cause and/or to assist the city in causing to be printed any prospectus or
other written or printed communication proposed to be published in connection
with the issuance, offer or sale of bonds, prior to the delivery by the city of
the bonds, and, if deemed necessary by the city, following the delivery of the
bonds;
   (D)   All commitments by the company shall specifically provide for the
company to pay all expenses in connection with the issuance, offer or sale of
the bonds, whether or not they are financially issued, to hold the city
harmless from any and all expenses and liabilities related thereto and to pay
items on an ongoing basis so that neither the city, nor its advisors,
attorneys, employees and the like will accumulate any claims against the city;
   (E)   All additional information, agreements and undertakings as the city
may require which are submitted to the city by a company shall be reproduced in
written, printed or other tangible form shall be supplied in as many copies as
the city prescribes and shall be deemed supplements or amendments to the
application.
(1995 Code, § 12.04.080)
§ 12.04.090   Processing of applications.
   (A)   Applications for projects by companies not reasonably in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter need not be accepted and further
processed.
   (B)   Receipt of any application in no way obligates the city to
preliminarily undertake the project proposed.
   (C)   Upon receipt of any application, the city shall review each
application and shall determine compliance with the purposes of this chapter
and with the criteria established pursuant hereto, and the review shall include
the making of the appropriate determinations, including, without limitation,
the determination that it is likely that the undertaking of the project by the
city will be a substantial factor in the accrual of each of the public benefits
from the use of the facilities as proposed in the application.
   (D)   Upon an affirmative determination under division (C) of this section,
a copy of the application, as then amended or supplemented, so certified by the
City Clerk, shall be entered into the records of the city, and a notice of the
acceptance of the application naming the company, stating the estimated maximum
bond issue and briefly summarizing the proposed project, shall be published
pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 6061.
   (E)   The company, not the city, shall be deemed the proposer of any
project, a copy of the application for which is filed pursuant to §
12.04.080.
   (F)   Upon the approval and certification thereof by the City Clerk, all
proceedings necessary to comply with the California Environmental Quality Act
of 1970, as amended (CEQA), any zoning, building code or other requirements of
law shall be taken or completed, as the case may be, at the expense of the
company.
(1995 Code, § 12.04.090)
§ 12.04.100   Preliminary undertaking.
   (A)   A project shall be deemed to have been preliminarily undertaken by the
city when the application has been reviewed, processed as above set forth, the
affirmative determinations above required have been made, the approval of the
city has been obtained, a period of 30 days from the date of publication of the
notice referred to in division (D) below has expired and no requests have been
received by the City Clerk for a public hearing pursuant to the publication of
the notice. Should requests be received for a public hearing on the matter, the
Council shall hold such a hearing as soon as is reasonably practicable. A
further notice shall be given of the public hearing pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code
§ 6061. If, after the public hearing, the Council decides to proceed, the
project shall be deemed to have been preliminarily undertaken, provided,
however, nothing herein shall be deemed to commit the city to proceeding, if as
a result of the public hearing, the Council decides not to proceed.
   (B)   Preliminarily undertaking a project in no way obligates the city to
undertake a project by entry into project agreements.
   (C)   The Council may decide to hold the public hearing referred to in
division (A) above, and if so, the 30-day waiting period in division (A) above
shall not apply.
   (D)   The Council may, as it deems necessary in certain instances, approve
any particular application, regardless of the form thereof, without complying
with §§
12.04.060,
12.04.070,
12.04.100(A), (B) and (C).
(1995 Code, § 12.04.100)
§ 12.04.110   Undertakings.
   The city shall undertake projects by entry into project agreements in
substance not inconsistent with the following:
   (A)   The company shall comply with all legal requirements relating to the
project and the operation, repair and maintenance of the facility, including:
      (1)   Obtaining any rezonings or variances, building, development,
environment and other permits and approvals, and licenses and other
entitlements for use, without regard to any exemption for public projects;
      (2)   Securing the issuance of any certificates of need, convenience, and
necessity or other certificates or franchises required by the state;
      (3)   Qualifying and/or registering any nonexempt issue, offer or sale of
any bonds or other security proposed to be issued by the company or others
(including the city) in connection with the project; and
      (4)   Providing satisfactory evidence of compliance with this section.
   (B)   The company shall provide or cause to be provided by others, all
amounts required for the project and all property of the project which are not
to be provided as or by expenditure of bond proceeds, and in the case of any
such amounts and property which the company proposes to cause to be provided by
others, as by contract, grant, subsidy, loan or other form of assistance, shall
provide satisfactory evidence that the amounts and property will be provided
when required.
   (C)   Expenditure of bond proceeds shall be supervised to assure proper
application to the project.
   (D)   The company shall, at its own expense, insure, repair and maintain the
facility, pay such taxes with respect to its interests in the property of the
project as is then required by law, and pay any assessments and other public
charges secured by liens, upon such interests as constitute the tax base for
property taxation (regardless of any exemption which may be provided from
property taxes) on the same basis as other property of similar character.
   (E)   The amounts payable by a company to or for the benefit of the city
shall, in the aggregate, not be less than amounts sufficient to pay any bonds
that shall be issued by the city to pay the costs of the project and to pay
those administrative expenses which relate to the administration of the project
agreements, the resolution of issuance of the bonds.
   (F)   The term of the project agreements shall extend at least until the
date on which all such bonds and all other obligations incurred by the city in
connection with a project shall have been paid in full or adequate funds for
such payment shall have been otherwise provided.
   (G)   Such additional provisions as in the determination of the city are
necessary or appropriate to effectuate the purposes of this chapter, including,
without limitation, provisions:
      (1)   For payments by a company which include amounts for administrative
expenses, in addition to the amounts which the agreement is required to
obligate the company to pay, which are incurred by the city subsequent to the
preliminary undertaking of the project by the city;
      (2)   For payment before a facility exists or becomes functional, or
after a facility has ceased to exist or be functional to any extent and from
any cause;
      (3)   For payment regardless as to whether or not the company is in
possession or is entitled to be in possession of the facility;
      (4)   Relating to the carrying out and completion of the project,
including the allocation of responsibility between the city and the company
regarding the acquisition of property, the making of other purchases, and the
contracting for construction of the project, with or without competitive
bidding, and the payment therefor;
      (5)   That some or all of the obligations of a company shall be
unconditional and shall be binding and enforceable in all circumstances
whatsoever, notwithstanding any other provision of law;
      (6)   Relating to the use, maintenance, repair, insurance, and
replacement of property of the project, such as the city and the company deem
necessary for the protection of themselves or other, including, but not limited
to, liability insurance, indemnification and events of default;
      (7)   That the company shall indemnify and hold the city harmless against
the claims and demands of all persons arising in any manner from the project,
the project agreements, the facilities, the property, its operation,
maintenance, repair and the like, including without limitation, alleged
violations of any state or federal law relating thereto or relating to this
chapter or any acts taken under this chapter; and
      (8)   For the payment of fees, charges or deposits for the purpose of
establishing and maintaining such common reserve fund or funds as may be deemed
necessary or desirable to secure the city’s bonds issued hereunder, pursuant to
rules and regulations governing the derivation, operation and use of such
common reserve fund or funds. One or more common reserve funds may be
established by the city for any or all of its bonds. The liability of any such
common reserve fund with respect to any single issue of bonds of the city may
not exceed the sum of the unpaid principal, interest and premium, if any, of
the outstanding bonds of the issue. Each common reserve fund established
pursuant to this section shall be established by the Finance Director/
Treasurer. All interest or other increment earned by investment or deposit of
moneys in such fund shall be credited to, and deposited in, the fund.
   (H)   The company shall provide for the payment of any relocation assistance
required by law and shall reimburse the city, as the case may be, for
relocation assistance services.
   (I)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, projects
developed pursuant to this chapter shall be consistent with the requirements of
the general plan of the city and any applicable redevelopment plan.
   (J)   In any project agreement entered into by the city for the financing or
refinancing of health facilities, the company shall agree that, to the extent
feasible, the company shall pass through to the patients at such health
facilities in the form of lower patient charges, the interest cost savings
achieved by the company as a result of the city issuing bonds for the financing
or refinancing of the health facilities.
   (K)   In any project agreement entered into by the city for the financing or
refinancing of health facilities, the company shall agree to obtain all
necessary health planning approvals with respect to the health facilities
proposed to be financed or refinanced by the city.
(1995 Code, § 12.04.110)
§ 12.04.120   Nonagency.
   No company shall, by reason of any project agreement, be deemed the agent of
the city in the carrying out of the agreement.
(1995 Code, § 12.04.120)
§ 12.04.130   Resolution of issuance.
   The issuance of bonds shall be authorized by the Council by a resolution of
issuance. The resolution of issuance may contain such terms and conditions of
the bonds as the Council deems advisable and in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter, including, but not limited to:
   (A)   The type, denominations, terms and maturities of the bonds as the city
may deem appropriate;
   (B)   For the bonds to be in either registered or bearer form either as to
principal or interest or both and carry such conversion and reconversion
privileges as the city may deem appropriate;
   (C)   For the bonds to be payable as serial or term bonds in such
installments as may be set forth therein and at such time or times not
exceeding 40 years from the date thereof;
   (D)   For the bonds to be payable in such mediums and at such place or
places within or without the state as the city may deem appropriate;
   (E)   For the bonds to bear interest at such rate or rates (or variable
rates, as the case may be) per annum not to exceed those specified in the
proceedings, payable at such time or times and at such place or places within
or without the state and evidenced in such manner as the city may deem
appropriate;
   (F)   For the bonds to be exchangeable for, or issuable in lieu of, such
bonds;
   (G)   For bonds to be signed on behalf of the city by facsimile signature of
the Mayor and by manual signature of the City Clerk and the seal of the city
shall be impressed, imprinted and reproduced thereon. The interest coupons on
the bonds shall be signed by facsimile signature of the City Clerk. The
foregoing officers shall be authorized and directed to sign the bonds and
coupons in accordance with the section. If any city official whose manual or
facsimile signature appears on the bonds or coupons ceases to be a member or
officer before delivery of the bonds, the signature is as effective as if the
official had remained in office. In lieu of the manual signature of the City
Clerk on the bonds, they may be authenticated by the manual signature of a duly
authorized officer of the trustee on the particular bond issue involved;
   (H)   If deemed advisable by the city, there may be retained in the
proceedings an option to redeem prior to maturity all or any part of any bonds
as may be specified in the proceedings, at such price or prices and after the
notice or notices and on such terms and conditions as may be set forth in such
proceedings and as may be briefly recited in the bond. Nothing in this chapter
shall be construed to confer on the city any right or option to redeem any
bonds, except as may be provided in the proceedings under which they shall have
been issued;
   (I)   For the fixing and collection of revenues;
   (J)   For the creation and maintenance of special funds from such revenues,
including reserve and sinking funds;
   (K)   For limitations on expenditures of bond proceeds;
   (L)   For the procedure by which any contract represented by bonds may be
amended or abrogated;
   (M)   For the acts and omissions which shall constitute, and the right and
remedies available, in an event of default. In such event of default, the
obligations of the city may be enforced by mandamus, by the appointment of a
receiver, by foreclosure of, or sale under, any resolution of issuance by
injunction, by specific performance, by equitable relief, or by any one or more
of such remedies, or any other appropriate remedy authorized by law;
   (N)   Limitations on the issuance of additional bonds, the terms upon which
additional bonds may be issued and secured and be refunding of outstanding
bonds;
   (O)   The procedure, if any, by which the terms of any contract with
bondholders may be amended or abrogated, the amount of bonds the holder of
which must consent thereto, and the manner in which such consent may be given;
   (P)   For the payment of administrative expenses or other expenses of the
city;
   (Q)   Specifications of the acts or omissions to act which shall constitute
a default in the duties of the city to holders of the bonds and providing the
rights and remedies of the holders in the event of default;
   (R)   Issuing bonds in temporary form pending preparation of bonds in
definitive form, at which time the temporary bonds shall be exchanged for
definitive bonds in bearer or fully registered form;
   (S)   For any additional matters authorized to be included in the indenture
provisions of a resolution of issuance or which relate to the security,
protection or remedies of bondholders or which tend to make the bonds more
marketable; and
   (T)   The bonds to contain such provisions not inconsistent with this
chapter as the city may deem appropriate which are for the protection of the
city or the bondholders or which tend to make the bonds more marketable.
(1995 Code, § 12.04.130)
§ 12.04.140   Indenture provisions in resolution of issuance.
   In the discretion of the city, any bonds issued under the provisions of this
chapter may be secured by indenture provisions in the resolution of issuance by
and between the city and a corporate trustee or trustees, which may be any
trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company within the state and
the resolution of issuance may contain such provisions which are customarily
found in indentures including, without limitation, the provisions hereinafter
set forth. The resolution of issuance may vest in bondholders the right to
remove and appoint a new trustee or trustees. The trustee or trustees may, at
any time, own all or any part of the bonds unless otherwise provided in the
resolution of issuance. The resolution of issuance may vest in the trustee or
trustees, in trust or as agents, as provided therein and as consistent with
other provisions of this section, property, rights, powers and duties and may
provide that the revenues and any other rights be pledged as security for
repayment of the bonds, subject to such agreements with bondholders as may then
exist. The resolution of issuance may contain covenants of the city as to the
acquisition of property, the disposition of any property or part thereof, the
subjecting of additional property to the lien thereof, the issuance of
additional bonds, the custody, investment and application of all moneys, the
creation and maintenance of reserves, the disposition of insurance or
condemnation proceeds and the use of surplus bond proceeds. Any such resolution
of issuance may define events of default thereunder, which may include events
of default by a company under the project agreements, may specify the action to
be taken by the city upon an event of default, may set forth the rights and
remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee or trustees and may restrict the
individual right of action by bondholders. In addition, any such resolution of
issuance may contain such other provisions as the city may deem reasonable and
proper and which relate in any way to the security or protection of
bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out the provisions of such
resolution of issuance shall be treated as an administrative expense. Any
interest in property established by any resolution of issuance shall be valid
and binding from the date thereof and any revenues or amounts to cover
administrative expenses received by or on behalf of the city thereunder shall
immediately be subject to the lien thereof without any further act, which lien
shall be valid and binding as against all persons, irrespective of notice,
without any filing or recording except a filing in the records of the city. All
revenues, excepting (unless otherwise provided) bond proceeds shall further be
deemed to be trust funds and all revenues shall be held and applied solely as
provided in such resolution of issuance, but no bondholder shall, as such, be
in any manner obligated to see to the proper application thereof.
(1995 Code, § 12.04.140)
§ 12.04.150   Further provisions regarding bonds.
   All bonds issued by the city for a project shall be special obligations only
of the city, payable solely from the revenues or from the other sources
specified in the proceedings. In addition and without limitation to the other
provisions of this chapter:
   (A)   The bonds may be executed and delivered by the city at any time and
from time to time;
   (B)   The issuance by the city of one or more issues of bonds for one or
more purposes shall not preclude it from issuing other bonds in connection with
the same project or any other project, subject to such agreements with
bondholders as may then exist;
   (C)   Any bonds of the city issued hereunder at any time outstanding may, at
any time, and from time to time, be refunded by the city by the issuance of its
refunding bonds in such amount as the city may deem necessary or appropriate.
Bonds may be issued as one issue for refunding and other authorized purposes.
Any refunding may be effected whether the bonds to be refunded shall have then
matured or shall thereafter mature, either by sale of the refunding bonds and
the application of the bond proceeds to the purchase or redemption of the bonds
to be refunded thereby or by the exchange of the refunding bonds for the bonds
to be refunded thereby with the consent of the holders of the bonds so to be
refunded and with such cash adjustments as may be agreed and regardless of
whether or not the bonds proposed to be refunded shall be payable at the same
date or different dates or shall be due serially or otherwise, and
notwithstanding any other provision of the law, the proceedings for the
issuance of the refunding bonds may provide for the payment into an escrow fund
such moneys, together with the interest to be earned thereon, which will be
sufficient to pay the principal of, and interest and premium, if any on the
bonds so refunded to the earliest or subsequent date of redemption, purchase or
maturity of the refunded bonds; and
   (D)   Each bond shall be deemed to be an investment security under the
Uniform Commercial Code as adopted by the state and a negotiable instrument,
subject only to any provisions thereof or registration or other provisions
restricting transfer and shall be deemed to have been issued for an authorized
purpose of the city in the exercise of the powers pursuant to this chapter,
provided that the city so determines in the proceedings and the determination
is recited in the bond.
(1995 Code, § 12.04.150)
§ 12.04.160   Compliance with state and federal laws.
   Any and all bonds issued pursuant to this chapter shall be issued in
compliance with state laws not in conflict herewith and federal laws and
regulations relating to the issuance of securities and the federal laws and
regulations relating to the exemption from federal income taxation.
(1995 Code, § 12.04.160)
§ 12.04.170   Sale of bonds.
   Bonds may be sold at such prices and in such manner as the Council may
direct, at public or private sale. The bonds may be sold at above or below the
par or face value thereof, but the sale price shall not be less than the
percentage of the par or face value of the bonds specified in the proceedings.
(1995 Code, § 12.04.170)
§ 12.04.180   No city debt.
   (A)   None of the bonds issued by the city pursuant to this chapter shall be
deemed to constitute a debt or liability of the city or a pledge of the faith
and credit of the city but shall be payable solely from the revenues and other
funds, if any, provided therefor in the proceedings.
   (B)   This issuance of bonds shall not directly or indirectly or
contingently obligate the city to levy or to pledge any form of taxation
whatsoever therefor or to make any appropriation for their payment.
   (C)   All bonds shall contain on the face thereof a statement to the
following effect:
      “Neither the faith and credit nor the taxing power of the City of Tulare
is pledged to the payment of the principal of, premium, if any, or interest on
this bond, nor is the City of Tulare in any manner obligated to make
appropriation for payment.”
   (D)   Neither the Council nor any persons executing the bonds shall, in any
event, be subject to any personal liability or accountability by reason of the
issuance of the bonds.
   (E)   The bonds shall be a special obligation of the city, and the city
shall, under no circumstances, be obligated to pay bonds or project costs
(other than administrative expenses) except from revenues and other funds
received under the project agreements for such purposes nor to pay
administrative expenses except from funds received under project agreements for
such purposes or from funds which are made available as otherwise authorized by
law. All bonds shall contain on the face thereof a statement of their special
obligation nature.
(1995 Code, § 12.04.180)
§ 12.04.190   Net earnings.
   Any net earnings realized by the city pursuant to this chapter shall inure
solely to the benefit of the city and not to the benefit of any company or
private person.
(1995 Code, § 12.04.190)
§ 12.04.200   Miscellaneous.
   (A)   This chapter, being necessary for the welfare of the city and its
inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect its purposes.
   (B)   The City of Tulare pledges and agrees with the holders of any bonds
issued and with those companies which may enter into project agreements
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter relating to the bonds, that the city
will not amend this chapter so as to adversely affect vested rights of the
holders of the bonds or the companies executing project agreements relating
thereto until the obligations evidenced by the bonds are fully met or
discharged and the project agreements are fully performed or discharged on the
part of the city, provided however, that nothing herein contained shall
preclude the alteration or change:
      (1)   If them will be no impairment of the contracts represented by the
bonds, based upon a finding made by the Council after a public hearing and the
receipt of appropriate opinions and evidence relating thereto;
      (2)   If, and when, adequate provision shall have been made for the
protection from impairment of the contracts represented by the bonds and
project agreements; or
      (3)   To amend this chapter so as to make it more efficient, cure
ambiguities, defects, inconsistent provisions, clarify matters or questions
arising under this chapter, take advantage of new legal or conceptual
developments or otherwise improve this chapter and the application thereof to
the benefit of the city and its citizens and the right to so alter or change is
hereby reserved.
   (C)   An action may be brought pursuant to Cal. Code of Civil Procedure
Chapter 9 (commencing with § 860) of Part 2 of Title 10 to determine the
validity of bonds, proceedings, project agreements or indentures, including,
without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the legality of all
proceedings theretofore taken or proposed to be taken in such proceedings,
pursuant to this chapter; and all of such matters respecting which an action
may be brought pursuant to Cal. Code of Civil Procedure Chapter 9 of Part 2 of
Title 10 shall be subject to the provisions thereof regarding validity,
limitation of actions and incontestability.
   (D)   This chapter provides a complete and alternative method for the doing
of the things authorized hereby but the authorizations shall be regarded as
supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, provided
however, that in the exercise of any of the powers conferred, including powers
relating to the offer, issuance and sale of bonds under the provisions of this
chapter, the city need not comply with the provisions of any law applicable to
the exercise of similar powers except as referred to in this chapter.
   (E)   Except to the extent that a particular word or phrase is otherwise
specifically defined in this chapter, the definition of each word or phrase
shall constitute, to the extent applicable, the definition of each word or
phrase which is derivative from it or from which it is a derivative as the case
may be. Words of the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter genders.
Words importing the singular number include the plural number and vice versa.
Words importing persons shall include corporations and associations, including
public bodies, as well as natural persons. The terms “hereby”, “hereof”,
“hereto”, “herein”, “hereunder” and any similar terms used in this chapter
refer to this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 12.04.200)
§ 12.04.210   Other ordinances.
   The city presently has no ordinances or parts of ordinances that are in
conflict with this chapter.
(1995 Code, § 12.04.210)
§ 12.04.220   Statement of policy, severability.
   The Council hereby declares that the ordinance enacting this chapter is an
exercise of the power granted to the city by the Constitution of the State of
California and is an exercise by the city of its powers as to municipal affairs
and this chapter shall be liberally construed to be valid under the
Constitution of the State of California and the Constitution of the United
States of America. If any section, paragraph, division, sentence, clause or
phrase of this chapter shall for any reason be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional, unenforceable or invalid, such
judgment shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this
chapter. The Council hereby declares it would have adopted this chapter and
each and every other section, paragraph, division, sentence, clause or phrase
hereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, paragraphs,
divisions, sentences, clauses or phrases of this chapter may be held to be
unconstitutional, unenforceable or invalid.
(1995 Code, § 12.04.220)
CHAPTER 12.08: HOME MORTGAGE FINANCING PROGRAM
Section
   
12.08.010   Adoption of Home Mortgage Financing Program.
   
12.08.020   Findings.
   
12.08.030   Liberal construction.
   
12.08.040   Effective date.
§ 12.08.010   Adoption of Home Mortgage Financing Program.
   Based upon the findings of the City Council, the city adopts the Program
pursuant to the Act for the purpose of increasing the housing supply for
moderate and low-income families in the city.
(1995 Code, § 12.08.010)
Statutory reference:
   Act, see Cal. Health and Safety Code Chapters 1 through 5 of Part 5 of
Division 31
§ 12.08.020   Findings.
   The City Council hereby finds and declares that:
   (A)   Decent housing is an essential motivating force in helping people to
achieve self-fulfillment in a free and democratic society;
   (B)   A healthy housing market is one in which residents of this state have
a choice of housing opportunities and one in which the housing consumer may
effectively choose within the free market;
   (C)   There exists within the city a shortage of housing available to
moderate and low-income persons, as such person are now or hereafter defined by
the provisions of the Act, and that this shortage is exacerbated during periods
of rising interest rates, particularly as high interest rates have the effect
of diminishing the number of otherwise creditworthy buyers from qualifying for
private sector mortgage capital sources, and in order to remedy this adverse
effect on potential homebuyers on the low end of the purchasing spectrum, it is
necessary to implement a public program to reduce the cost of mortgage
financing for single-family purchases for those persons unable to complete for
mortgage financing in the conventional mortgage market; and
   (D)   It is necessary, in order to implement a public program to reduce the
cost of mortgage financing, to authorize long-term, low-interest mortgages to
persons not presently eligible for financing through private sector lending
institutions to finance construction, rehabilitation and acquisition of homes,
and in order to finance the Program, to issue mortgage revenue bonds to fund
the Program.
(1995 Code, § 12.08.020)
§ 12.08.030   Liberal construction.
   The provisions of this chapter, being necessary for the welfare of the city
and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect the purpose of the
Program.
(1995 Code, § 12.08.030)
§ 12.08.040   Effective date.
   The Mayor shall sign this chapter and the City Clerk shall cause the same to
be published within 15 days after its passage at least once in Advance
Register, a newspaper of general circulation in the city. This chapter will
take effect immediately upon adoption pursuant to Cal. Health and Safety Code §
52031. The facts constituting the public purpose of this chapter are the
findings of the City Council set forth in §
12.08.020.
(1995 Code, § 12.08.040)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to California Codes
References to 1995 Code
References to United States Code
References to Code of Federal Regulations
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO CALIFORNIA CODES
 
Alcohol Beverage Control Act
California Code Cite Code Section
2(b)                 6.28.040
 
Business and Professions Code
California Code Cite Code Section
Business and Professions Code
California Code Cite                      Code Section
Div. 2, Ch. 10.5                          5.104.020
                                          5.104.010;
4600 et seq.                              5.104.020 ;
                                          5.104.040;
                                          5.104.130
4600.5                                    5.104.020
5500.1                                    10.52.110;
                                          10.52.120
                                          10.52.030;
5615                                      10.52.110;
                                          10.52.120
5641                                      10.52.110;
                                          10.52.120
5641.1                                    10.52.110;
                                          10.52.120
5641.2                                    10.52.110;
                                          10.52.120
5641.3                                    10.52.110;
                                          10.52.120
5641.4                                    10.52.110;
                                          10.52.120
5641.5                                    10.52.110;
                                          10.52.120
5641.6                                    10.52.110;
                                          10.52.120
6700 et seq.                              8.24.130
6701                                      10.52.110;
                                          10.52.120
7000 et seq.                              5.60.050
7027.5                                    10.52.110;
                                          10.52.120
7040                                      5.60.030
7041                                      5.60.030
7042                                      5.60.030
7043                                      5.60.030
7044                                      5.60.030
7045                                      5.60.030
7046                                      5.60.030
7047                                      5.60.030
7048                                      5.60.030
7049                                      5.60.030
Ch. 9.5 (commencing with §§ 7200 et seq.6.12.050
8700 et seq.                              8.24.130
8771                                      8.24.350
11003.2                                   8.24.130
11004                                     8.24.130
17200 et seq.                             5.104.110
17510.25                                  7.56.040
19300 et seq.                             5.98.040
19300.5                                   5.96.240
19300.5(m)                                7.48.020;
                                          10.96.020
19323                                     5.96.100;
                                          5.96.110
19400.5(f)                                7.48.020
19400.5(k)                                7.48.020
21500 et seq.                             Ch. 5.16
22435                                     7.60.100
22435.1                                   7.60.100
                                          
 
Civil Code
California Code Cite Code Section
Civil Code
California Code Cite Code Section
51.3                 10.82.020
51.12                10.82.020
714(c)(iii)          4.96.020
729.29               8.24.130
783                  8.24.130
798.76               10.82.020
799.5                10.82.020
801.5(a)(1), (2)     4.96.020
815–816            10.66.040;
                     10.66.070
815.3                10.66.080
851                  8.24.130
1350                 8.24.020
1351                 10.52.030
1714.1               6.52.060
1834.5               6.12.370
1942.5               4.80.050
3341                 6.12.410
3482.5               6.12.210
3490                 7.28.030
3493                 6.12.210
4100                 10.82.020
4125                 8.24.130
                     
 
Code of Civil Procedure
California Code Cite Code Section
Code of Civil Procedure
California Code Cite                               Code Section
Ch. 9 of Part 2 of Title 10                        12.04.200
Ch. 9 (commencing with § 860) of Part 2 of Title 212.04.200 
                                                   5.74.160;
                                                   5.76.190;
1094.6                                             6.12.240;
                                                   6.12.370;
                                                   7.40.210;
                                                   7.64.290
1094.8                                             5.88.140
1162                                               7.52.060
                                                   
 
California Code Cite Code Section
California Code Cite                    Code Section
Title 14                                7.17.030
Title 14, Art. 2, Div. 7, Ch. 12        7.17.100
Title 14, Div. 7, Ch. 12                7.17.030
Title 14, Div. 7, Ch. 12, § 18982(a)(7)7.17.030
Title 14, § 17402(a)(6.5)              7.17.030
Title 14, § 17402(a)(11.5)             7.17.030
Title 14, § 17402(a)(18.7)             7.17.030
Title 14, § 17402(a)(26.6)             7.17.030
Title 14, § 17402.5(b)(4)              7.17.030
Title 14, § 17409.5.8(c)(2)            7.17.030
Title 14, § 17409.5.8(c)(3)            7.17.030
Title 14, § 17855(a)(4)                7.17.030
Title 14, § 17896.2(a)(4)              7.17.030
Title 14, § 17896.5                    7.17.030
Title 14, § 18815.2(a)(13)             7.17.030
Title 14, § 18815.2(a)(49)             7.17.030
Title 14, § 18815.2(a)(62)             7.17.030
Title 14, § 18815.5(d)                 7.17.030
Title 14, § 18815.5(e)                 7.17.030
Title 14, § 18815.5(f)                 7.17.030
Title 14, § 18815.7                    7.17.030
Title 14, § 18981.2                    7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(14.5)                7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)                   7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(6)                7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(7)                7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(8)                7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(18)               7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(22)               7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(24)               7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(25)               7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(26)               7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(27)               7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(28)               7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(30)               7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(31.5)             7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(33)               7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(35)               7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(38)               7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(39)               7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(40)               7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(41)               7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(42)               7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(43)               7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(45)               7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(46)               7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(48)               7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(49)               7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(51)               7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(54)               7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(55)               7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(60)               7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(61)               7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(62)               7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(64)               7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(65)               7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(66)               7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(66)(A)            7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(71)               7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(73)               7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(74)               7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982(a)(73) and (a)(74)   7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982.2(a)(5)              7.17.030
Title 14, § 18982.2(a)(29)             7.17.030
Title 14, § 18983.1(b)                 7.17.030
Title 14, § 18984.1                    7.17.030;
                                        7.17.110
Title 14, § 18984.1(a) and (b)         7.17.030
Title 14, § 18984.1(a)(1)(A)           7.17.030
Title 14, § 18984.2                    7.17.030;
                                        7.17.110
Title 14, § 18984.2(a)(1)(C)           7.17.030
Title 14, § 18984.3                    7.17.030;
                                        7.17.110
Title 14, § 18984.8                    7.17.060
Title 14, § 18984.9(b)                 7.17.060
Title 14, § 18984.9(b)(3)              7.17.060
Title 14, § 18984.9(c)                 7.17.050;
                                        7.17.060
Title 14, § 18989.1                    7.17.100
Title 14, § 18991.3(b)                 7.17.080;
                                        7.17.090
Title 14, § 18991.4                    7.17.080
Title 14, § 18991.5(a)(1)              7.17.090
Title 14, § 18991.5(a)(2)              7.17.090
Title 14, § 18995.4                    7.17.030
Title 14, § 18996.2                    7.17.130
Title 14, § 189852(a)(75)              7.17.030
Title 14, § 189852(a)(76)              7.17.030
Title 16, § 832.27                     10.52.110;
                                        10.52.120
                                        7.09.130;
Title 17                                7.21.020;
                                        7.21.030;
                                        7.21.110
Title 17, § 2606.2                     6.12.410
Title 19                                10.50.030
Title 19 et seq.                        3.08.030
                                        7.20.570;
Title 22                                7.21.010;
                                        7.21.020;
                                        7.21.030
Title 22, Ch. 2. §§ 1000005 et seq.   7.40.050
Title 22, Ch. 3, §§ 100101 et seq.    7.40.050
Title 22, Div. 4                        7.21.020
Title 24                                10.50.080
Title 24, Part 2                        4.04.020
Title 24, Part 2.5                      4.04.030
Title 24, Part 3                        4.04.040
Title 24, Part 4                        4.04.050
Title 24, Part 5                        4.04.060
Title 24, Part 6                        4.04.070
Title 24, Part 8                        10.38.020
Title 24, Part 9, App. B–N            3.08.010
Title 24, Part 12                       4.04.090
Title 27                                7.17.030
                                        
 
 
Education Code
California Code Cite                     Code Section
Title 2, Div. 4, Part 27, Ch. 9, Art. 13 7.17.080
(comm. with § 49580)
                                         
 
 
Elections Code
California Code Cite Code Section
                     Chtr.
--                   Sec. 11;
                     12
9480 et seq.         1.36.020
                     
 
 
Fire Code
California Code Cite Code Section
                     
 
 
Fish and Game Code
California Code Cite Code Section
2116                 6.12.050;
                     6.12.180
                     
 
Food and Agricultural Code
California Code Cite Code Section
Food and Agricultural Code
California Code Cite Code Section
6721                 10.52.110;
                     10.52.120
30804.5              6.12.100
30955                6.12.410
31108                6.12.340
31108.5              6.12.340
31254                6.12.340;
                     6.12.370
31752                6.12.340
31753                6.12.340
31754                6.12.340
81000                10.96.020
                     
 
Government Code
California Code Cite Code Section
Government Code
California Code Cite                                       Code Section
Title 7, 65000                                             10.02.050
Art. 2.5 (commencing with 65864) of Ch. 4, Div. 1, Title 7 8.56.020
Ch. 5 (commencing with 66000) Div. 1 of Title 7            8.56.160
912.4                                                      5.74.150;
                                                           5.76.180
913                                                        5.74.150;
                                                           5.76.180
935                                                        5.74.150;
                                                           5.76.180
935(b)                                                     5.74.160;
                                                           5.76.190
945.6                                                      5.74.150
946                                                        5.74.150
1481                                                       1.20.020
6061                                                       12.04.090;
                                                           12.04.100
6062a                                                      1.64.060
6250 et seq.                                               7.17.120
12580 12583                                                7.56.040
25845                                                      10.68.150
36518 36521                                                1.20.020
36805 36810                                                1.16.010
36900                                                      7.64.200
36901                                                      7.64.200
37100.5                                                    5.98.020
37101                                                      5.98.020
38771                                                      7.28.130
38771 et seq.                                              8.52.250
                                                           3.08.100;
38773.5                                                    3.16.100;
                                                           7.29.180
38775                                                      8.08.050
43072                                                      1.48.020
45300–45345                                              1.40.010
50485                                                      10.44.010
51070–51097                                              10.66.040;
                                                           10.66.070 
51200 et seq.                                              10.66.070
51500–51519                                              1.32.030
51540–51562                                              1.48.020
51800                                                      1.48.020
                                                           1.61.010;
53069.4                                                    1.61.130;
                                                           6.12.080
53069.5                                                    6.52.110
53.075.5                                                   5.36.125
53750(h)(2)                                                5.74.130;
                                                           5.76.160
53750(h)(2)(A)                                             5.76.030;
                                                           5.76.040
54992                                                      1.64.050
54994.1                                                    1.64.050
54994.2                                                    1.64.050
56011                                                      10.94.020
56654                                                      10.94.030
56700                                                      10.94.080
64999                                                      7.20.1070
64999.3                                                    7.20.1070
65000                                                      10.44.010
65302                                                      10.48.010
65450 et seq.                                              10.98.020
65466                                                      8.04.070
65560                                                      10.48.010
65583.2(i)                                                 10.82.030
65589.5(d)(2)                                              10.82.040;
                                                           10.82.110
65800                                                      10.48.010
65850.5                                                    4.96.010;
                                                           4.96.030
                                                           8.56.120;
                                                           10.10.110;
                                                           10.12.110;
                                                           10.14.110;
65852.2                                                    10.16.110;
                                                           10.18.110;
                                                           10.54.160;
                                                           10.60.030;
                                                           10.96.020
65852.21                                                   10.08.020
65965 et seq.                                              10.66.080
65852.22                                                   10.60.040;
                                                           10.96.020
66487                                                      8.64.020
65864                                                      10.98.020
65864 et seq.                                              8.56.010;
                                                           10.89.010
                                                           10.82.010;
65915                                                      10.82.060;
                                                           10.82.070;
                                                           10.98.020
65915(d)(3)                                                10.82.110
65915(e)                                                   10.82.110
65915.5                                                    10.82.020
65915 et seq.                                              10.82.010
65931                                                      10.98.020
66001(d)                                                   8.56.150;
                                                           8.56.110
66001(e)                                                   8.56.110
66001(f)                                                   8.56.110
66001 66009                                                8.56.010
66007                                                      8.56.080
66410                                                      10.98.020
                                                           8.24.010;
66410 et seq.                                              8.24.130;
                                                           8.26.030
66412(d)                                                   8.24.380
66415                                                      8.24.050
66426                                                      8.24.150
66427.1                                                    8.24.330
66428                                                      8.24.050;
                                                           8.24.150
66434                                                      8.24.320
66434(c)                                                   8.24.130
66435 - 66443                                              8.24.320
66451 et seq.                                              8.24.070
66451                                                      8.24.130
66451.10 - 66451.33                                        8.24.390;
                                                           8.24.400
66451.11(b)                                                8.24.390;
                                                           8.24.400
66451.30(a)                                                8.24.390
66451.30(b)                                                8.24.390
66452.5                                                    8.24.080
66452.6                                                    8.24.260
66452.6(a)(1)                                              8.24.260
66452.11                                                   8.24.260
66452.21                                                   8.24.260
66452.22                                                   8.24.260
66452.23                                                   8.24.260
66452.24                                                   8.24.260
66456.1                                                    8.24.260
66462.5                                                    8.24.500
66469                                                      8.24.360
66472.1                                                    8.24.360
66473.7                                                    8.24.220
66474                                                      8.24.360
66477                                                      8.26.030;
                                                           8.56.020
66477(e)                                                   8.26.050
66477.1                                                    8.24.450
66487                                                      8.64.020
66498.5(c)                                                 8.24.290
66499 et seq.                                              8.24.510
66499.3                                                    8.24.520
66499.4                                                    8.24.520
66499.7                                                    8.24.520
66499.20.1                                                 8.24.410
66499.35(b)                                                8.24.100
                                                           10.10.160;
                                                           10.12.160;
115920                                                     10.14.160;
                                                           10.16.160;
                                                           10.18.160;
                                                           10.60.230
                                                           
 
Health and Safety Code
California Code Cite Code Section
Health and Safety Code
California Code Cite                        Code Section
Ch. 1 5, Part 5 of Div. 31                  12.08.010
Div. II, Part 2                             3.08.080
Div. 10                                     6.08.060
Div. 10.5                                   6.08.060
1797 et seq.                                7.40.050
1797.52                                     7.40.050
1797.60                                     7.40.050
1797.80                                     7.40.050
1797.82                                     7.40.050
1797.170                                    7.40.050
1797.171                                    7.40.050
Part 1.5 (commencing with 17910) of Div. 13 4.32.030
10021.5                                     10.96.020
10021.6                                     10.96.020
                                            5.88.230;
11000 et seq.                               7.49.020;
                                            7.49.110
11018                                       5.96.240
11018.1                                     5.96.240
11018.5                                     5.96.240;
                                            10.96.020
11053 through 11058                         7.49.020
                                            7.49.020;
11357.5                                     7.49.040;
                                            7.49.110
11362.5                                     7.48.020;
                                            10.96.020
11362.7 et seq.                             7.48.020
11375.5                                     7.49.020;
                                            7.49.110
11380.5                                     6.56.020;
                                            6.56.030
11380.5(a)                                  6.56.010
11401                                       7.49.020;
                                            7.49.110
114287                                      5.92.170
12500 through 12637                         3.08.080
12508                                       8.36.160
12529                                       3.08.080
12599.5                                     3.08.080
12689(b)                                    3.08.080
12700(b)(4)                                 3.08.040
15000 et seq.                               5.12.010
17922.12                                    10.52.030
18001.8                                     8.24.130
                                            5.68.020;
18008                                       8.24.130;
                                            10.60.140
18008.5                                     10.60.140
18010                                       10.98.020
18901 et seq.                               10.82.040
18551                                       10.60.120
Div. 104, Part 9, Ch. 8 (comm. with 114860) 7.17.030
Div. 104, Part 14 (comm. with 117600)       7.17.030
25110.1                                     10.96.020
25117                                       10.98.020
25143.2(b)(4)                               10.98.020
2520.11                                     10.98.020
25501 of Ch. 6.95, Div. 20                  3.16.020
33030                                       10.94.030
33031                                       10.94.030
39730.5                                     7.17.030
39730.6                                     7.17.030
39730.7                                     7.17.030
39730.8                                     7.17.030
40100                                       5.96.030
41099                                       5.96.030
50052.5                                     10.82.040
50079.5                                     10.82.020
50093                                       10.82.020
50105                                       10.82.020
50675.14                                    10.96.020
52031                                       12.08.040
53260                                       10.96.020
113783                                      7.17.030
113789                                      7.17.030
113841                                      7.17.030
113842                                      7.17.030
114079                                      7.17.080
115921                                      7.32.060
116815                                      7.21.110
117600 et seq.                              7.19.030
118286                                      7.19.010
121705                                      6.12.410
122045 et seq.                              6.12.290
122335                                      6.12.200
122370 - 122374                             6.12.300
                                            
 
 
 
Health and Sanitation Code
California Code Cite Code Section
18000                Ch. 5.12;
                     5.12.310
 
 
Labor Code
California Code Cite          Code Section
Art. 2, Ch. 1, Part 7, Div. 2 1.70.010
1410 et seq.                  1.52.120
1782                          1.70.020
                              
 
Penal Code
California Code Cite Code Section
Penal Code
California Code Cite     Code Section
Ch. 1 of Title 4, Part 4 6.04.010;
                         6.04.080
                         7.52.070;
19                       7.56.060;
                         7.60.060;
                         8.36.050
19(c)                    8.52.150;
                         10.02.120
230                      Ch. 6.24
266d                     5.88.010;
                         10.62.010
266e                     5.88.010;
                         10.62.010
266f                     5.88.010;
                         10.62.010
266h                     5.88.010;
                         10.62.010
                         5.88.010;
266i                     5.104.130;
                         10.62.010
286.5                    6.12.410
290                      5.104.130;
                         6.08.060
308                      Ch. 6.28
314                      5.88.010;
                         10.62.010
                         5.88.010;
315                      5.104.130;
                         10.62.010
                         5.88.010;
316                      5.104.130;
                         10.62.010
317                      5.88.010;
                         10.62.010
318                      5.104.130
326.5                    6.36.010;
                         6.36.030
415                      6.08.060
487e                     6.12.410
487f                     6.12.410
487g                     6.12.410
594                      6.52.110,
                         8.36.050
594.1                    6.52.040
594.1(c)                 6.52.050
594.3                    6.52.110
596                      6.12.420
597                      6.12.160;
                         6.12.410
597(t)                   6.12.050
597.5                    6.12.050;
                         6.12.410
599d(a)                  6.12.050
599aa                    6.12.050;
                         6.12.410
602                      8.37.060
640                      6.52.110
640.5                    6.52.110
640.6                    6.52.110
647(b)                   5.104.130
653.22                   5.104.130
653.23                   5.104.130
667.5                    5.96.100;
                         5.96.110
830.9                    6.12.060
832                      6.12.060
                         1.60.010 –
                         1.60.100;
836.5                    7.60.030;
                         7.64.270;
                         10.02.120
849                      7.64.270
1192.7(c)                5.96.100;
                         5.96.110
11225                    5.88.010;
                         10.62.010
11225 11235              5.104.130
13510(c), Ch. 1          6.04.080
13512, Ch. 1             6.04.080
13522                    6.04.010;
                         6.04.080
16460                    3.08.040
18710                    3.08.040
                         
 
 
Plumbing Code
California Code Cite         Code Section
Title 24, Part 5, Chapter 16 10.52.200
                             
 
Public Resources Code
California Code Cite Code Section
Public Resources Code
California Code Cite                             Code Section
Div. 30                                          7.17.030
Div. 30, Part 3 (comm. with § 42652)            7.17.030
Div. 30, Part 3, Ch. 12 (comm. with § 42649)    7.17.010
Div. 30, Part 3, Ch. 12.9 (comm. with § 42649.8)7.17.010
2100 et seq.                                     1.64.010
4291(a) and (b)                                  10.196.063
21080(b)(8)(1)                                   1.64.010
40000 et seq.                                    7.17.010
40004                                            7.17.010
40141                                            7.17.030
40181                                            7.17.030
40191                                            7.17.030
40195.1                                          7.17.030
41500                                            7.17.030
41730                                            7.17.010
41731                                            7.17.010
41734                                            7.17.010
41734.5                                          7.17.010
41735                                            7.17.010
41736                                            7.17.010
41780.01                                         7.17.010
41780.02                                         7.17.010
41800                                            7.17.010
41802                                            7.17.030
42926                                            7.17.010
44004                                            7.17.010
50001                                            7.17.010
                                                 
 
Public Utilities Code
California Code Cite Code Section
Public Utilities Code
California Code Cite    Code Section
Part 1, Div. 9, Art. IV 1.28.060
218                     5.76.010
218(b)                  5.76.010
218.5                   5.76.010
222                     5.76.010
230                     8.24.150
234                     5.76.010
241                     5.76.010
                        5.74.180;
799                     5.74.210;
                        5.76.210
5860                    8.68.020
6203                    7.10.010;
                        7.10.030
6294                    7.10.010;
                        7.10.030
6354(e)                 5.76.170
21411                   5.78.100
21684                   1.28.060
                        
 
Revenue and Taxation Code
California Code Cite Code Section
Revenue and Taxation Code
California Code Cite                             Code Section
Ch. 5 (commencing with 5096) of Part 9 of Div. 1 5.72.100
                                                 5.08.090;
Part 1 of Div. 2                                 5.08.100;
                                                 5.78.080;
                                                 5.78.110
                                                 5.08.040;
                                                 5.08.090;
Part 1.5 of Div. 2                               5.08.120;
                                                 5.08.130;
                                                 5.08.150;
                                                 5.08.160
                                                 5.78.010;
                                                 5.78.070;
Part 1.6 of Div. 2                               5.78.100;
                                                 5.78.110;
                                                 5.78.120
Part 1.6 (commencing with 7251) of Div. 2        5.78.010
                                                 5.78.010;
Part 1.7 of Div. 2                               5.78.070;
                                                 5.78.110;
                                                 5.78.120
Part 6.7 (commencing with 11901) of Div. 2       5.72.010;
                                                 5.72.090
99                                               10.94.080
401                                              5.08.140
6067                                             5.08.110;
                                                 5.78.090
6203                                             5.08.100;
                                                 5.78.080
6366                                             5.08.130;
                                                 5.78.100
6366.1                                           5.08.130;
                                                 5.78.100
6701                                             5.08.100;
                                                 5.78.080
6702                                             5.08.100;
                                                 5.78.080
6711                                             5.08.100;
                                                 5.78.080
6715                                             5.08.100;
                                                 5.78.080
6737                                             5.08.100;
                                                 5.78.080
6797                                             5.08.100;
                                                 5.78.080
6828                                             5.08.100;
                                                 5.72.080
7202                                             5.08.130
7248.6                                           5.74.140
                                                 5.74.080;
7284.6                                           5.76.110;
                                                 5.76.170
7284.7                                           5.74.140;
                                                 5.76.170
7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Div. 2                     5.78.010
17274                                            4.80.050
23701b                                           6.36.020
24436.5(c)                                       4.80.050
                                                 
 
 
Streets and Highways Code
California Code Cite     Code Section
Ch. 22 of Div. 7, Part 3 8.12.160
5614                     8.12.160
                         
 
Vehicle Code
California Code Cite Code Section
Vehicle Code
California Code Cite                      Code Section
Ch. 1 (commencing with 4000) of Div. 3    5.78.100
Ch. 2 of Div. 3.5 (commencing with 9840)  5.78.100
Ch. 10 (commencing with 22650) of Div. 11 7.29.030
233                                       10.98.020
324                                       10.98.020
362                                       10.98.020
396                                       10.98.020
471.1                                     9.28.060
635                                       10.98.020
670                                       5.92.020
12500(c)                                  6.32.020
22514                                     3.04.080
22650                                     7.28.030
22660                                     7.29.010
23103                                     6.32.020
23103 et seq.                             6.32.010
23109                                     6.32.020
23109 et seq.                             6.32.010
35790                                     8.24.130
                                          
 
 
Water Code
California Code Cite              Code Section
Division 7 (commencing with 8000) 8.24.220
535                               10.52.120
13000 et seq.                     7.64.030
13050                             7.21.050;
                                  7.21.120
                                  
 
Welfare and Institutions Code
California Code Cite Code Section
Welfare and Institutions Code
California Code Cite                  Code Section
Division 4.5 (commencing with § 4500)10.98.020
602                                   6.52.090,
                                      6.52.110
654                                   6.52.090
702                                   Ch. 6.28;
                                      6.28.030
4512                                  8.36.190
5150                                  7.40.050
                                      
 
STATUTORY REFERENCES FOR CALIFORNIA CITIES
   The statutory references direct the code user to those portions of the state
statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. This reference
list is up-to-date through July, 1996.
General Provisions
General Provisions
Code adoption
Gov. Code §§ 50022.1-50022.10
Ordinances
Gov. Code § 36900 et seq.
Penalties for ordinance violations
Gov. Code §§ 36900 and 36901
Imprisonment
Gov. Code §§ 36903 and 36904
Citations for misdemeanors
Penal Code §§ 853.5-853.85
Judicial review of city decisions
Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.6
City charters
Gov. Code §§ 34450 et seq.
Elections
Gov. Code §§ 34050 and 36503-36503.7
Classification of cities
Gov. Code §§ 34100—34102
General powers
Gov. Code § 37100 et seq.
Conflict of interest code
Gov. Code § 87100 et seq.
Administration and Personnel
Administration and Personnel
City records
Gov. Code §§ 34090-34090.7 et seq.
Alternative forms of government
Gov. Code § 34851 et seq.
City Manager
Gov. Code §§ 34851--34859
Elective Mayor
Gov. Code §§ 34900-34906
City officers generally
Gov. Code § 36501 et seq.
Legislative body
Gov. Code § 36802 et seq.
Election of legislative body by districts
. Code § 34870 et seq.
Meetings
Gov. Code § 54950 et seq.
Mayor
Gov. Code § 40601 et seq.
City clerk
Gov. Code § 40801 et seq.
City treasurer
Gov. Code § 41001 et seq.
City assessor
Gov. Code § 41201 et seq.
Chief of police
Gov. Code § 41601 et seq.
City attorney
Gov. Code § 41801 et seq.
Local planning agencies
Gov. Code § 65100 et seq.
Emergency services
Gov. Code § 8550 et seq.
Peace officer standards and training
Penal Code § 13520 et seq.
Personnel system
Gov. Code § 45000 et seq.
Retirement systems
Gov. Code § 45340 et seq.
Special gas tax street improvement fund
Str. and Hwys. Code § 2106 et seq.
Unclaimed property
Civil Code § 2080 et seq.
Local agency service fees and charges
Gov. Code § 66013 et seq.
Public works and public purchases
Gov. Code § 4000 et seq.
Contracting by local agencies
Pub. Contracts Code § 20100 et seq.
Uniform public construction cost accounting act
Pub. Contracts Code § 22000 et seq.
Claims against public entities
Gov. Code § 900 et seq.
 
REFERENCES TO 1995 CODE
 
1995 Code 2007 Code
1995 Code          2007 Code
1.01.010           1.01.010
1.01.020           1.01.020
1.01.030           1.01.030
1.01.040           1.01.040
1.01.050           1.01.050
1.01.060           1.01.060
1.01.070           1.01.070
1.01.080           1.01.080
1.01.090           1.01.090
1.04.010           1.04.010
1.04.020           1.04.020
1.04.030           1.04.030
1.08.010           1.08.010
1.12.010           1.12.010
1.12.020           Ch. 1.12
1.12.030           Ch. 1.12
1.12.040           Ch. 1.12
1.12.050           Ch. 1.12
1.12.060           1.12.020
1.12.070           1.12.030
1.16.010           1.16.010
1.20.010           1.20.010
1.20.020           1.20.020
1.24.010           1.24.010
1.24.020           1.24.020
1.28.010           1.28.010
1.28.020           1.28.020
1.28.030           1.28.030
1.28.040           1.28.040
1.28.050           1.28.050
1.28.060           1.28.060
1.32.010           1.32.010
1.32.020           1.32.020
1.32.030           1.32.030
1.36.020           1.36.020
1.40.010           1.40.010
1.44.010           1.44.010
1.44.020           1.44.020
1.48.010           1.48.010
1.48.020           1.48.020
1.52.010           1.52.010
1.52.020           1.52.020
1.52.030           1.52.030
1.52.040           1.52.040
1.52.050           1.52.050
1.52.060           1.52.060
1.52.070           1.52.070
1.52.080           1.52.080
1.52.090           1.52.090
1.52.100           1.52.100
1.52.110           1.52.110
1.52.120           1.52.120
1.52.130           1.52.130
1.56.010           1.56.010
1.60.010           1.60.010
1.60.020           1.60.020
1.60.030           1.60.030
1.60.040           1.60.040
1.60.050           1.60.050
1.60.060           1.60.060
1.60.070           1.60.070
1.60.080           1.60.080
1.60.090           1.60.090
1.60.100           1.60.100
1.61.005           1.61.010
1.61.010           1.61.020
1.61.020           1.61.030
1.61.030           1.61.040
1.61.040           1.61.050
1.61.050           1.61.060
1.61.060           1.61.070
1.61.070           1.61.080
1.61.080           1.61.090
1.61.090           1.61.100
1.61.100           1.61.110
1.61.110           1.61.120
1.61.120           1.61.130
1.61.130           1.61.140
1.64.010           1.64.010
1.64.020           1.64.020
1.64.030           1.64.030
1.64.040           1.64.040
1.64.050           1.64.050
1.64.060           1.64.060
1.64.070           1.64.070
2.04.010           2.04.010
2.04.020           2.04.020
2.04.030           2.04.030
2.04.040           2.04.040
2.04.050           2.04.050
2.04.060           2.04.060
2.04.070           2.04.070
2.12.010           2.12.010
2.12.020           2.12.020
2.12.030           2.12.030
2.12.040           2.12.040
2.12.050           2.12.050
2.12.060           2.12.060
2.12.070           2.12.070
2.12.080           2.12.080
2.12.090           2.12.090
2.12.100           2.12.100
2.12.110           2.12.110
2.12.120           2.12.120
2.12.130           2.12.130
2.12.140           2.12.140
2.12.150           2.12.150
2.12.160           2.12.160
2.12.170           2.12.170
2.12.180           2.12.180
2.12.190           2.12.190
3.04.010           3.04.010
3.04.020           3.04.020
3.04.030           3.04.030
3.04.040           3.04.040
3.04.050           3.04.050
3.04.060           3.04.060
3.04.070           3.04.075
3.04.080           3.04.080
3.04.090           3.04.090
3.04.100           3.04.100
3.04.110           3.04.110
3.08.010           3.08.010
3.08.020           3.08.020
3.08.030           3.08.030
3.08.070           3.08.070
3.08.090           3.08.090
3.08.100           3.08.100
3.08.110           3.08.110
3.16.010           3.16.010
3.16.020           3.16.020
3.16.030           3.16.030
3.16.040           3.16.040
3.16.050           3.16.050
3.16.060           3.16.060
3.16.070           3.16.070
3.16.080           3.16.080
3.16.090           3.16.090
3.16.100           3.16.100
3.20.010           3.20.010
3.20.020           3.20.020
3.20.030           3.20.030
3.20.040           3.20.040
3.20.050           3.20.050
4.20.010           4.20.010
4.20.020           4.20.020
4.20.030           4.20.030
4.20.040           4.20.040
4.20.050           4.20.050
4.20.060           4.20.060
4.20.070           4.20.070
4.32.010           4.32.010
4.32.020           4.32.020
4.32.030           4.32.030
4.32.040           4.32.040
4.32.050           4.32.050
4.32.060           4.32.060
4.32.070           4.32.070
4.32.080           4.32.080
4.32.090           4.32.090
4.32.100           4.32.100
4.32.110           4.32.110
4.32.120           4.32.120
4.32.130           4.32.130
4.32.140           4.32.140
4.32.150           4.32.150
4.40.010           4.40.010
4.40.020           4.40.020
4.40.030           4.40.030
4.40.040           4.40.040
4.40.050           4.40.050
4.40.060           4.40.060
4.40.070           4.40.070
4.40.080           4.40.080
4.40.090           4.40.090
4.40.100           4.40.100
4.40.110           4.40.110
4.40.120           4.40.120
4.44.010           4.44.010
4.44.020           4.44.020
4.44.030           4.44.030
4.44.040           4.44.040
4.44.050           4.44.050
4.44.060           4.44.060
4.44.070           4.44.070
4.70.010           4.70.010
4.70.020           4.70.020
4.70.030           4.70.030
4.70.040           4.70.040
4.70.050           4.70.050
4.70.060           4.70.060
4.70.070           4.70.070
4.70.080           4.70.080
4.70.090           4.70.090
5.04.010           5.04.010
5.04.020           5.04.020
5.04.030           5.04.030
5.04.040           5.04.040
5.04.050           5.04.050
5.04.060           5.04.060
5.04.070           5.04.070
5.04.080           5.04.080
5.04.090           5.04.090
5.04.100           5.04.100
5.04.110           5.04.110
5.04.120           5.04.120
5.04.130           5.04.130
5.04.140           5.04.140
5.04.150           5.04.150
5.04.160           5.04.160
5.04.170           5.04.170
5.04.180           5.04.180
5.04.190           5.04.190
5.04.200           5.04.200
5.04.210           5.04.210
5.04.220           5.04.220
5.04.230           5.04.230
5.04.240           5.04.240
5.04.250           5.04.250
5.04.260           5.04.260
5.04.270           5.04.270
5.04.280           5.04.280
5.04.290           5.04.290
5.04.300           5.04.300
5.04.310           5.04.310
5.04.320           5.04.320
5.04.330           5.04.330
5.04.340           5.04.340
5.04.350           5.04.350
5.04.360           5.04.360
5.04.370           5.04.370
5.04.380           5.04.380
5.04.390           5.04.390
5.04.400           5.04.400
5.04.410           5.04.410
5.04.420           5.04.420
5.04.430           5.04.430
5.04.440           5.04.440
5.04.450           5.04.450
5.04.460           5.04.460
5.04.470           5.04.470
5.04.480           5.04.480
5.04.490           5.04.490
5.04.500           5.04.500
5.08.010           5.08.010
5.08.020           5.08.020
5.08.030           5.08.030
5.08.040           5.08.040
5.08.050           5.08.050
5.08.060           5.08.060
5.08.070           5.08.070
5.08.080           5.08.080
5.08.090           5.08.090
5.08.100           5.08.100
5.08.110           5.08.110
5.08.120           5.08.120
5.08.130           5.08.130
5.08.140           5.08.140
5.08.150           5.08.150
5.08.160           5.08.160
5.08.170           5.08.170
5.12.010           5.12.010
5.12.020           5.12.020
5.12.030           5.12.030
5.12.040           5.12.040
5.12.050           5.12.050
5.12.060           5.12.060
5.12.070           5.12.070
5.12.080           5.12.080
5.12.090           5.12.090
5.12.100           5.12.100
5.12.110           5.12.110
5.12.120           5.12.120
5.12.130           5.12.130
5.12.140           5.12.140
5.12.150           5.12.150
5.12.160           5.12.160
5.12.170           5.12.170
5.12.180           5.12.180
5.12.190           5.12.190
5.12.200           5.12.200
5.12.210           5.12.210
5.12.220           5.12.220
5.12.230           5.12.230
5.12.240           5.12.240
5.12.250           5.12.250
5.12.260           5.12.260
5.12.270           5.12.270
5.12.280           5.12.280
5.12.290           5.12.290
5.12.300           5.12.300
5.12.310           5.12.310
5.16.010           5.16.010
5.16.020           5.16.020
5.16.030           5.16.030
5.16.040           5.16.040
5.16.050           5.16.050
5.16.060           5.16.060
5.16.070           5.16.070
5.16.080           5.16.080
5.16.090           5.16.090
5.16.100           5.16.100
5.20.010           5.20.010
5.20.020           5.20.020
5.20.030           5.20.030
5.20.040           5.20.040
5.20.050           5.20.050
5.20.060           5.20.060
5.20.070           5.20.070
5.20.080           5.20.080
5.20.090           5.20.090
5.20.100           5.20.100
5.20.110           5.20.110
5.20.120           5.20.120
5.20.130           5.20.130
5.20.140           5.20.140
5.20.150           5.20.150
5.20.160           5.20.160
5.20.170           5.20.170
5.20.180           5.20.180
5.20.190           5.20.190
5.20.200           5.20.200
5.24.010           5.24.010
5.24.020           5.24.020
5.24.030           5.24.030
5.24.040           5.24.040
5.24.050           5.24.050
5.24.060           5.24.060
5.24.070           5.24.070
5.24.080           5.24.080
5.24.090           5.24.090
5.24.100           5.24.100
5.24.110           5.24.110
5.24.120           5.24.120
5.24.130           5.24.130
5.24.140           5.24.140
5.24.150           5.24.150
5.24.160           5.24.160
5.24.170           5.24.170
5.24.180           5.24.180
5.24.190           5.24.190
5.24.200           5.24.200
5.24.210           5.24.210
5.24.220           5.24.220
5.24.230           5.24.230
5.28.010           5.28.010
5.28.020           5.28.020
5.28.030           5.28.030
5.28.040           5.28.040
5.28.050           5.28.050
5.28.060           5.28.060
5.28.070           5.28.070
5.32.010           5.32.010
5.32.020           5.32.020
5.32.030           5.32.030
5.32.040           5.32.040
5.32.050           5.32.050
5.32.060           5.32.060
5.32.070           5.32.070
5.36.010           5.36.010
5.36.020           5.36.020
5.36.030           5.36.030
5.36.040           5.36.040
5.36.050           5.36.050
5.36.060           5.36.060
5.36.070           5.36.070
5.36.080           5.36.080
5.36.090           5.36.090
5.36.100           5.36.100
5.36.110           5.36.110
5.36.120           5.36.120
5.36.130           5.36.130
5.36.140           5.36.140
5.36.150           5.36.150
5.36.160           5.36.160
5.36.170           5.36.170
5.36.180           5.36.180
5.36.190           5.36.190
5.36.200           5.36.200
5.36.210           5.36.210
5.36.220           5.36.220
5.44.010           5.44.010
5.44.020           5.44.020
5.44.030           5.44.030
5.44.040           5.44.040
5.44.050           5.44.050
5.48.010           5.48.010
5.48.020           5.48.020
5.48.030           5.48.030
5.48.040           5.48.040
5.48.050           5.48.050
5.48.060– 5.48.08Ch. 5.48
5.52.010           5.52.010
5.52.020           5.52.020
5.52.030           5.52.030
5.56.010           5.56.010
5.56.020           5.56.020
5.56.030           5.56.030
5.56.040           5.56.040
5.56.050           5.56.050
5.56.060           5.56.060
5.56.070           5.56.070
5.60.010           5.60.010
5.60.020           5.60.020
5.60.030           5.60.030
5.60.040           5.60.040
5.60.050           5.60.050
5.64.010           5.64.010
5.64.020           5.64.020
5.64.030           5.64.030
5.64.040           5.64.040
5.64.050           5.64.050
5.64.060           5.64.060
5.64.070           5.64.070
5.64.080           5.64.080
5.64.090           5.64.090
5.64.100           5.64.100
5.64.110           5.64.110
5.64.120           5.64.120
5.64.130           5.64.130
5.64.140           5.64.140
5.64.150           5.64.150
5.64.160           5.64.160
5.64.170           5.64.170
5.64.180           5.64.180
5.64.190           5.64.190
5.64.200           5.64.200
5.64.210           5.64.210
5.64.220           5.64.220
5.68.010           5.68.010
5.68.020           5.68.020
5.68.030           5.68.030
5.68.060           5.68.040
5.68.050           5.68.050
5.68.060           5.68.060
5.68.070           5.68.070
5.68.080           5.68.080
5.68.090           5.68.090
5.68.100           5.68.100
5.68.110           5.68.110
5.68.120           5.68.120
5.68.130           5.68.130
5.68.140           5.68.140
5.68.150           5.68.150
5.68.160           5.68.160
5.68.170           5.68.170
5.68.180           5.68.180
5.68.190           5.68.190
5.68.200           5.68.200
5.72.010           5.72.010
5.72.020           5.72.020
5.72.030           5.72.030
5.72.040           5.72.040
5.72.050           5.72.050
5.72.060           5.72.060
5.72.070           5.72.070
5.72.080           5.72.080
5.72.090           5.72.090
5.72.100           5.72.100
5.76.010           5.76.010
5.76.020           5.76.020
5.76.030           5.76.030
5.76.040           5.76.040
5.76.050           5.76.050
5.76.060           5.76.060
5.76.070           5.76.070
5.76.090           5.76.090
5.76.100           5.76.100
5.76.110           5.76.110
5.76.120           5.76.120
5.76.130           5.76.130
5.76.140           5.76.140
5.76.150           5.76.150
5.76.160           5.76.160
5.76.170           5.76.170
5.76.180           5.76.180
5.76.190           5.76.190
5.76.200           5.76.200
5.76.210           5.76.210
5.76.220           5.76.230
5.76.230           5.76.230
5.78.010           5.78.010
5.78.020           5.78.020
5.78.030           5.78.030
5.78.040           5.78.040
5.78.050           5.78.050
5.78.060           5.78.060
5.78.070           5.78.070
5.78.080           5.78.080
5.78.090           5.78.090
5.78.100           5.78.100
5.78.110           5.78.110
5.78.120           5.78.120
5.80.010           5.80.010
5.80.020           5.80.020
5.80.030           5.80.030
5.80.040           5.80.040
5.80.050           5.80.050
5.84.010           5.84.010
5.84.020           5.84.020
5.88.010           5.88.010
5.88.030           5.88.020
5.88.040           5.88.030
5.88.050           5.88.040
5.88.060           5.88.050
5.88.070           5.88.060
5.88.080           5.88.070
5.88.090           5.88.080
5.88.100           5.88.090
5.88.110           5.88.100
5.88.120           5.88.110
5.88.130           5.88.120
5.88.140           5.88.130
5.88.150           5.88.140
5.88.160           5.88.150
5.88.165           5.88.160
5.88.170           5.88.170
5.88.180           5.88.180
5.88.190           5.88.190
5.88.200           5.88.200
5.88.210           5.88.210
5.88.220           5.88.220
5.88.230           5.88.230
5.88.240           5.88.240
5.88.250           5.88.250
5.92.010           5.92.010
5.92.020           5.92.020
5.92.030           5.92.030
5.92.040           5.92.040
5.92.050           5.92.050
5.92.060           5.92.060
5.92.070           5.92.070
5.92.080           5.92.080
5.92.080.1         5.92.090
5.92.090           5.92.100
5.92.100           5.92.110
5.92.110           5.92.120
5.92.120           5.92.130
5.92.130           5.92.140
5.92.140           5.92.150
5.92.150           5.92.160
5.92.160           5.92.170
5.92.170           5.92.180
5.92.180           5.92.190
5.92.190           5.92.200
5.92.200           5.92.210
5.92.210           5.92.220
5.96.010           5.96.010
5.96.080           5.96.080
5.96.090           5.96.100
5.96.110           5.96.130
5.96.130           5.96.140
5.96.190           5.96.180
5.96.200           5.96.200
6.04.010           6.04.010
6.04.020           6.04.020
6.04.030           6.04.030
6.04.040           6.04.040
6.04.050           6.04.050
6.04.060           6.04.060
6.04.070           6.04.070
6.04.080           6.04.080
6.08.010           6.08.010
6.08.020           6.08.020
6.08.030           6.08.030
6.08.040           6.08.040
6.08.050           6.08.050
6.08.060           6.08.060
6.08.070           6.08.070
6.20.010           6.20.010
6.20.020           6.20.020
6.20.030           6.20.030
6.20.040           6.20.040
6.24.010           6.24.010
6.24.020           6.24.020
6.24.030           6.24.030
6.24.040           6.24.040
6.24.050           6.24.050
6.24.060           6.24.060
6.28.010           6.28.010
6.28.020           6.28.020
6.28.030           6.28.030
6.28.040           6.28.040
6.28.050           6.28.050
6.36.010           6.36.010
6.36.020           6.36.020
6.36.030           6.36.030
6.36.040           6.36.040
6.36.050           6.36.050
6.36.060           6.36.060
6.36.070           6.36.070
6.36.080           6.36.080
6.36.090           6.36.090
6.36.100           6.36.100
6.36.110           6.36.110
6.36.120           6.36.120
6.36.130           6.36.130
6.36.140           6.36.140
6.36.150           6.36.150
6.36.160           6.36.160
6.36.170           6.36.170
6.36.180           6.36.180
6.36.190           6.36.190
6.36.200           6.36.200
6.36.210           6.36.210
6.36.220           6.36.220
6.36.230           6.36.230
6.36.240           6.36.240
6.36.250           6.36.250
6.36.260           6.36.260
6.40.010           6.40.010
6.40.020           6.40.020
6.40.030           6.40.030
6.40.040           6.40.040
6.40.050           6.40.050
6.40.060           6.40.060
6.40.070           6.40.070
6.40.080           6.40.080
6.40.090           6.40.090
6.40.100           6.40.100
6.44.010           6.44.010
6.44.020           6.44.020
6.44.030           6.44.030
6.44.040           6.44.040
6.44.060           6.44.050
6.44.070           6.44.060
6.44.080           6.44.070
6.48.010           6.48.010
6.52.010           6.52.010
6.52.020           6.52.020
6.52.030           6.52.030
6.52.040           6.52.040
6.52.060           6.52.060
6.52.070           6.52.070
6.52.080           6.52.080
6.52.090           6.52.090
6.52.100           6.52.100
6.52.120           6.52.120
6.56.010           6.56.010
6.56.020           6.56.020
6.56.030           6.56.030
7.04.010           7.04.010
7.08.010           7.08.010
7.08.020           7.08.020
7.08.030           7.08.030
7.08.040           7.08.040
7.08.050           7.08.050
7.08.060           7.08.060
7.10.010           7.10.010
7.10.020           7.10.020
7.10.030           7.10.030
7.10.040           7.10.040
7.10.050           7.10.050
7.10.060           7.10.060
7.10.070           7.10.070
7.10.080           7.10.080
7.10.090           7.10.090
7.10.100           7.10.100
7.10.110           7.10.110
7.10.120           7.10.120
7.12.010           7.12.010
7.12.020           7.12.020
7.12.030           7.12.030
7.12.040           7.12.040
7.12.050           7.12.050
7.12.060           7.12.060
7.12.070           7.12.070
7.12.080           7.12.080
7.12.090           7.12.090
7.12.100           7.12.100
7.12.110           7.12.110
7.12.120           7.12.120
7.12.130           7.12.130
7.12.140           7.12.140
7.12.150           7.12.150
7.12.160           7.12.160
7.12.170           7.12.170
7.12.180           7.12.180
7.12.190           7.12.190
7.12.200           7.12.200
7.12.210           7.12.210
7.12.220           7.12.220
7.12.230           7.12.230
7.12.240           7.12.240
7.12.250           7.12.250
7.12.260           7.12.260
7.12.270           7.12.270
7.12.280           7.12.280
7.12.290           7.12.290
7.12.300           7.12.300
7.16.010           7.16.010
7.16.020           7.16.020
7.16.030           7.16.030
7.16.040           7.16.040
7.16.050           7.16.050
7.16.060           7.16.060
7.16.070           7.16.070
7.16.080           7.16.080
7.16.090           7.16.090
7.16.100           7.16.100
7.16.110           7.16.110
7.16.120           7.16.120
7.16.130           7.16.130
7.16.140           7.16.140
7.16.150           7.16.150
7.20.010           7.20.010
7.20.020           7.20.020
7.20.030           7.20.030
7.20.040           7.20.040
7.20.045           7.20.050
7.20.050           7.20.060
7.20.060           7.20.070
7.20.070           7.20.080
7.20.080           7.20.090
7.20.090           7.20.100
7.20.100           7.20.110
7.20.120           7.20.120
7.20.125           7.20.130
7.20.130           7.20.140
7.20.140           7.20.150
7.20.150           7.20.160
7.20.160           7.20.170
7.20.170           7.20.180
7.20.180           7.20.190
7.20.190           7.20.200
7.20.200           7.20.210
7.20.210           7.20.220
7.20.220           7.20.230
7.20.230           7.20.240
7.20.240           7.20.250
7.20.250           7.20.260
7.20.260           7.20.270
7.20.270           7.20.280
7.20.280           7.20.290
7.20.290           7.20.300
7.20.300           7.20.310
7.20.310           7.20.320
7.20.320           7.20.330
7.20.330           7.20.340
7.20.340           7.20.350
7.20.350           7.20.360
7.20.360           7.20.370
7.20.370           7.20.380
7.20.380           7.20.390
7.20.390           7.20.400
7.20.400           7.20.410
7.20.410           7.20.420
7.20.420           7.20.430
7.20.430           7.20.440
7.20.440           7.20.450
7.20.450           7.20.460
7.20.460           7.20.470
7.20.465           7.20.480
7.20.470           7.20.490
7.20.475           7.20.500
7.20.480           7.20.520
7.20.484           7.20.530
7.20.486           7.20.540
7.20.488           7.20.550
7.20.490           7.20.560
7.20.495           7.20.570
7.20.500           7.20.580
7.20.505           7.20.590
7.20.510           7.20.600
7.20.520           7.20.610
7.20.530           7.20.620
7.20.540           7.20.630
7.20.550           7.20.640
7.20.560           7.20.650
7.20.565           7.20.660
7.20.570           7.20.670
7.20.580           7.20.680
7.20.590           7.20.690
7.20.600           7.20.700
7.20.610           7.20.710
7.20.620           7.20.720
7.20.625           7.20.730
7.20.630           7.20.740
7.20.640           7.20.750
7.20.650           7.20.760
7.20.660           7.20.770
7.20.670           7.20.780
7.20.680           7.20.790
7.20.690           7.20.800
7.20.700           7.20.810
7.20.710           7.20.820
7.20.715           7.20.830
7.20.720           7.20.840
7.20.730           7.20.850
7.20.740           7.20.860
7.20.750           7.20.870
7.20.760           7.20.880
7.20.770           7.20.890
7.20.775           7.20.900
7.20.780           7.20.910
7.20.790           7.20.920
7.20.800           7.20.930
7.20.810           7.20.940
7.20.820           7.20.950
7.20.830           7.20.960
7.20.840           7.20.970
7.20.850           7.20.980
7.20.860           7.20.990
7.20.870           7.20.1000
7.20.880           7.20.1010
7.20.890           7.20.1020
7.20.900           7.20.1030
7.20.910           7.20.1040
7.20.920           7.20.1050
7.20.930           7.20.1060
7.20.940           7.20.1070
7.20.950           7.20.1080
7.20.960           7.20.1090
7.20.970           7.20.1100
7.20.980           7.20.1110
7.20.990           7.20.1120
7.20.995           7.20.1125
7.20.996           7.20.1126
7.20.1000          7.20.1130
7.20.1020          7.20.1140
7.20.1030          7.20.1150
7.20.1040          7.20.1160
7.20.1050          7.20.1170
7.20.1060          7.20.1180
7.24.010           7.24.010
7.24.020           7.24.020
7.24.030           7.24.030
7.24.040           7.24.040
7.24.050           7.24.050
7.24.060           7.24.060
7.24.070           7.24.070
7.24.080           7.24.080
7.24.090           7.24.090
7.24.100           7.24.100
7.28.010           7.28.010
7.28.020           7.28.020
7.28.030           7.28.030
7.28.040           7.28.040
7.28.050           7.28.050
7.28.060           7.28.060
7.28.070           7.28.070
7.28.080           7.28.080
7.28.090           7.28.090
7.28.100           7.28.100
7.28.110           7.28.110
7.28.120           7.28.120
7.28.130           7.28.130
7.28.140           7.28.140
7.28.150           7.28.150
7.28.160           7.28.160
7.28.170           7.28.170
7.28.180           7.28.180
7.28.190           7.28.190
7.28.200           7.28.200
7.28.210           7.28.210
7.28.220           7.28.220
7.28.230           7.28.230
7.28.240           7.28.240
7.28.250           7.28.250
7.28.260           7.28.260
7.28.270           7.28.270
7.32.010           7.32.010
7.32.020           7.32.020
7.32.030           7.32.030
7.32.040           7.32.040
7.32.050           7.32.050
7.32.060           7.32.060
7.32.080           7.32.080
7.36.010           7.36.010
7.36.020           7.36.020
7.36.030           7.36.030
7.36.040           7.36.040
7.36.050           7.36.050
7.36.060           7.36.060
7.36.070           7.36.070
7.36.080           7.36.080
7.40.010           7.40.010
7.40.020           7.40.020
7.40.030           7.40.030
7.40.040           7.40.040
7.40.050           7.40.050
7.40.060           7.40.060
7.40.070           7.40.070
7.40.080           7.40.080
7.40.090           7.40.090
7.40.100           7.40.100
7.40.110           7.40.110
7.40.120           7.40.120
7.40.130           7.40.130
7.40.140           7.40.140
7.40.150           7.40.150
7.40.160           7.40.160
7.40.170           7.40.170
7.40.180           7.40.180
7.40.190           7.40.190
7.40.200           7.40.200
7.40.210           7.40.210
7.44.010           7.44.010
7.44.020           7.44.020
7.44.030           7.44.030
7.48.010           7.48.010
7.48.020           7.48.020
7.48.030           7.48.030
7.48.040           7.48.040
7.48.050           7.48.050
7.52.010           7.52.010
7.52.020           7.52.020
7.52.030           7.52.030
7.52.040           7.52.040
7.52.050           7.52.050
7.52.060           7.52.060
7.52.070           7.52.070
7.52.080           7.52.080
7.56.010           7.56.010
7.56.020           7.56.020
7.56.030           7.56.030
7.56.050           7.56.050
7.56.060           7.56.060
7.60.010           7.60.010
7.60.020           7.60.020
7.60.030           7.60.030
7.60.040           7.60.040
7.60.050           7.60.050
7.60.060           7.60.060
7.60.070           7.60.070
7.60.080           7.60.080
7.60.090           7.60.090
7.60.100           7.60.100
7.60.110           7.60.110
7.60.120           7.60.120
7.60.130           7.60.130
8.04.010           8.04.010
8.04.020           8.04.020
8.04.030           8.04.030
8.04.040           8.04.040
8.04.050           8.04.050
8.04.060           8.04.060
8.04.070           8.04.070
8.04.080           8.04.080
8.04.090           8.04.090
8.04.100           8.04.100
8.04.110           8.04.110
8.04.120           8.04.120
8.08.010           8.08.010
8.08.020           8.08.020
8.08.040           8.08.030
8.08.050           8.08.040
8.08.060           8.08.050
8.12.010           8.12.010
8.12.020           8.12.020
8.12.030           8.12.030
8.12.040           8.12.040
8.12.050           8.12.050
8.12.060           8.12.060
8.12.070           8.12.070
8.12.080           8.12.080
8.12.090           8.12.090
8.12.100           8.12.100
8.12.110           8.12.110
8.12.120           8.12.120
8.12.130           8.12.130
8.12.140           8.12.140
8.12.150           8.12.150
8.12.160           8.12.160
8.12.165           8.12.170
8.12.170           8.12.180
8.12.180           8.12.190
8.12.190           8.12.200
8.12.200           8.12.210
8.16.010           8.16.010
8.16.020           8.16.020
8.16.030           8.16.030
8.16.040           8.16.040
8.16.050           8.16.050
8.16.060           8.16.060
8.16.070           8.16.070
8.32.010           8.32.010
8.32.020           8.32.020
8.32.040           8.32.040
8.32.050           8.32.050
8.32.060           8.32.060
8.32.070           8.32.070
8.32.080           8.32.080
8.32.090           8.32.090
8.32.100           8.32.100
8.32.110           8.32.110
8.32.120           8.32.120
8.32.130           8.32.130
8.32.140           8.32.140
8.32.150           8.32.150
8.32.160           8.32.160
8.32.170           8.32.170
8.32.180           8.32.180
8.32.190           8.32.190
8.32.200           8.32.200
8.32.210           8.32.210
8.32.220           8.32.220
8.36.010           8.36.010
8.36.020           8.36.020
8.36.030           8.36.030
8.36.040           8.36.040
8.36.050           8.36.050
8.36.060           8.36.060
8.36.070           8.36.070
8.36.080           8.36.080
8.36.090           8.36.090
8.36.100           8.36.100
8.36.110           8.36.110
8.36.120           8.36.120
8.36.130           8.36.130
8.36.140           8.36.140
8.36.150           8.36.150
8.36.160           8.36.160
8.36.170           8.36.170
8.36.180           8.36.180
8.36.190           8.36.200
8.36.200           8.36.210
8.36.210           8.36.220
8.36.220           8.36.230
8.36.230           8.36.240
8.36.240           8.36.280
8.36.250           8.36.290
8.36.260           8.36.300
8.36.270           8.36.310
8.36.280           8.36.320
8.36.290           8.36.330
8.36.300           8.36.340
8.36.310           8.36.350
8.36.320           8.36.360
8.36.330           8.36.370
8.36.340           8.36.380
8.36.350           8.36.390
8.36.360           8.36.400
8.36.370           8.36.410
8.40.010           8.40.010
8.40.020           8.40.020
8.40.030           8.40.030
8.40.040           8.40.040
8.40.050           8.40.050
8.40.060           8.40.060
8.40.070           8.40.070
8.40.080           8.40.080
8.40.090           8.40.090
8.40.100           8.40.100
8.40.110           8.40.110
8.44.010           8.44.010
8.48.010           8.48.010
8.48.020           8.48.020
8.48.030           8.48.030
8.48.040           8.48.040
8.48.050           8.48.050
8.48.060           8.48.060
8.48.070           8.48.070
8.48.080           8.48.080
8.48.090           8.48.090
8.48.100           8.48.100
8.48.110           8.48.110
8.48.120           8.48.120
8.48.130           8.48.130
8.52.010           8.52.010 
8.52.020           8.52.020
8.52.030           8.52.030
8.52.040           8.52.040
8.52.050           8.52.050
8.52.060           8.52.060
8.52.070           8.52.070
8.52.080           8.52.080
8.52.090           8.52.090
8.52.100           8.52.100
8.52.110           8.52.110
8.52.120           8.52.120
8.52.130           8.52.130
8.52.140           8.52.140
8.52.150           8.52.150
8.52.160           8.52.160
8.52.170           8.52.170
8.52.180           8.52.180
8.52.190           8.52.190
8.52.200           8.52.200
8.52.210           8.52.210
8.52.220           8.52.220
8.52.230           8.52.230
8.52.240           8.52.240
8.52.250           8.52.250
8.52.260           8.52.260
8.60.010           8.60.010
8.60.020           8.60.020
8.60.030           8.60.030
8.60.040           8.60.040
8.60.070           8.60.070
8.60.080           8.60.080
8.60.090           8.60.090
8.64.010           8.64.010
8.64.020           8.64.020
8.64.030           8.64.030
8.64.040           8.64.040
8.64.050           8.64.050
9.04.010           9.04.010
9.08.010           9.08.010
9.08.020           9.08.020
9.08.030           9.08.030
9.08.040           9.08.040
9.12.010           9.12.010
9.20.010           9.20.010
9.20.020           9.20.020
9.20.030           9.20.030
9.20.040           9.20.040
9.28.010           9.28.010
9.28.020           9.28.020
9.28.030           9.28.030
9.28.040           9.28.040
9.28.050           9.28.050
9.28.060           9.28.060
9.32.010           9.32.010
9.32.020           9.32.020
9.32.030           9.32.030
9.36.010           9.36.010
9.36.020           9.36.020
9.36.030           9.36.030
9.40.010           9.40.010
9.40.020           9.40.020
9.40.030           9.40.030
9.40.040           9.40.040
9.44.010           9.44.010
9.44.020           9.44.020
9.44.030           9.44.030
9.44.040           9.44.040
9.44.050           9.44.050
9.48.010           9.48.010
9.48.020           9.48.020
9.48.030           9.48.030
9.48.040           9.48.040
9.48.060           9.48.060
9.48.070           9.48.070
9.48.090           9.48.090
9.48.100           9.48.100
9.48.110           9.48.110
9.48.120           9.48.120
9.48.130           9.48.130
9.48.150           9.48.150
9.48.160           9.48.160
9.48.170           9.48.170
9.48.180           9.48.180
9.48.190           9.48.190
9.48.200           9.48.200
9.48.210           9.48.210
9.52.010           9.52.010
9.52.020           9.52.020
9.52.030           9.52.030
9.52.040           9.52.040
9.52.050           9.52.050
9.52.060           9.52.060
9.52.070           9.52.070
9.52.080           9.52.080
9.52.090           9.52.090
9.52.100           9.52.100
9.52.110           9.52.110
9.52.120           9.52.120
9.52.130           9.52.130
9.52.140           9.52.140
9.56.010           9.56.010
9.60.010           9.60.010
9.60.020           9.60.020
9.60.030           9.60.030
9.64.010           9.64.010
11.04.010          11.04.010
11.04.020          11.04.020
11.04.010          11.04.030
11.08.010          11.08.010
11.08.020          11.08.020
11.12.010          11.12.010
11.12.020          11.12.020
11.12.030          11.12.030
11.16.010          11.16.010
11.16.020          11.16.020
11.16.030          11.16.030
11.20.010          11.20.010
11.20.020          11.20.020
11.20.030          11.20.030
11.20.040          11.20.040
11.20.050          11.20.050
11.24.010          11.24.010
11.24.020          11.24.020
11.24.030          11.24.030
11.24.040          11.24.040
11.24.050          11.24.050
11.24.060          11.24.060
11.24.070          11.24.070
11.24.080          11.24.080
11.24.090          11.24.090
11.24.100          11.24.100
11.24.110          11.24.110
11.28.010          11.28.010
11.28.020          11.28.020
11.28.030          11.28.030 
11.28.040          11.28.040
11.28.050          11.28.050
11.28.060          11.28.060
11.28.070          11.28.070
11.28.080          11.28.080
11.28.090          11.28.090
11.32.010          11.32.010
11.32.020          11.32.020
11.32.030          11.32.030
11.32.040          11.32.040
12.04.010          12.04.010
12.04.020          12.04.020
12.04.030          12.04.030
12.04.040          12.04.040
12.04.050          12.04.050
12.04.060          12.04.060
12.04.070          12.04.070
12.04.080          12.04.080
12.04.090          12.04.090
12.04.100          12.04.100
12.04.110          12.04.110
12.04.120          12.04.120
12.04.130          12.04.130
12.04.140          12.04.140
12.04.150          12.04.150
12.04.160          12.04.160
12.04.170          12.04.170
12.04.180          12.04.180
12.04.190          12.04.190
12.04.200          12.04.200
12.04.210          12.04.210
12.04.220          12.04.220
12.08.010          12.08.010
12.08.020          12.08.020
12.08.030          12.08.030
12.08.040          12.08.040
                   
 
 
REFERENCES TO UNITED STATES CODE
U.S.C. Cite Code Section
U.S.C. Cite               Code Section
4 U.S.C. § 116           5.76.010
4 U.S.C. §§ 116 et seq. 5.76.010
                          5.74.020;
4 U.S.C. § 124           5.74.040;
                          5.76.010
11 U.S.C. § 101(33)      5.72.060
11 U.S.C. § 507(a)(8)(C) 5.74.100;
                          5.76.130
15 U.S.C. § 79k          5.72.070
15 U.S.C. § 79z-5a       5.76.010
21 U.S.C. §§ 81 et seq. 7.49.020
26 U.S.C. § 4251         5.76.030;
                          5.76.040
26 U.S.C. § 4252         5.76.030;
                          5.76.040
26 U.S.C. § 4253         5.76.030;
                          5.76.040
                          7.20.010;
33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq7.20.020 ;
                          7.64.020;
                          7.64.030
33 U.S.C. § 1317         7.20.020
42 U.S.C. § 3604(f)(3)(B)10.92.010
42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq7.20.020
47 U.S.C. § 332(d)       5.76.010
47 U.S.C. § 332(d)(1)    5.76.010
47 U.S.C. § 332(d)(3)    5.76.030;
                          5.76.040
47 U.S.C. § 522 (13)     5.74.020;
                          5.76.010
                          
 
REFERENCES TO CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS
C.F.R. Cite Code Section
C.F.R. Cite                              Code Section
40 C.F.R. § 2.302                       7.20.810
40 C.F.R. § 122.2                       7.64.030
40 C.F.R. § 122.26(b)                   7.64.030
40 C.F.R. § 128.140(b)                  7.20.520
                                         7.20.520;
40 C.F.R. part 136                       7.20.530;
                                         7.20.630
40 C.F.R. part 261                       7.20.570
40 C.F.R. § 261.21                      7.20.470
40 C.F.R. § 261.33                      7.28.020
40 C.F.R. § 261.4(B)(1)                 7.28.020
40 C.F.R. part 403                       7.20.010
40 C.F.R. § 403                         7.20.020
                                         7.20.020;
40 C.F.R. § 403.5                       7.20.470;
                                         7.20.480
40 C.F.R. § 403.5(b)                    7.20.660
40 C.F.R. § 403.5(c)                    7.20.520
40 C.F.R. § 403.6                       7.20.020
40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)(2)(ii)             7.20.520
40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)(4)                 7.20.520
40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c)                    7.20.520
40 C.F.R. § 403.6(d)                    7.20.520
40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e)                    7.20.520;
                                         7.20.640
40 C.F.R. § 403.7                       7.20.520
40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(2)(viii)           7.20.520
40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(5)                 7.20.030
40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(6)                 7.20.020;
                                         7.20.700
40 C.F.R. § 403.12(e)(1)                7.20.520
40 C.F.R. § 403.12(q)                   7.20.020
                                         7.20.520;
40 C.F.R. § 403.13                      7.20.640;
                                         7.20.770
40 C.F.R. § 403.15                      7.20.640
40 C.F.R. § 403.17                      7.20.640
40 C.F.R. parts 414, 419, and 455        7.20.640
40 C.F.R. Ch. I, Subch. N                7.20.020
40 C.F.R. Ch. I, Subch. N, parts 405–477.20.020;
                                         7.20.640
40 C.F.R. part 503                       7.20.020
47 C.F.R. part 20                        5.76.030;
                                         5.76.040
47 C.F.R. part 20.3                      5.76.010
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
540      - -         5.08.170
1095     - -         5.08.170
1333     - -         Ch. 1.60
01-1885  - -         1.60.100
775      5-23-1962   1.40.010
1146     - -1975     1.40.010
1152     7-15-1975   Ch. 1.12
1229     8-16-1977   1.40.010
1459     11-6-1984   1.40.010
1534     9-15-1987   8.48.060
1604     7-17-1990   8.48.060–
                     8.48.090
1723     - -1994     8.56.040
95-1753  - -1995     9.32.010
95-1754  - -1995     7.32.060
95-1769  - -1995     8.36.310
95-1770  - -1995     5.04.080
95-1773  - -1995     2.04.010–
                     2.04.070
96-1777  - -1996     4.44.020–
                     4.44.070
96-1778  - -1996     9.48.210
96-1779  - -1996     9.48.120
96-1780  - -1996     4.20.020–
                     4.20.070
96-1784  - -1996     4.20.010;
                     4.44.010 
                     7.40.010;
96-1786  - -1996     7.40.020;
                     7.40.040–
                     7.40.070
96-1789  - -1996     5.04.490
96-1790  - -1996     1.12.030
96-1793  - -1996     3.20.010—
                     3.20.050
96-1795  - -1996     9.12.010
                     11.04.010–
                     11.04.030;
                     11.08.010;
                     11.08.020;
                     11.12.010–
                     11.12.030;
                     11.16.020;
                     11.16.030;
97-1800  - -1997     11.20.010–
                     11.24.110;
                     11.28.010;
                     11.28.030;
                     11.28.040;
                     11.28.060–
                     11.28.090;
                     11.32.010–
                     11.32.040
                     11.04.020;
                     11.24.080;
97-1810  - -1997     11.28.010;
                     11.28.030–
                     11.28.060
97-1813  1-21-1997   1.01.010–
                     1.01.090
98-1818  - -1998     1.52.030
98-1822  - -1998     1.20.010;
                     1.20.020
98-1819  4-7-1998    5.24.230
98-1821  - -1999     7.40.030
99-1838  - -1999     7.44.010–
                     7.44.030
99-1845  - -1999     6.56.010–
                     6.56.030
                     11.16.010;
99-1847  - -1999     11.20.010;
                     11.20.020;
                     11.28.020
                     3.08.010–
                     3.08.030;
99-1850  - -1999     3.08.070,
                     3.08.090–
                     3.08.110
99-1851  - -1999     Ch. 6.32
00-1861  - -2000     Ch. 5.48
                     5.88.010;
01-1872  - -2001     5.88.080;
                     5.88.170–
                     5.88.250
01-1873  - -2001     1.64.040
01-1875  - -2001     5.88.160;
                     5.88.200
01-1887  - -2001     1.64.040
01-1890  - -2001     9.12.010
                     7.32.010–
1895     - -2002     7.32.060;
                     7.32.080
02-1908  11-19-2002  5.92.010–
                     5.92.220
02-1909  - -2002     7.28.010–
                     7.28.270
02-1910  11-19-2002  4.70.010–
                     4.70.090
                     1.60.100;
                     1.64.040;
                     2.04.020;
                     8.32.020;
03-1915  - -2003     8.32.140;
                     8.36.010;
                     8.36.040;
                     8.52.010;
                     8.52.080;
                     11.16.010
                     3.08.010–
                     3.08.030;
03-1919  - -2003     3.08.070,
                     3.08.090–
                     3.08.110
03-1924  - -2003     8.12.160;
                     8.12.170
03-1925  - -2003     1.64.040
04-1953  - -2004     1.61.010–
                     1.61.140
                     5.76.010–
05-1958  - -2005     5.76.070;
                     5.76.090–
                     5.76.230
05-1978  8-3-2005    8.36.310
05-1975  8-16-2005   6.52.010 –
                     6.52.120
05-1995  12-20-2005  7.18.010 –
                     7.18.130
05-1996  - -2005     5.78.010–
                     5.78.120
                     5.96.010;
                     5.96.090;
                     5.96.100;
05-1998  - -2005     5.96.130;
                     5.96.140;
                     5.96.180;
                     5.96.200
05-1999  - -2005     7.48.010–
                     7.48.050
05-2001  1-3-2006    3.20.010–
                     3.20.050
06-2005  2-21-2006   11.20.020;
                     11.28.020
06-2008  - -2006     7.10.010–
                     7.10.120
06-2009  3-21-2006   3.08.070
06-2011  - -2006     7.60.010–
                     7.60.130
06-2012  - -2006     7.52.010–
                     7.52.080
                     7.56.010–
06-2013  - -2006     7.56.030;
                     7.56.050;
                     7.56.060
06-2019  6-6-2006    11.16.010
                     7.40.050;
06-2024  6-20-2006   7.40.100;
                     7.40.110;
                     7.40.150
                     7.08.030;
                     7.08.040;
                     7.08.050;
                     7.08.060;
06-2026  - -2006     8.60.010;
                     8.60.020;
                     8.60.030;
                     8.60.040;
                     8.60.090;
                     8.64.020
06-2029  - -2006     1.64.040
                     5.74.010–
07-05    6-5-2007    5.74.060;
                     5.74.080–
                     5.74.210
07-12    7-17-2007   8.48.010–
                     8.48.130
07-18    8-7-2007    7.10.050
07-26    12-18-2007  4.80.010–
                     4.80.070
07-29    12-18-2007  4.20.010;
                     4.70.100
07-30    12-18-2007  3.08.010;
                     3.08.070
08-06    6-3-2008    6.40.050
                     8.32.010–
08-12    7-15-2008   8.32.020;
                     8.32.040–
                     8.32.220
08-13    7-15-2008   8.36.250;
                     8.36.420
09-02    4-21-2009   7.16.160
09-03    5-9-2009    9.12.010
                     5.74.040;
                     5.74.070;
09-04    12-1-2009   5.76.040;
                     5.76.050;
                     5.76.070;
                     5.76.080
09-06    6-16-2009   9.12.010
09-07    6-16-2009   4.90.010 -
                     4.90.120
                     5.36.010;
                     5.36.030;
                     5.36.060;
                     5.36.090;
                     5.36.110;
                     5.36.120;
09-10    9-1-2009    5.36.125;
                     5.36.140;
                     5.36.150;
                     5.36.160;
                     5.36.190;
                     5.36.200;
                     5.36.210 
09-12    10-6-2009   8.36.190
09-13    11-3-2009   5.04.161
09-15    11-3-2009   7.64.010–
                     7.64.350
09-16    11-17-2009  8.08.025
                     8.08.010–
09-17    12-15-2009  8.08.050;
                     8.70.010–
                     8.70.160
10-04    2-16-2010   1.64.040
10-05    3-2-2010    1.16.010–
                     1.16.030
10-11    4-6-2010    8.48.010–
                     8.48.130
10-13    4-6-2010    6.48.010
                     1.61.040;
                     3.25.010;
                     4.95.010;
10-15    4-20-2010   5.100.010;
                     6.60.010;
                     7.68.010;
                     8.74.010;
                     9.68.010
10-16    5-4-2010    1.12.010;
                     1.61.040
10-19    11-16-2010  9.24.010–
                     9.24.030
                     3.08.010;
10-21    12-7-2010   4.04.010–
                     4.04.090
10-22    12-7-2010   1.44.020
11-04    6-7-2011    3.08.070
11-08    8-16-2011   6.40.010–
                     6.40.100
11-09    9-20-2011   4.04.080
                     6.70.010–
12-06    5-15-2012   6.70.080;
                     6.80.010–
                     6.80.080
12-07    6-5-2012    8.48.010–
                     8.48.130
12-08    8-21-2012   8.64.010–
                     8.64.030
12-09    8-21-2012   4.70.060
13-05    10-1-2013   7.21.010–
                     7.21.130
                     3.08.010;
                     3.08.070;
13-07    12-3-2013   3.08.110;
                     4.04.010–
                     4.04.110;
                     4.44.010
13-08    1-21-2014   7.19.010–
                     7.19.060
                     5.04.020;
14-02    3-18-2014   6.04.090;
                     7.28.030
14-03    6-17-2014   7.32.010–
                     7.32.080
14-04    10-21-2014  1.61.085;
                     1.61.100
                     1.52.030;
                     1.60.100;
                     2.04.020;
                     2.04.070;
                     6.40.050;
                     8.32.020;
                     8.32.050;
14-05    10-21-2014  8.32.170;
                     8.32.210;
                     8.36.010;
                     8.36.040;
                     8.36.260;
                     8.36.270;
                     8.52.010;
                     8.52.040
14-06    10-21-2014  7.49.010–
                     7.49.110
15-01    2-3-2015    9.12.010
15-02    5-5-2015    7.20.010–
                     7.20.1180
15-03    5-19-2015   9.16.010
15-06    7-21-2015   7.32.010–
                     7.32.080
15-07    9-15-2015   3.08.070
15-08    10-6-2015   4.96.010–
                     4.96.030
15-12    12-15-2015  8.24.010–
                     8.24.530
                     5.96.010;
                     5.96.090;
                     5.96.100;
                     5.96.130;
15-13    1-19-2016   5.96.140;
                     5.96.180;
                     5.96.200;
                     7.48.010–
                     7.48.050
16-01    2-16-2016   7.32.010–
                     7.32.080
                     3.04.010,
                     3.04.040,
                     3.04.050,
                     3.04.060;
                     3.08.010,
                     3.08.020,
16-12    11-1-2016   3.08.070,
                     3.08.080,
                     3.08.110;
                     3.16.010–
                     3.16.100;
                     3.20.010–
                     3.20.050;
                     3.25.010
16-13    1-17-2017   7.64.010–
                     7.64.350
16-14    1-17-2017   4.04.010 –
                     4.04.110
17-01    2-7-2017    5.40.010–
                     5.40.090
17-03    3-21-2017   7.20.010–
                     7.20.1180
17-04    5-16-2017   9.12.010
                     5.96.010;
                     5.96.090;
                     5.96.100;
17-11    12-19-2017  5.96.130;
                     5.96.140;
                     5.96.180;
                     5.96.200
17-12    12-19-2017  7.48.010–
                     7.48.050
17-13    12-19-2017  6.12.010–
                     6.12.440
                     7.16.010–
18-05    9-18-2018   7.16.170;
                     7.18.010–
                     7.18.130
18-06    10-2-2018   3.08.080
18-08    10-16-2018  1.70.010;
                     1.70.020
18-11    12-11-2018  7.09.010–
                     7.09.130
19-01    6-4-2019    9.12.010
19-02    6-18-2019   5.104.010–
                     5.104.140
19-08    12-17-2019  8.56.010–
                     8.56.180
19-11    12-3-2019   3.08.010–
                     3.08.070
19-12    4-21-2020   5.96.010–
                     5.96.240
19-13    1-7-2020    9.48.080;
                     9.48.140
2020-01  1-21-2020   2.04.010–
                     2.04.070
2020-05  6-2-2020    1.64.040
2020-06  7-7-2020    9.48.120
2020-07  7-21-2020   7.32.010–
                     7.32.080
2020-09  9-15-2020   5.96.240;
                     5.96.250
2021-01  3-2-2021    9.12.010
2021-02  10-5-2021   5.96.020
2021-04  12-21-2021  8.24.450
                     3.08.030;
2021-05  12-21-2021  3.08.040;
                     3.08.090;
                     3.08.100
2021-06  1-18-2022   8.36.010–
                     8.36.420
2022-04  5-17-2022   8.36.280
2022-07  6-7-2022    7.17.010–
                     7.17.130
2022-11  8-16-2022   6.12.390
2022-12  9-20-2022   9.48.060
2022-13  10-4-2022   2.04.030
                     5.96.240;
2022-15  11-8-2022   5.98.010–
                     5.98.310
                     3.04.010;
                     3.04.020;
                     3.04.040–
                     3.04.110;
                     3.08.010–
                     3.08.110;
                     3.12.010;
                     3.12.020;
2022-17  12-20-2022  3.16.010–
                     3.16.100;
                     3.20.010–
                     3.20.050;
                     3.22.010;
                     3.22.020;
                     3.25.010;
                     7.05.010–
                     7.05.040;
                     7.28.030
2023-02  1-17-2023   4.04.010–
                     4.04.110
2023-03  1-17-2023   7.56.010–
                     7.56.060
                     7.52.020;
2023-04  4-4-2023    7.52.040;
                     7.52.060
2023-05  4-4-2023    9.64.010
2023-06  8-15-2023   6.32.010–
                     6.32.050
2023-07  8-15-2023   8.26.010–
                     8.26.140
2023-08  9-19-2023   5.62.010-
                     5.62.150
2024-01  3-19-2024   7.29.010-
                     7.29.190
                     7.28.020,
2024-02  3-19-2024   7.28.030,
                     7.28.090
2024-06  12-17-2024  7.09.010–
                     7.09.150
                     10.02.010–
                     10.02.130;
                     10.04.010–
                     10.04.040;
                     10.06.010–
                     10.06.080;
                     10.08.010–
                     10.08.040;
                     10.10.010–
                     10.10.180;
                     10.12.010–
                     10.12.180;
                     10.14.010–
                     10.14.180;
                     10.16.010–
                     10.16.180;
                     10.18.010–
                     10.18.180;
                     10.20.010–
                     10.20.150;
                     10.22.010–
                     10.22.150;
                     10.24.010–
                     10.24.150;
                     10.26.010–
                     10.26.150;
                     10.28.010–
                     10.28.150;
                     10.30.010–
                     10.30.150;
                     10.32.010–
                     10.32.160;
                     10.34.010–
                     10.34.160;
                     10.36.010–
                     10.36.170;
                     10.38.010–
                     10.38.250;
                     10.40.010–
                     10.40.120;
                     10.42.010–
                     10.42.090;
                     10.44.010–
                     10.44.090;
                     10.46.010–
                     10.46.110;
                     10.48.010–
                     10.48.070;
                     10.50.010–
                     10.50.100;
2025-01  1-7-2025    10.52.010–
                     10.52.290;
                     10.54.010–
                     10.54.170;
                     10.56.010–
                     10.56.370;
                     10.58.010–
                     10.58.160;
                     10.60.010–
                     10.60.260;
                     10.62.010–
                     10.62.080;
                     10.64.010–
                     10.64.060;
                     10.66.010–
                     10.66.090;
                     10.66.110;
                     10.68.010–
                     10.68.150;
                     10.70.010–
                     10.70.280;
                     10.72.010–
                     10.72.140;
                     10.74.010–
                     10.74.070;
                     10.76.010–
                     10.76.070;
                     10.78.010–
                     10.78.070;
                     10.80.010–
                     10.80.090;
                     10.82.010–
                     10.82.110;
                     10.84.010–
                     10.84.090;
                     10.86.010–
                     10.86.090;
                     10.88.010–
                     10.88.070;
                     10.89.010–
                     10.89.120;
                     10.90.010–
                     10.90.080;
                     10.92.010–
                     10.92.120;
                     10.94.010–
                     10.94.100;
                     10.96.010;
                     10.96.020;
                     10.98.010;
                     10.98.020
2024-04  4-15-2025   10.66.010–
                     10.66.110
                     8.36.280;
                     8.37.010–
2025-05  5-6-2025    8.37.090;
                     8.38.010–
                     8.38.060
                    
 
